Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 19-20, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday, December 19, 1983, at 3:00 p.m., andcontinuing on Tuesday, December 20, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Balles, Black, and Forrestal, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Prell, Siegman,Scheld, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountPRESENT:12/19-20/83Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Deputy Staff Director, Office of StaffDirector for Monetary and Financial Policy,Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Burns, J. Davis, Koch, Mullineaux, Keran, andStern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Dallas, Cleveland, Atlanta, Philadelphia, SanFrancisco, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus and Burger, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Richmond and St. LouisMr. McCurdy, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofDecember 19-20, 1983December 19, 1983--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have an addendum to the minutes fromthe last meeting, which has been distributed to you. I'm going to askfor approval of the minutes as amended. We do need a motion.MR. MARTIN. So move.MR. PARTEE. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Approved, with no objection. You haveseen the Report of Examination, I assume. Is somebody here to talkabout it or to answer questions?MR. PARTEE. That's as clean as a whistle.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any questions about it?MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I thought I would just askabout that foreign exchange loss. Is that due to intervention or swapagreements or what?SPEAKER(?). Not intervention.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's mark-to-market, isn't it?MR. CROSS. It's due to the change in the value of the dollarrelative to these other currencies.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What policy do we follow now? Do weupdate these every month? Do we mark-to-market every month?MR. CROSS. We have to update, that's right. So, when thedollar rises relative to the other currencies, in terms of dollars ourcurrency holdings show up as bookkeeping losses not as realized[losses].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not permitted to ask questionsbefore we [unintelligible], I suppose.SPEAKER(?). I beg your pardon?MR. BLACK. That's a bad omen!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other questions on it?MR. PARTEE. Mr. Chairman, with such a clean letter as this,it makes me wonder about the auditors!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's our own examination people[unintelligible] looking embarrassed.MR. PARTEE. It seemed to be absolutely clean, though. Wouldyou say that's right, Clyde?12/19-20/83MR. FARNSWORTH. Yes, they were quite clean.MR. PARTEE. No reservations whatsoever?MR. FARNSWORTH. Very straight[forward].MR. PARTEE. Move to accept the report.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't imply anything about thepolicy?MR. PARTEE. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a second?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the absence of any objections, it'sapproved. [The next item on the agenda is] a preliminary report oncontemporaneous reserve accounting. Who is introducing this subject?Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. I'll say a few words and Mr. Sternlight mightalso. We really have very little to add, Mr. Chairman, to our eight-page note. The memorandum takes the opportunity to explain how, underpresent procedures, one would construct paths under contemporaneousreserve accounting and review the paths in the course of the two-weekreserve period. The memorandum then goes on to suggest possibleadditional procedures or alternatives the Committee may wish toconsider, which introduce [various] degrees of automaticity to takeadvantage, so to speak, of the contemporaneous reserve requirements.These, in effect, would let misses in deposits, strong or weakrelative to the path, be reflected. In the case of strong deposits wewould have somewhat higher borrowings, and in the case of weakdeposits somewhat lower borrowings within the reserve period--to somedegree automatically, depending on the limits the Committee may wishto set, if indeed it wants to go in that direction. We suggested acouple of rather arbitrary procedures, that the Committee may want toconsider, in a somewhat limited effort to get at this under currentconditions, where there's some uncertainty about the meaning and theuse the Committee may wish to make of Ml, the variable to whichcontemporaneous requirements are tied. I don't know if Mr. Sternlightwould like to add a word or two.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think Steve summarized the note thatcame from us. But the little that I would add at this point is thatwe still would have, I assume, nonborrowed reserve targets for eachreserve period. I would see those as remaining the central focus ofDesk activity. With a two-week rather than a one-week period, ourperspective would change somewhat, but I think the main focus wouldstill be on the full reserve period. With a longer settlement period,we would probably give more attention to the profile of excesses ordeficiencies within the full period. To some extent, we still wouldlook at weekly reserve levels, but there wouldn't be the same need asnow to strive to meet those individual weekly targets. But weprobably would want to avoid sizable accumulations of excesses ordeficiencies within the two-week span. I don't see any need fordifferent operational techniques from what we work with now.12/19-20/83MR. BOEHNE. Do you have some sense as to how much morevariability there might be in the funds rate?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it might depend on how one respondsto the point that Steve was outlining about the degree of automaticitythe Committee may want to permit to occur.MR. AXILROD. We have two problems to look at. We have alonger reserve period by one week; we have a two-week period. Rightnow within the reserve period we have some variability, particularlyon the last day of the week or before the weekend on special holidaysor something like that. What we can't tell is--and we've surveyed anumber of banks--[how banks may change] their reserve managementprocedures under contemporaneous reserve accounting. The answergenerally is that they don't plan to change anything they have beendoing, and they were doing different things. They're going toestimate their required reserves; I think they're going to be off to adegree. And then they're going to continue doing what they have beendoing. Those who tried to play the funds rate within a one-weekperiod are going to continue that and try to play it within a two-weekperiod. And those who wanted to stay in balance day-by-day are goingto try to stay in balance day-by-day. With a two-week period there isa greater opportunity to run bigger deficiencies or surpluses in thecourse of the period. That means there's more they have to make uplater. So, it seems to me there is some possibility of a lot morevariability in the funds rate within a period if banks happen to allowbig deficiencies to pile up and then wait until the 14th day, so tospeak, and have to make up twice as much as they previously did.That's one factor. On the average, in a two-week reserve period, ourresearch suggested we missed on our required reserves estimate by $100million or so, after some revision in the course of the period. Andthat would have almost an unnoticeable effect, I would suspect, on theaverage funds rate variability. Of course, if the Committee were topermit a more deliberate miss, that might add a little to it and therecould be some more effect. I'm not able to quantify it to any greatdegree, but I would suspect we would have somewhat more variabilitywithin the period and from period to period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [With regard to] the miss in requiredreserves that is discovered at the end of the period, to what degreeis that related to a change in Ml and to what degree is it related toother factors?MR. AXILROD. Well, I was thinking of a miss in general whenI gave that $100 million figure--$100 to $200 million is what I thinkI have in here as the [average] miss. I don't have it refined at themoment between what might be so-called multiplier misses on governmentdeposits and interbank deposits and what might be just Ml itself.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can you say anything sensible about thatwith further looking?MR. AXILROD. I think probably with some detailed looking wemight be able to break it [down].Partee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That might be worthwhile. Governor12/19-20/83MR. PARTEE. Am I right, Steve, that this doesn't begin untilthe first of February?MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The date it begins is the first ofFebruary?MR. AXILROD. The reserve maintenance period begins Thursday,the 4th and for deposits it's Tuesday, the 2nd of February.MR. PARTEE. So, we're talking about something that couldreceive attention again at the next meeting, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a little problem here, itseems to me. It occurs to me that we better tell the market whatwe're doing; we should have a little statement. I don't know howwe're going to come up with a statement before the next meeting.MR. GRAMLEY. One problem I had with the analysis is that itseems to imply that we're looking at Ml as our principal target. WhatI'm wondering is: What do we do in a world of CRR if we're continuingto target primarily on M2? It seems to me that we ought to have ananalysis of that. If we [use Ml], we would be changing our operatingtechniques in that event.MR. PARTEE. That was going to be my comment, too. Thisgives us the opportunity for paying more attention to nonborrowedreserves and letting shortfalls and excesses show through. But thatdoes seem to me to require some determination by the Committee as tothe amount of emphasis it wants to put on M1. That's why I askedabout the timing. It could be deferred somewhat. Also, the figuresmay be suspect for a while, given the [new] procedures and all that.Peter said we will be setting nonborrowed reserves just as we do now,but my impression is that what we set now is borrowings, notnonborrowed reserves. And if we really did set nonborrowed reservesagain, and then contemporaneously it ran off, that would put pressureon the discount window, as was our typical mode of operation when wevoted to put in contemporaneous reserves. So, I think it all needs tobe considered in that context. I guess I'm doing this as much asanything to remind the Committee that one of the decisions we need tomake is the attention to be paid to Ml.MR. BALLES. That's a good point, Chuck. I would ask thequestion: If we went back to the approximately equal [weight]scenario that we had some years ago, that would not take care of allof the problems we're raising, would it? It might take care of what--half?MR. PARTEE. I think the proposal, if I understood it fromthe staff, was that we might start off letting 25 percent of theovershoots and undershoots show through automatically and that mightnot be too inconsistent with something like equal attention to the setof the aggregates. But perhaps Steve ought to answer that.MR. AXILROD. In sum, the problem we had in analyzing M2 isthat if you are thinking of an automaticity in response, there is noneon M2 except to the degree that its Ml component moves. The onlyrequired reserves that move contemporaneously, after adjusting for12/19-20/83 -5-multipliers, are those on Ml. So, anything the Committee wants to dowith M2--that is if M2 were weak and the Committee wanted to moveborrowing or whatever--could be done quite independently ofcontemporaneous reserve accounting. You wouldn't need contemporaneousreserve accounting to do that. We were trying to think of things thatwere in some sense uniquely related to contemporaneous reserveaccounting. And with a lag we could observe M2 and make whateveradjustments in response to changes in M2 the Committee wished to seemade. But the question that arises with contemporaneous reserves isautomaticity--letting it happen if we aim at a nonborrowed or totalreserve figure. What happens is pretty much purely Ml, if we make theproper multiplier adjustments in a contemporaneous way. M2, to theextent it is affected, is only [affected] by Ml.MR. PARTEE. Well, I guess I was reading between the lines.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a particular week we could make anadjustment for M2.MR. AXILROD. Sure you can. There's no question about it.My only point was that that wasn't uniquely related to thecontemporaneous reserve accounting. That could be done either way.MR. PARTEE. That's why I thought you suggested 25 percent--to give some weight but not overwhelming weight to Ml behavior.MR. AXILROD. That's right. And we did have in there at onepoint a paragraph that I took out about the various things to do ifthe Committee wanted to put some weight on M2. But that didn't strikeme as uniquely related to the contemporaneous reserve accounting. Wealways have done that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, if we don't make any more changesin our procedures than Steve and Peter have suggested, I think we'remissing a mighty good opportunity on our control mechanism. At leastsome of us supported this [change to CRR] primarily in the hope thateventually we'd be able to control total reserves better than we couldunder the lagged system. It's rather painful to me since I hadsomething to do with the lagged system and I hate to see the onecontribution I thought I had made go down the drain and turn out notto be a contribution! But in any event, I became persuaded that wecould control total reserves better under this system than we couldunder the lagged system. I recognize, of course, that the two-day lagimposes some of the same problems that we had with the full lag, butnot quite as much. And if we deemphasize Ml, then certainly we prettywell have to stick to the procedures that Peter and Steve were talkingabout. But I hope that this is just an initial step toward movingeventually to emphasizing Ml. If we assume that the presentnonborrowed reserve target procedures are going to be continued underthis new regime then, as I think Steve has indicated, with thisgreater variability in federal funds we ought to be prepared to letthat much show through to the extent that [the variability] resultsfrom unexpected changes in required reserves stemming from demand-induced changes in Ml. That would be a self-correcting brake onwhatever might be happening [to Ml]. I also think we ought to installas much automaticity in this as we possibly can. Right now, under our12/19-20/83present procedures, the Committee is really out of it once it choosesits initial borrowing target unless we have another meeting. And thisputs a tremendous burden on you, Mr. Chairman, in deciding the extentto which the borrowing target will be altered. I would greatly favora more automatic procedure because it would probably operate better.The only alternative is an ad hoc procedure. So, I think the 25percent is unduly low.Finally, it seems to me that if the system is going to workvery well at all, we have to force the banks to adjust during thatpart of the reserve maintenance period that overlaps the other period.This would mean that in the last two days of that reserve maintenanceperiod we ought not to let federal funds be subject to overly strictcontrol or else the banks and other depository institutions are notgoing to adjust during this two-week period at the beginning. If wedon't do some of these things, or move in that direction, we reallyhave put the banking system and now the thrift industry through atremendous amount of pain and suffering for something that's reallynot going to make us that much better off. We are not only going tohave a lot of trouble computing these things but, in my judgment,we're apt to get a lot of errors because it's frightfully complicated.We have to make use of these potential improvements in the mechanism,it seems to me, or else it's all for naught.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. It has been my assumption that the purpose ofcontemporaneous reserves, which have involved an enormous effort toput in place, is to improve control over the aggregates, particularlyMl. I don't want to repeat what President Black said; I'd like toassociate myself entirely with his views. I concur with him.I was going to ask the question, Steve: If the purpose isbetter control of the money supply, wouldn't we be better offtargeting on total reserves? I think we should [exercise] reducedflexibility rather than the other way around. The only problem that Ican see from that is increased volatility of interest rates, which Ithink the market would adjust to readily.MR. AXILROD. Well, if we had every multiplier adjustmentright, that would probably be the case. We don't normally get the mixeven in money supply type deposits--those at small banks and those atlarge banks--exactly right. So, that tends to throw us off.MR. ROBERTS. The multiplier differences are generally veryshort term, though, aren't they?MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right; they might average through.But on the technical side, the study we did a couple of years ago--before we had contemporaneous reserves, but even after we tried toallow for it--seemed to suggest, surprisingly, that nonborrowedreserves were probably better in controlling Ml on a month-by-monthbasis than total reserves so long as we didn't have exactly the samereserve requirement on all types of demand deposits. We have reducedthose variabilities. We only have three classes now: zero, a smallone, and a large one. Still, I would suggest that you would besurprised that total reserves would [not] do quite as well as youthink it would.12/19-20/83MR. ROBERTS. I'm thinking about our target in recent monthsand our actual experience and wondering about our control.MR. BLACK. Steve, this gets closely at the point thatChairman Volcker was raising a while ago. Two kinds of demanddeposits are in there that are [not] normally in Ml: governmentdeposits and interbank deposits. I would think one could pretty wellestimate what they are going to do over an extended period of time; atleast what little work I've done on it suggests that. Insofar asshifts between large banks and small banks [are concerned], yes, inthe short run that is important; but over the long run I wouldn'tthink that really messes us up very much. The whole thing has beendesigned--at least I've perceived it this way and I'm sure others havealso or it wouldn't have [been adopted]--to control Ml because, as youmentioned, that's the only aggregate that is subject tocontemporaneous reserve requirements. All the rest, M2 and M3, aresubject to lagged reserves. So, we go into a reserve period andsupply what reserves are needed against those liabilities that havebeen lagged. Then we put in an additional amount to take care of theinterbank and government deposits plus what we think is necessary toachieve the right expansion in Ml. I believe that's manageable,although, of course, we have to agree that we want to control Mlbefore we can do that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, it seems to me that we ought not to usethe existence of CRR as a reason to go to M1 or not to go to Ml. Weought to give more or less weight to Ml depending on our judgment asto how good an intermediate target it is. CRR is a means to an end;it seems to me that we have the argument backwards when we say weought to put [more weight on] Ml because we now have CRR. There isprobably a case to treat Ml on the same footing as M2 and M3--not thatMl is particularly good, but it's not a whole lot worse than the othertwo. So, I think there is a case to give it equal weight. If we giveit nearly equal weight or equal weight, there is a case for somedegree of automaticity, and it strikes me that something like 25percent is not a bad way to start. It's a reasonable blend with whichto begin to experiment. But the main point is that we ought to judgeMl on its merits; I don't think whether we have CRR or not is a reasonpro or con to give additional weight to Ml.MR. BLACK. If you thought that was my [predilection], Ed, Imisled you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. It seems to me, as has already been said aroundthe table, that if we really are going to implement CRR and make itmeaningful, we have to elevate Ml to the essential, intermediatetarget we follow. I have two comments about that: First, I do notbelieve the informational content in Ml relative to income issufficient that I would be prepared to do that; and secondly, we'removing into a period where the commercial banks are learning how tooperate under contemporaneous reserves and that uncertainty wouldsuggest that at least for some period of time--maybe as much as sixmonths--we would want to continue to operate very much as we have inthe past. We may want to run an experiment along the side to see what12/19-20/83would happen if we adjusted 25 or 50 percent. But I would not runpolicy in the upcoming period--at least until July--given theuncertainty that falls out of CRR and the uncertainty that falls outof the relationship of Ml to the real economy. As a result, I wouldpropose that we not change operating procedures until we get a gooddeal more experience than what we will have on February 2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I was not terribly sympathetic with theprocedures we followed from October '79 to October '82 in the firstplace and I haven't looked back on that period with any differentview. I'm even more reluctant to see us go in that direction now byelevating Ml even partially toward an intermediate target or byincreasing automaticity. That's not just a matter of week-to-week orday-to-day or even month-to-month variability in the funds rate thatwe would be looking at, but it's the fact that we're looking atrelationships between Ml and GNP since the fourth quarter of 1981 thatsimply have no parallel in prior history. To make it very simple, letme take the past several months. The staff has been anticipating asubstantial increase in the growth rate of Ml, as I have, because wehave such a strong economy. It hasn't happened. If we had had thekind of operating techniques that we did earlier and they wereaugmented by CRR, we would have experienced in the past couple ofmonths a very substantial decline in interest rates. And from myreading of the economy, we need a decline in interest rates and astimulus to economy activity to go with the fiscal stimulus like weneed holes in our heads. In my judgment, we're looking at a verystrong economy--an economy in which the risks are too much expansion,rather than too little, and more inflationary pressures. I recognizethat not everybody agrees with that, but that's my view. And that'swhy I would be very, very reluctant to see us go back to an automaticresponse pattern and the use of Ml as an intermediate target now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. There has been some change, at least in mythinking, and I think in the broader perception, of the desirabilityof very tight money control since we adopted CRR. We went to CRR, Ithink, in order to achieve this tighter control of the aggregates;we've seen that it can miscarry. I have become more concerned aboutwide fluctuations in interest rates and, therefore, more concernedabout the possible consequences of a rigorous application ofcontemporaneous reserve requirements on an M1 basis and on a fullyautomatic basis. We made this decision and I think we have to movesomewhat in that direction. Also, I don't think we can be quite asrelaxed about Ml as we had a right to be while it was misbehaving. Ithink it is beginning to establish somewhat greater credibility butit's certainly still under some degree of suspicion. So, since CRRdoes point toward Ml, with the relevant reserves that arecontemporaneous being for the most part against Ml, I think we can'tavoid giving more weight, though perhaps not full weight, to Ml. Ithink some automaticity is desirable because that's the nature of thewhole operation. If we didn't have automaticity, why have any form ofcontemporaneous or lagged reserve control? But I would not make ittotal; something in the range that has been suggested by the staffstrikes me as a reasonable compromise.12/19-20/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, as almost everybody knows, I was neverpersuaded by the case for CRR to begin with and I'm still not. Inever thought it would make that much difference in terms of how wellwe could control Ml even if we decided that we wanted to control M1and nothing else. I do agree with Mr. Boehne's point, however, thatthe logically prior decision here is what we want to do with Ml. Butquite apart from that, I must say that my hunch is that we're going toend up with more [interest rate] variability than Steve and Peter seemto expect. That's just my hunch; I can't prove it either, but I thinkthat's the way things are going to go--that we're going to have morenoise and little or no improvement in the control of Ml. So, if Ireally had my druthers, I'd drop the whole thing. But I don't thinkwe can do that. I think it does argue, though, for what I would calla "go slow approach," particularly for the first few months. I havealways liked a degree of automaticity but I would be willing tocompromise that in the interest of trying to get this in place in anorderly way. I suspect that the full impact on data flows and on theoperations of cash managers of big banks and small banks has not beenfully digested in spite of the enormous amount of work that has beengoing on around the Federal Reserve in trying to get people up tospeed on this. In short, I don't think the operational impact eitheron us or on the banks has been fully digested up to this point. Thatagain would argue, in my way of thinking, for a go slow approach. Asfar as our own operations are concerned, I must say that I did notwalk away from reading the memo with a great deal of confidence thatwe know what we should do ourselves, much less that we know how thebanks will respond to what we do. Maybe I missed something but thebottom line is that I'm distinctly uneasy about the whole thing.MR. AXILROD. We were pained, Mr. Corrigan, to leave optionsfor the Committee and not make a recommendation that would sound as ifwe were certain about how we're going to approach it.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I'm not thinking so much of your 25percent [suggestion] in there. I'm just thinking of what lies behindall that. This question of whether we have a miss because of what youcall multipliers as opposed to a shift in money demand is a profoundlyimportant question. Which side of that coin one is on [is important]even on a week-to-week basis. It seems to me that it's going to havevery, very sizable implications for the amount of noise in the moneymarket.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, there is one thing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you going to give us a little analysisof it?MR. AXILROD. Yes, but I thought in the context of thisdiscussion that there is one thing that perhaps is not clear enough[about] the automaticity in response to Ml. For example, if M1 wereweak by an amount that said borrowing would drop, say, $50 million inthat week, we did not necessarily concede that the next week we wouldstart off at a lower level of borrowing. That would be a matter ofdecision for the Committee. So, for example, if M1 were weak and M2were on track or strong, with any automaticity in there, borrowing12/19-20/83might be $50 million [lower one] week but the next week we could startoff with borrowing where it was earlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We always come within $50 million anyway!MR. AXILROD. That's right! And the next week if Ml werestrong, borrowing would be up $50 million and it could fluctuate; wewouldn't make judgmental adjustments of borrowing unless the wholebunch of the aggregates seemed weak or strong relative to theCommittee's anticipation or whatever rule the Committee might want touse.MR. PARTEE. When you say $50 million, where do you startoff--where you were before? I don't quite understand.MR. AXILROD. Well, suppose we started off a week at $650million, as we have been doing, and we got all the multipliers correctand all that and by the time we were through the two-week period, Mlin fact was weak to the extent that borrowing dropped $50 million andended up at $600 million. Then the question comes up: What level ofborrowing do we start the next week with? I'm saying, unless theCommittee says otherwise, we would start at $650 million again andthen if Ml is strong that makes up for that and we would be up to $700million of borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To put it in perspective: $50 millionwould imply a $500 million dollar weakness in Ml from where we were,roughly.MR. PARTEE. I guess I would have thought if we had letborrowing drift down from $650 to $600 million because of a weaknessin Ml one week, that if Ml were then strong the next week, thusoffsetting the [previous weakness], we'd drift back to $650 millionfrom $600 million. It seems we might get a progressive movement if wealways went back to where we thought we should have been.MR. AXILROD. Well, that's [an issue] we are raising. TheCommittee can decide whether it wants to cumulate, which would be togo up to $650 million [in this example] or stay at the $600 million asthe way to take account of M2 and M3 and everything else.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we had a week in which Ml, according toour perfect seasonal, went up by $5 billion--if you could imagine aweek of that sort--when we were thinking it was going to go up $1billion, borrowing would go up by $400 million, all that beingperfectly arranged.MR. AXILROD. If we took the full 100 percent; at 25 percentwe'd be better off.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't quite understand this taking a 100percent or 50 percent. You're not going to know what the figure is;you don't know what to take 50 percent of.MR. AXILROD. We have our estimates. You're right that thereis always going to be the noise from the errors in the estimate.-10-12/19-20/83MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with the statementsof Governor Gramley. I opposed moving to contemporaneous reserveaccounting on the grounds that it didn't make sense unless onebelieved that Ml was a sensible target for policy. But now that we'vemade this investment, I think we ought to look upon it as a sunk costand as something that we will have in place in the event we everseriously want to go to pursuing Ml again. I don't think the factthat we've made this investment should automatically push us intochanging the way we're currently running monetary policy. I agreewith Lyle: I think it would have been a big mistake if we had hadthis in place 6 months ago and had pursued a much more aggressivelyeasy policy, which we would have had to do. I don't think we cansubstitute this new system, in this context, for the good judgment wehave been using.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it is analytically correctthat we went out and bought a potato digger but we don't have to plantthe potatoes.MR. PARTEE. We can plant them; we don't have to water them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, it seems to me that CRR more than implies ahigher level of control of the aggregates and, whether we like it ornot, it's going to be with us on February 1st. There has been anenormous effort expended by us and by the commercial banks. And Iwould hope that for all of this trial and tribulation and money we'dbe able to deliver something. It seems to me that all this does implya much greater emphasis on Ml than we have been giving it recently.We have been through a period of significant adjustment; I think wewould be making a mistake if we did not use this as an opportunity tomove to reemphasize Ml. I would in no way suggest that we ought toput the system on automatic but I wouldn't lose the opportunity. I'dbegin to reemphasize Ml as our principal aggregate. I would plant thepotato.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're going to plant a small field! Mrs.Teeters.MS. TEETERS. As you well know, I objected to CRR all the wayalong and I associate myself with reservations about Ml as a majortarget in policy and about its relevance to GNP. But I'm moreconcerned that if we go to any degree of automaticity, we're going toget increasing volatility in the interest rates. Can you give us someestimates, Steve? If we go to 10, 20, 25, or 50 percent automaticity,what degree of volatility will we reintroduce into the interest ratestructure?MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Teeters, our best guess hasalways been, that we get 20 to 25 basis points per 100. It seems alittle less.MS. TEETERS. Per 100 of what?MR. AXILROD. A hundred million dollars of borrowing. Wethought [a change of] something like $400 to $500 million in borrowingwould result in a one percentage point [change in interest rates].-11-12/19-20/83Now, we've gone through $400 to $500 million of borrowing withvirtually no movement in the funds rate in the process of which we'vedeclared that there were shifts in the demand for borrowing, shifts inthe demand for excess reserves. And making those judgments has tendedin some sense to moderate these movements, or the banks have just notcared. We haven't gotten those kinds of movements. So, I would notreally want to swear on a stack of Bibles that a $500 millionborrowing change will give you 1 percentage point. But I would saythat with a $50 million change in borrowing within a week one is notgoing to discern the effects relative to the noise. It has toaccumulate to begin to move the funds rate in some sort of trend way.MS. TEETERS. Well, what are you referring to as "noise"? Iwas interpreting that as being volatility in the interest rates.MR. AXILROD. I meant the variation [at the end of astatement period.] Mr. Sternlight aims at a nonborrowed reserve pathconstructed from some borrowing assumption and some knowledge of thedemand for excess reserves. The noise that I meant was what happensto it on the last day of the statement week when the factors affectingreserves other than his actions vary by $2 billion, say, or whenrequired reserves relative to expectations change by a lot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For reasons other than a change in Ml.MR. AXILROD. Yes, and changes that we hadn't allowed for; wewere estimating but we missed. And that will either add to that $2billion or subtract from it; they could be offsetting. To the degreethat it adds, there is going to be a result in the relation in freereserves or nonborrowed--they are the same--that is different fromwhat we were aiming at. That's a kind of noise in the system, I wouldsay. The additional noise is how banks decide to manage theirreserves over a two-week period. If they suddenly get it into theirheads that the funds rate is going down when it isn't, they are goingto get themselves into a deep hole and at the end of the statementweek they are going to have to borrow a lot. Over a 14-day periodthey might have to borrow, instead of $3 billion on the [last] day, $6or $7 billion. That will put a lot more pressure on the funds ratethan they have been used to. So, over a two-week period there is alittle more capacity for noise, depending on how banks manage theirreserves and what [rate] expectations they have for one reason oranother.MR. ROBERTS. Even banks learn!SPEAKER(?). Over time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. More slowly than most other people!MS. TEETERS. Well, I think one of the great costs of theperiod from '79 to '82 was the high volatility of rates--not only theshort-term rates but the long-term rates. What I'm really concernedabout is that I simply don't want to get back into a situation inwhich that sort of volatility reoccurs.MR. AXILROD. I didn't mean that as "noise". I meant whatseems to me to be the product of the controls of---12-12/19-20/83MS. TEETERS. But the more automaticity we build into thesystem, the greater the volatility is going to be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're almost bound to get more volatilityin the very short run, whatever we build into this. I think--we'llsee--that just [the nature of] this system is going to give us morevery short-run volatility.MR. AXILROD. Probably.MS. TEETERS. But one of the things that was most damagingwas that the short-term volatility got translated into the long-termmarket.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It probably happened over a longer periodof time--volatility over a month, two months. I'm not sure. That'san open question. But I think within a two-week period we're going toget more.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Unless we offset it.MS. TEETERS. Unless we offset it.MR. BLACK. We should get more variation in the federal fundsrate concomitant with that. If we hit our target on a more regularbasis, I wonder if we'd really have that much volatility in othershort-term rates. I can see very easily that we would in the federalfunds rate. And I'm not sure it follows in longer-term rates.MR. GRAMLEY. That was the argument that was used in October'79: You don't have to worry much because most of the variation wouldbe in the funds rate, a little in the short-term market rates, but thelong rates would hardly react--particularly after the markets have anopportunity to adjust. And that just didn't happen at all.MR. BLACK. But we didn't hit our targets as regularly as Iam talking about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm one of those whonever really understood completely how CRR was going to give us moreprecision with respect to the monetary aggregates. But that's waterover the dam, as other people have said, and I think we have to goforward with the program. But I think there's going to be an awfullot of confusion out there right up until February 1st, particularlyamong the smaller and medium-size banks. That confusion is going toreign supreme for some weeks after we introduce this system. So, Idon't think we ought to go in any way to any automaticity at thispoint. I would much prefer to see us go slowly. Automaticity has acertain amount of logical appeal, but I think the timing is wrong interms of the implementation of CRR. The other point that I reallywould like to make--and perhaps this also has been said--is that Idon't think we ought to be looking at the question of CRR'srelationship to Ml. The question ought to be asked the other wayaround. The threshold question it seems to me is: What target doesthe Committee really want to focus on? We ought not to be pushed intoone or the other because of a technical accounting system. And I-13-12/19-20/83happen to think at this point in my membership on this Committee thatM1 is a pretty good target and one that has a pretty good relationshipto GNP. Others have argued that around the table before. But it's aquestion that we now have an opportunity to look at in great depth andI think we ought to seize the opportunity before CRR becomes effectiveto zero in on what we really want to target on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I guess I'll resist the temptation of asking,Mr. Chairman, why we decided to go back to CRR in view of all of this.But passing beyond that, first I'd like to associate myself with theview that Ed Boehne expressed so well: Just because we have CRRdoesn't mean we necessarily should revert to Ml as the primaryintermediate target. However, I consider it personally a ratherfortunate piece of timing in that I'm convinced--as some others arearound the table, though many are not--that we are in the process ofwitnessing a new behavior of Ml where it's going to be more reliable.We're beyond that stage where velocity dropped in that unprecedentedmanner in '82 or early '83 and, therefore, we now can begin to relymore on Ml, as we used to do. If that's the case, and it happens thatit has come along just at a time when we could have some automaticityin Ml--not complete in my view--then some automaticity would not bedamaging; it probably would be desirable. I wouldn't want, as SiKeehn said--I think it was you, Si--to go fully automatic. But Ithink it's time we went partly that way. I come out, bottom line, inmuch the same way as Si Keehn and Ted Roberts and Bob Black did.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I join those of our colleagues whohave been accepting the hypothesis that we will have more volatilityin short-term rates, perhaps spilling over into long-term rates, by acloser adherence to M1 targeting, or by CRR. And if indeed there isto be some degree of increased volatility as a result of our moving inthat direction, it seems to me that the risks in 1984 and in 1985should be kept in mind and would mitigate against our moving in thatdirection. I'm thinking, of course, of the international debtsituation, of the efficacy of business fixed investment as asustaining force in the expansion, of housing, and obviously ofcommercial construction, which I think is going to be the next REITdisaster and which is susceptible to the influence of [interest]rates. It seems to me that there is some potential reward, but it'srather a paper reward, of controlling M1 better. But how long is itgoing to take us to learn what velocity is going to be and what trendline is going to emerge--either the old one or a new one? How long isit going to be before we can see what the relationship of this new oneis with regard to the economy? I think we may, as a group, have amore favorable look at M1 and at a more automatic procedure later. Iam sure that many in the markets will continue to feel, surmise,believe in, or have faith in M1 and its close relationship witheconomic activity. As long as that belief is out there, it'ssomething we have to deal with. But now with the unknowns with regardto velocity and M1 and the risks to this economy by increasing thevolatility of interest rates, I simply think we should wait.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me draw several conclusions. Ithink it is logically or otherwise correct that simply because we-14-12/19-20/83adopted contemporaneous reserve requirements, for better or for worse,we don't have to arrange our policy from now until eternity to takemaximum advantage of that operationally. That's a separate decisionand logically comes first. Secondly, I do have the sense that there'senough uncertainty about this [CRR] that we're not going to want to doanything very radical in the very first months of its introduction.There may be very little change. Thirdly, I think we really have tosay whether we're going to do anything very different or what we'regoing to do because there will be [a lot of] confusion around. And ifthis process begins on February 2nd, inevitably I guess we're going tohave to say something before then.As a footnote, I want to be reminded that we may have toadvance the next meeting, anyway--which will be convenient for thisreason, I suppose--because I might have to testify before the LincolnDay recess in the Congress. If so, that doesn't give us enough time[between] the meeting as it is now scheduled [and] the testimony. Idon't know that for certain at the moment, but we may have to get backwith you to see about a date roughly a week earlier [than nowscheduled]. If we do that, we can then decide precisely what we wantto say, although even then it will be getting kind of late, I suppose.It might be that there will be a lot of questions. I would prepare atleast one version or maybe two or three versions of precisely what anannouncement might say as to how we're going to handle this at leastfor some transitional period while we at least make sure that thestatistics come in in an orderly and predictable way.Then, finally, I think the question is: What weight do wewant to put on the different aggregates, which is the natural subjectof the discussion at the next meeting in terms of setting targets;we're going to have to discuss it anyway. People probably havedifferent opinions about whether we will want to make any majorchanges, but it is a natural focus of the discussion. But even if weput a lot of weight on Ml, I wouldn't be prepared to put full weighton it for at least a brief transitional period to gin up an operating[procedure] just because we have contemporaneous reserves, simply toget the operating bugs out at the extreme.MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you on thatentirely, but I think we've left unsaid here one point that isimportant. And that is: In this interim high-risk period of 6 monthswe've built very wide latitudes on reserve requirements and we'veessentially made the smaller banks immune to the process, which Ithink reduces the risk. It doesn't eliminate it, but it certainlyreduces it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll see how it goes. I don't havea good feel for it. On Ml itself, just to make one substantive point,I have some feeling that it's getting a little better but I don't knowwhy. It has been way off on the low side, and seeing it come backfrom that I guess makes everybody feel a lot more comfortable. But wehave one quarter of an exceptionally large rise in velocity now. So,while I have a feeling that maybe it is going to be reacting a littlemore normally, we surely can't prove it by any figure we've seen atany particular point in the past quarter anyway.MR. MORRIS. I think Ml is a random walk.-15-12/19-20/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not quite willing to say that.MR. BOEHNE. I'm surprised to hear you say that, Frank!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd hate to have to pick out today whatthe trend is going to be over the next three years, even though I havethe feeling that it may be a little more reliable. I'll know morethree years from now. Well, is there anything else to be said on thissubject?We will see once we set the date of the next meeting, but wemay either have to circulate something to you in writing before thenor have a telephone call or something because I do have the suspicionthat people in the market and everybody else are going to ask whatthis is going to do and how we are going to conduct ourselves. Theywill ask whether we are going to do something radically different andwe ought to tell them.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I make one more observation?On this automatic part, suppose we've agreed that Ml deserves a littlemore emphasis than it now has; if it runs above target andconsequently required reserves are higher than the path, we can eitheradjust the borrowing up automatically or we can do it on an ad hocbasis. Since we've not been emphasizing Ml to any great degree, theseadjustments in the borrowed reserve targets have all been on an ad hocbasis. There's no way the Committee can realistically participate inthose decisions. That has to be left up to you in consultation withSteve and Peter or however you want to do it. And that is the point:That is the only alternative to some kind of automatic adjustmentmechanism, if in fact we're going to pay any attention at all to Ml.I think we ought to focus on that part of it. I'm quite willing todelegate that to you, but I'm not sure whether I'd be that willing todelegate it to your successor, whoever he might be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On this M1 issue, I don't know what thefigures look like, but I was looking at this so-called experimentalseasonal, for what it's worth, that we publish figures on. Themonthly figures look quite different.MR. AXILROD. We publish them weekly. Yes, [they lookdifferent]. In terms of absolute variations, though, be aware thatthe average absolute variation of the experimental, both monthly andweekly, is just about equal to the average absolute variation of theregular series.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They look erratic in different ways.MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the way I see it.MR. AXILROD. Very different [timing].MR. ROBERTS. We don't get growth in December on thisexperimental [version].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, and it shows a sizable growth inNovember, I think. That brings it to---16-12/19-20/83MR. AXILROD. And the weekly changes in the experimentalseries are sometimes larger than in the regular series.MR. ROBERTS. The seasonals wouldn't affect the reserverequirements, would they?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, because the target is set forth inseasonally adjusted figures. We live in an eerie world of seasonaladjustment, but when they are converted into--MR. ROBERTS. They're real, but they're converted--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but they're converted from a targetthat is seasonally adjusted.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I ask Steve about that point?Steve, what do you think about the merits of the experimental[seasonal] versus the regular one? We've done some work that suggeststhat the seasonals are probably bad for the last part [of the year].Hence, we didn't have as much of a burst in Ml earlier and we haven'thad as much of a slowdown since then. What one believes on that makesa lot of difference, I think, in where one comes out.MR. AXILROD. Well, my memory is that if you look at the twoseries on a quarterly basis, the pattern doesn't look very different.There are small differences, but not big ones. There is somewhatslower growth, I think, in the experimental [series]. I'm not sure ofthis in the second half, quarter-over-quarter. But month-to-month, ifyou look at the second half, the growth rate in the experimentalseries drops somewhere around July--I may be off by a month--and thenwith the exception of one negative month where it's -0.5 percent, itfluctuates between 3 and 7 percent. So, it tends to look as if it hasdropped down to a new 5 percent or so growth rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it looks much more like a drop to aplateau than--MR. AXILROD. Whereas the other series looks like it wasgoing along strongly and suddenly it dropped to 2 or 3 percent forfour months. It gives a slightly different look to Ml. Up to thatpoint I had been getting prepared to recommend to the Board that wedrop the experimental series, mainly because it wasn't showing anyless volatility. I had the feeling, therefore, that it was justproving that weekly and monthly seasonals are difficult to get at andthat Ml is an inherently volatile series. That's how I wouldinterpret Ml. But now it looks as if the experimental series has madea comeback. It seems to me that it still has some value and I wouldtend to recommend that it be continued, but certainly onlyexperimentally. It hasn't demonstrated--and we haven't found--a wayto make the weekly seasonal variation less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only thing I conclude from it is that,as Steve is suggesting, weekly and monthly seasonals are verytreacherous and we shouldn't assume too much. But [the results] arequite different, depending on which seasonal one uses.-17-12/19-20/83MS. TEETERS. Well, that argues even more strongly againstany large degree of automaticity. If our current data are highlyvolatile, we don't quite know where we are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're back in that old dilemma: Ifwe wait too long, we've waited too long; and if we react too quickly,we've reacted too quickly.MR. BLACK. It's hard to argue with that one!MR. AXILROD. As a technical point, Mr. Chairman, a two-weekreserve period has the advantage of averaging through a little, insome sense; it has the disadvantage of delaying [us] ever so slightly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anything else to be said on thissubject? We will turn to Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. We can have some Committeediscussion, which I would hope would focus as much as possible on whatrisks, probabilities, or otherwise, people may see looking out 6 to 12months ahead either on economic activity or on prices. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think if I were sitting where Jim is sitting,I would probably come up with about the same forecast, but I suspectthat the economy is going to turn out to be a good bit stronger nextyear than the standard forecast. I think that what we have here is acumulative self-feeding momentum that will deliver a stronger economyso that the total, in effect, is stronger than seemingly theindividual parts. I've talked to a lot of people from a lot ofdifferent industries in my District in recent weeks and I think termslike euphoric and ebullient and buoyant are very descriptive [of theirviews]. If I heard these kinds of reports from my good friend BobBoykin I would say: "Well, that's Texas." But when I hear them inPennsylvania and around the Third District, which has generally beenon the slow side, that tells me something about what is happening tothis self-feeding momentum and to the psychology. My board, whichgenerally has been on the bearish side--we have some industries thathave been hit fairly hard--in its meeting last week was concerned forthe first time in memory that perhaps things were moving along tooquickly to be sustainable.Now, having said that on that side, I also think the risk ofmore inflation is greater. I think that's definitely where the risksare and also that we likely will get a stronger economy. Also, I finda great sensitivity to interest rates out there--a view that [higher]interest rates could shut this down fairly promptly. For what it'sworth, I have the sense that if interest rates went up 1 percentagepoint or so, it probably would dash some of these expectations but nota great deal; but if the increase were in the 1 to 2 point range, Ifeel it really would have a major effect on this psychology. A goodmany people I talked to think that if we had something in theneighborhood of a 2 percentage point increase in rates, that couldreverse things fairly quickly. I'm not saying that that is scientificfact or even that it is true; I'm simply giving you a sense of howpeople view various kinds of increases in rates.-18-12/19-20/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not going to tell us whether youagree with that?MR. BOEHNE. Well, getting ahead of ourselves, I think thereis room for a little snugging but it ought to be very cautious--justenough to deflate the bubble a little but not all that much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. I didn't know I had put my hand up, but I'llgo ahead anyway. I put my comments in two categories. First, for thepast couple of days I have had in the Bank the CEOs--and strictly theCEOs--of a good cross section of major industrial companies in theNinth District, including some of the really Blue Chip companies up inthe Minnesota area. I have been getting from these people almostastonishing reports of very pronounced stretch-outs in deliveries thathave materialized just in the past six months. One of the bigcomputer manufacturers, for example, said that six months ago he couldpick up the phone and get anything he wanted just like that. Now, sixmonths later, he's looking at delivery delays of six months to a yearon things that were simply available with a phone call a few monthsago. There were reports of very, very strong final sales. And thisseemed to be the case across the board, in everything from wood,construction materials, soft goods, computers--you name it. One ofthe very substantial food companies indicated that their soft goodsoperations--not the foods in some cases--were showing unit sales inDecember up 40 percent from a year ago. There was a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What company was that?MR. CORRIGAN. It was Some of their softgoods-- and things likethat were up 40 percent in unit terms.MR. PARTEE. Their sales to retailers?MR. CORRIGAN. They own the retail outlets in some cases, soit's a mix of both their own retail outlets and their supplies toretailers. I think it's fair to say that in one way or another everyone of these CEOs reported building price pressures. The good news isthat they all at least indicated that they were holding the line ontheir wage cost [increases] for 1984--other than a bank, whichwouldn't surprise you. Other than a bank, every one of these roughlytwenty or so firms reported that their plans were for compensation in1984 [to rise by] 4 to 5 percent or less. They also reported, againalmost without exception, very severely depleted inventories either intheir raw materials or, in the case of those in retailing, in items onthe shelves. Perhaps most disturbing of all to me: There was a trulyuniversal expectation among these people that we would have sharplyhigher inflation and interest rates by the end of 1984. Believe it ornot, some of these people even spoke in terms of a "buy now" attitudecreeping back into the picture for fear of the outlook toward the endof 1984. That was my rather clear impression, with the exception ofthe wage side, which would suggest that the risks for both the economyand inflation are very much on the up side. There was deep concern,even among the people in this group whom I know to be very close tothe current Administration, that the deficit situation is totally outof control--that there is no prospect whatsoever for being able to-19-12/19-20/83deal with it in the near term or the long term. Again, at least amongthis group, there was a sense that it was just very, very [important]that the Federal Reserve do what it could to hold the line.Abstracting from those comments, I still obviously feelpersonally that the risks are on the up side in the economy. We knowexports are a soft spot and there certainly is, I think, morefinancial vulnerability out there than meets the eye. I don't thinkthat problem is behind us by any means. But the thing that gives methe greatest cause for concern right now is that I can't quite figureout for myself what really is happening with inflation. In the lastsix months the rate of increase in the consumer price index hasdoubled--more than doubled. It is now running at 5 percent or alittle better, and I can't see that there is any great influence ofspecial factors in there. Maybe Mr. Kichline knows something that Idon't know, but I can't find them. I don't think that the markets ingeneral have quite caught up with the fact that the consumer priceindex now seems to be rising at a rate of 5 percent or a little more.On the other side, we haven't seen any pickup in the deflator; andcertainly wholesale prices continue to look very good. One of thethings that I look at myself as a barometer of price pressures is thespread between the rise in the GNP deflator and the behavior of unitlabor costs in the economy as a whole. Very seldom does that spreadexceed 2 percent and it's unprecedented for it to exceed 2 percent inthe early stages of the recovery. But we're looking at a spread ofsomething like 3-1/2 percent, which I would interpret as a greatdesire on the part of businesses to make themselves whole from therecession or to get themselves whole [before] the recession they thinkis going to come in 1985. The bottom line, from my perspective, isthat we may already be seeing a build-up in price pressures in theeconomy that if carried forward in 1984 would be very, verydisturbing. That's about what I think, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, as far as the Board staff'sforecast, we would not have a whole lot of difference in views. Interms of the risk: If it's wrong, it's probably a bit wrong on thedown side; I think the economy is possibly a little stronger than thestaff has indicated. I'm hearing much of what Jerry is hearing; theredoes seem to be a real concern about the possibility of inflationreaccelerating if the pressures are not already there. Looking at itfrom our part of the country, it still is a bit of a mixed bag. Weare getting strength now from some of the areas that had been slowcoming back [from the recession]. Of course, housing has been one ofthe strong factors [in the expansion] and that is levelling off. Andthat is a good sign because I think we had gotten ourselves into anoverbuilt and risky situation in terms of the land boom. I know thishas been commented on before, but it is still is going on. Thenewspaper has been running a series of articles on what is apparentlya real scandal involving condominiums. [Developers] built over 5,000condominiums in just one little area out by a lake but increased[prices] 600 percent in one day through land clipping. They areselling the condominiums at a rate of 42 units a month, so they have a6- or 7-year supply. The small savings and loans around the statehave been drawn into this. They are very exposed; even the goodoperators--or those who were supposed to be good--seem to be caught upin it. The president of a title company told me--and he sees a lot of-20-12/19-20/83these deals in north Dallas--that he bought a piece of property for$17 million. He was going to close on it a week ago last Friday.Before he closed, he sold it for $34 million and that transaction wasclosed last Friday. I don't know what somebody sees in it that theseller wasn't seeing!On the energy side, drilling in particular is showing alittle strength. In the natural gas area, which has been quite aproblem, there is some feeling that the bubble is about to [burst] andthat maybe by late '84 that will have leveled out a bit. On theagricultural side, by the time one puts together the pluses andminuses it turns out to be a little better than was anticipated.Again, though, it's pretty uneven if you look at our District as awhole. Northern Louisiana and New Mexico are showing a littleimprovement; it's still rather tough out there. On the unemploymentsituation, we're below the national rate, but the state of Texas as awhole has an unemployment rate of 7.4 percent while for Dallas/FortWorth it's 4-1/2 percent and going down. So, my bottom line would bethat there is some strength and that we are seeing some sectorsbeginning to come back that are taking up the decline. In housing, weare anticipating that the financial side will be a concern; of course,our banks and other major institutions are not reporting very goodresults for the fourth quarter and they are making rather substantialloan loss provisions for 1984. There is a lot of concern that 1984 isgoing to be a bit hard, primarily [because of concern] that theturnaround in energy will not occur before the operators, the servicecompanies, and so forth are going to have to [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, you asked for comments with regardto some of the downside risk aspects of the economy. Let me mentiontwo or three, beginning with the projections we have with regard tocommercial property development in the fixed investment sector.President Boykin mentioned the speculation in land. I want to takethat one step further into the commercial property area where the so-called syndications-- companies and others have sales of$50 million, $100 million, $200 million at a time--have bid up theprices of commercial property and brought on to submarket aftersubmarket a supply of this kind of space, which is having its effecton the existing commercial properties in those submarkets. I believethat the IRS review of so-called tax sheltered investments, if itresults in any kind of substantial change in the tax position of theseinvestors in the syndicates, particularly these privately offeredlimited partnerships, could result in a very substantial contractionof ownership of commercial property and development--the mortgagesthereon--in this country. And I think we're headed for a verysubstantial setback there.As far as housing is concerned, I have never seen in myexperience with mortgage portfolios over more years than I would liketo admit the poor quality that one sees in mortgage portfolios today--if we subject them to any kind of analysis. The builders who havegotten people into these mortgage arrangements and who now havewithdrawn their subsidies--their so-called buydown arrangements--haveleft a situation in which the value, if I may use that term, ofresidential property is no longer rising despite what we see inscattered statistics. And, therefore, the position of those-21-12/19-20/83households as far as payors are concerned is under severe pressure.So, the losses that the private mortgage insurance companies aretaking continue to go [up]; the quality of the residential mortgageportfolio has deteriorated; and there are further losses out there inthe future with regard to these situations.In terms of inventory, I had the opportunity recently, as didPresident Corrigan, to spend some time with business people--retailersin several parts of the country. I take it, Jerry, that you weretalking about manufacturers in the big companies. But the informationI got at the retail level--here I'm shifting from comments on risk tocomments regarding inflation--is that particularly because of theavailability of overseas sources for the retailers, so far they havenot faced the kind of price pressures that you indicated in othersegments of the private sector. Quite the contrary, at this stage ofthe recovery they find that they can get to sources [of supply] andthey don't have to maintain a heavy inventory and have no plans tomaintain a heavy inventory. So, once the Christmas selling season isover, they will have some bare shelves. But some of them are willingto trade off at the margin what they consider minor market sharelosses for the rigid control of their inventory. On the plus side,what I have picked up on these matters has been an emphasis onproductivity--the profitability, say, of the auto companies in theMidwest. They are looking toward break-even points at much much lowerlevels than before, in part because they have taken out of theircosts--as they express it--several billions of dollars.So, it seems to me that we have a downside risk in themortgage market and in the thrift institutions. Savings banks arestill very deeply in the red on an operating basis, despite theinteresting kinds of ways that their accountants let them "report" and"disclose" to the public. The savings and loan industry--maybe 40percent of it--is still in the red on an operating basis. To add toPresident Boehne's comments with regard to interest rates: Ifinterest rates go up 100 to 150 basis points, that would move theproportion of the thrift industry that is having operating losses tosomething like 75 or 80 percent. Housing doesn't stabilize--allgeneralizations are false including that one--it either goes up orgoes down. And my guess is that it's going to go down because of thequality of mortgage paper and because we have now used up that backlogin demand for housing that resulted from low levels of housing startspreviously. So, I think there are several downside areas in theeconomy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Boehne detects someoptimism in his District. I would say that in our District there iseuphoric ebullience everywhere. I'm not sure that that actuallyreflects the reality of the situation but confidence levels are very,very high, not only among business people generally but among ourdirectors at both the branch level and at the head office level.Virtually every sector continues to strengthen; we're certainly in anexpansion phase of the business cycle in our part of the country andapparently in the nation as a whole. In all of our importantindustries employment and orders are up substantially. The retailershad very, very vigorous sales over the Thanksgiving holiday and thatgave rise to great optimism regarding the Christmas season. And that-22-12/19-20/83seems to be borne out by the tremendous traffic in and out of theshopping malls in all of our major cities. Interestingly, it's notjust people parking in the parking lots this year and going around andlooking; they are actually buying. My retail contacts tell me thatsales at this point are very, very good. Housing is quite good.Business lending by the major banks in our area has improvedsubstantially; consumer lending has been good for some time and that'sremaining quite healthy. There are a few trouble spots that we'vementioned before, particularly in the agricultural sector and in theexport sector. There are parts of the District that are not doing aswell as others; but even representatives of those areas are veryencouraged by the improvements that they see. The only places aboutwhich I have real concern are the rural areas where unemploymentcontinues to be very high, and I don't know that that is going toimprove very much. The great concerns among people that I talk to aretwofold: basically, interest rates and the deficit. And they gotogether.Coming to your question about what the concerns are lookingout six months, I would differ from Jim's forecast only in degree. Iwould think that growth in 1984, particularly in the first half, isgoing to be somewhat stronger than the staff forecast. And goingalong with that, I think inflation continues to be a risk that is outthere for the next 6 to 12 months, and my projection of interest ratesand of inflation would be somewhat higher than the staff's. Let mesay one other thing in terms of inflation: I think that highercorporate profits are going to be translated at some stage over thenext few months into wage pressure. Certainly some of the give-backsfrom the unions are going to decrease and there probably will be somepressure for actual increases in wages as a result of the goodperformance of corporations over the next several months. On theother side of the inflation picture, we have had relatively slowmonetary growth and the wage picture and commodity prices are not allthat bad at the moment. So, I guess those factors temper my concernsomewhat. But I come out on the bottom line feeling that we're goingto have a stronger economy in '84 than is projected by the staff andthat we're going to run the risk of higher inflation than is beingprojected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, since you asked us to addressourselves to uncertainties, I see some very critical ones in the wagearea, the dollar area, oil, and developing countries. But even thoughmost of these happen to be risks that fall on the down side, they arenot of a kind that one can guard against by leaning toward the upside. So, I think that the principal risk is really of more inflationthan we anticipate. I agree with Bob Forrestal that these profits arealmost bound to convert themselves into wage increases, particularlylater in the year--September, I think--when we get to the UAWcontract. With productivity gains diminishing quite abruptly earlythis year, capacity utilization diminishing at a surprising rate, andunemployment diminishing at a surprising and a very gratifying rate,all that points in the direction of upward pressure. Now, the otherside is what may or may not happen to the dollar. If the dollarshould go down abruptly, our exports will rise with a considerablelag. Our interest rates will rise very rapidly--not necessarilybecause the Fed does something about it but because capital imports-23-12/19-20/83can be seen in advance to be diminishing and the benefit of keepinginterest rates down will disappear--and that could produce aconsiderable downward bias [in the dollar]. The LDC situation,[though] much improved, is still with us. It is still a majoruncertainty. The oil situation I mentioned because people who watchwhat is happening in the Persian Gulf seem to think that the danger ofa closing of the straits [unintelligible] is greater than it has beenin the past. That would [result in] an increase in prices and areduction in economic activity--the same [sort of effect] as [thatfrom] the other oil shocks. That [potential] situation has a very[low] probability but very high risk if it were to occur. On balance,if you add these up, we have a number of risks on the dollar side; wecan't really guard against them by leaning in the other direction.And the danger of wage increases and price increases is one that wecan take into account and should guard against now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, as I've reported for the last year or so,the Middle West has been very slow to join this particular party. ButI do think there has been a significant improvement over the last fewweeks or months, and at this point we really are on board. On theconsumer side, all the current reports we get for retail sales arevery, very strong, and double-digit increases are fairly common. Justwandering around stores, as I have done the last week or so, one cansee that the traffic is very, very high. Even in the industrialsector there is an improvement; most of the basic sectors in theMiddle West are doing better. They still are at comparatively lowlevels; compared to, say, 1978 or 1979, they are operating at 40 to 50percent of what they used to think was a good level. But still, thatis an improvement from what they were experiencing just a year ago.So, I think on the industrial side, there is improvement also.With regard to the risks, I think they are the same ones thathave been pointed out. Interest rates are high. I think people areamazed that we've had as good a recovery as we have had so far at thisparticular rate level. That suggests in their minds, and mine aswell, that if there were any significant increase in rates, it wouldhave the impact of shutting this [recovery] down somewhat. On theinflation side, I think there is a high level of suspicion that thestated rate of inflation somewhat understates what people think is amore practical rate of inflation. On the price side, most of thepeople I've talked with are sitting on the price button ready to go assoon as they can get increases across. The operating ratios are lowenough that they can't pull it off; but as these ratios begin to creepup, I think they are going to try to push price increases forward asfast as they can. On the wage side, most of the people I've talked tosuggest that they are still able to get 6 percent settlements by andlarge but they are having to work very hard to accomplish that. Andas has been pointed out, there is an expectation that as profits beginto improve in a very significant way, that will form a prettydifficult environment in which to continue to pull off these verytough settlements. But as I add up these risks, I still think thefundamentals are in place for a continuation of recovery. The risks,[as] we look at them, are not significant enough to have a majorimpact on what I think is going to be a pretty good 1984--not verydifferent from what the staff forecast suggests.-24-12/19-20/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, most of what I wanted to say hasalready been said in one way or another--especially by GovernorWallich. However, my assessment of the downside risks is not quitethe same as his. I'm not quite as guarded in my outlook. It seems tome that activity is likely to continue strong over the next year,particularly in the first half of the year, and to decelerate somewhatin the second half but still expand at an acceptable rate withunemployment continuing to fall. So, I don't see business activityfalling off to unacceptable levels over the period of the next year.I'm a little more optimistic on the inflation outlook than I thinkmost people have expressed. I don't share the same worry with respectto the wage outlook. I think the wage picture is probably still oneof moderation. It's hard to see that profits are going to continue toexpand at such a rate as to weaken the resistance to higher wages andimprove really significantly the bargaining position of labor. So, Iwould expect continued moderation in wage increases. The energypicture looks pretty good and the outlook is for moderate--notrunaway--increases in food prices. So, if there are going to be anystrong inflationary pressures, it's hard for me to see where they aregoing to come from. So, I see the inflation outlook as reasonablyfavorable--pretty much as the staff has forecast. Along with thevulnerabilities listed by Governor Wallich, I would simply emphasize,as others have pointed out, that the major vulnerability is higherinterest rates than we now expect--that is, higher than in theforecast. A number of people have pointed to that, and I think thereis possibly a real danger of interest rates being substantially higherthan they are now forecast. The reasons for that, obviously, are thedeficit, the increase in private credit demands, and the falling offof capital inflows. All of these possibilities would operate towardputting upward pressure on interest rates. And if that happens, Ithink the economy will be very vulnerable and possibly in danger ofsome damage from that development. I don't, however, expect rates toincrease substantially, although I recognize that as a possibilitythat could affect the forecast, as I pointed out. On balance, I wouldsay that the probability is about 50 percent on being able to maintaincurrent levels of interest rates; and if we're able to do that, Ithink [the economy] will be in good shape.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might ask Mr. Kichline to comment on thepoint Mr. Corrigan made earlier, which is the inverse of this profitspoint. Is it true that labor costs are going up much less--orhistorically very little--compared to prices at this stage? You don'thave to address it now unless you want to. We'll turn to GovernorPartee.MR. PARTEE. Well, you asked for a different hypothesis onwhat is going on. A surprise this afternoon is the amount ofebullience reported in Minnesota, which I would think would be in acold deep freeze, and in Pennsylvania, which has not been a boisterousstate over the years. My only comment in response to that would bethat businessmen are inclined to look at their performance comparedwith a year ago; that still is the way that 90 percent of thebusinessmen look at their activity. We have now completed a year ofrecovery and, therefore, the November-to-November increases are aslarge as any they've seen--in fact the largest they've seen for thewhole period of the recovery. And they probably are the largest they-25-12/19-20/83are going to see anytime in the expansion; [the increases] will godown from here rather than up. So, I'm wondering whether we're notpicking up a degree of false optimism in the business community andwhether in fact it doesn't lay us open to the possibility that highexpectations will be frustrated in the months to come. I see that atleast as a possibility.Now, as I look at the projection, the greatest problem I havewith it--I've had it before--is that the saving rate is too low. Ithink it ought to be higher; I would expect it to be higher givenincome performance, given incentives to save that we have in theeconomy now, and given the general notion of maintaining some kind ofreasonable ratio of financial saving stocks to total income. The waywe would get the saving rate higher is either by having higher incomeor lower expenditures than are being forecast by the staff.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or use the Federal Reserve numbers?MR. PARTEE. Well, I can't even understand what is involvedin that argument since we haven't been briefed on it, so I can't dothat. We could have higher income to the extent that there is moredemand in the economy outside the consumer sector, principally perhapsinventory demand. That's a possibility; we could have more inventorydemand and more income generation as a result of that and, therefore,higher savings can result from higher income than is being projected.On the other hand, we could have lower income if productivity gains inthe short run are going to be considerably stronger than the staff hasprojected, which certainly seems possible, or if the wage rateenvironment stays placid. There are a lot of indications that it ispretty placid and, therefore, it seems to me that is possible. Now,if we have a reduction in consumer spending relative to income in themonths ahead and if businessmen are expecting very good gains--gainsthat are too large for them really to anticipate getting--they will bedisappointed in the months ahead. That would provide a basis for aneven smaller rise in business activity than is being forecast by thestaff and that's consistent with the Ml numbers. Therefore, slowgrowth in Ml--to bring in the monetarists in the crowd--is consistentwith this last hypothesis.MR. BOEHNE. Do you believe it, Chuck?MR. PARTEE. I don't know.MR. RICE. Isn't that what you want?MR. PARTEE. No. I think that the staff projection would bean almost ideal outcome, if we could get the staff projection.MR. RICE. What about 1 percent less growth?MR. PARTEE. I don't think so. I wouldn't want 3.3 percentrather than 4.3 percent growth for the next year. I think somethingon the order of 4 percent is fine. I would like to have maybe alittle more real growth and a little less inflation than in the staffprojection, but I think it's a very good projection. I think weprobably would find that we can't live with a number a good deal lowerthan that for very long, particularly in the environment we'll havenext year. But I think it is a very good [outcome]. If I were asked-26-12/19-20/83to state what my objective is for the economy in the next year, Iwould not be far off the staff projection. Anyway, I was trying tomake a case for a smaller rise [in business activity]. You asked forsomething far out; there is a far-out scenario.MS. TEETERS. But is your assessment of the situation thatgrowth would be lower than the staff projection?MR. PARTEE. Yes, that it would be lower because a rise inthe saving rate would cut consumption, and consumption would have afeedback effect on business attitudes--considering that they're overlyoptimistic now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The staff already has factored in amuch smaller rise in consumption--by $33 billion dollars, I think.MR. PARTEE. I know, but their saving rate continues verylow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'm on the opposite side of Chuck. Ithink there are a couple of areas in which the staff forecast islikely to be a bit low on the real side next year. One of them isbusiness fixed investment. I can't demonstrate any evidence of thisother than a gut feeling, I guess. The staff forecast is well abovewhat the surveys of intentions to spend are indicating, but thosesurveys have been practically useless in terms of the trend ofbusiness fixed investment in recent years. Given the kind ofconfidence we hear about and given cash flows, I think we're going tosee more investment next year than the staff has forecast. The secondarea is inventories. I have heard over and over again the story thatJerry Corrigan is telling us--that inventory/sales ratios are soblooming low now that delivery times are lengthening--and I thinkwe're going to see some price reaction to that early on in 1984. Thestaff forecast, incidentally, has a build-up of inventories andinventory investment to what might be called a normative relationshipwith GNP of around 1 percent of GNP. That means, in effect, however,that the inventory/sales ratio shows no improvement whatsoever; itstays at its third-quarter 1983 level, which I think is the lowestinventory/sales ratio ever in terms of GNP. My guess is that if finalsales continue to be fairly strong--and I think they are likely to be--that we're going to see some efforts to build up inventory more thanthe staff has indicated. Secondarily, I worry about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make sure that's correct; Ijust want to have it confirmed. You have $35 billion a quarter--ormore than that--on average. That would be no increase in theinventory/sales ratio?MR. KICHLINE. In 1972 dollars the inventory/sales ratio wasaround 3.03 or 3.04 and it stays flat throughout 1984. So, in realterms it is unchanged.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What am I looking at--unreal inventories?MR. KICHLINE. You're looking at book [values].-27-12/19-20/83MR. GRAMLEY. The other area I worry about is that the laborforce may well continue to show the kind of very slow growth we'veseen during the course of 1983. In the staff forecast, growth of thelabor force doubles in 1984 so we get less progress in reducingunemployment than I think may take place. If it turns out that we getmore real growth and a greater drop in unemployment relative to thegrowth rate, then I think the prospects are for a worsening of priceinflation as the year progresses--more than what the staff isforecasting. I don't think the risks are for huge overruns on eitherside; one percent more in real growth and maybe 1-1/2 percent or so onthe price side is the most I can see. But if we were to get that kindof situation, then by the last half of the year we would be looking ata rate of price inflation between 6 and 7 percent and we would begoing into 1985 with a much higher level of resource utilization andwith the near certainty that, unless something slows it down, the rateof inflation would worsen. And that's what I think we need to focuson.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, as I listen to the discussion around thetable, I come to the conclusion that how 1984 turns out is right smackin our laps, [given] the sensitivity of the economy to interest rates--the current levels and changes in interest rates. If they beginmoving upward and if that gets translated to the mortgage markets, wemay as well shut that one down. So, our decisions about whereinterest rates should be and their movements during the year are goingto be the crucial factor in determining whether we achieve thisforecast or not. I agree with Chuck that this forecast would be theideal outcome. And if we could achieve it, we could say that weactually were conducting monetary policy in a way that created asituation [that maximized the prospects] of a return to relativelyfull employment. But I do emphasize that I think the economy is nowso sensitive to interest rates--particularly starting from the levelthat they are--that a move of 100 basis points would completely turnaround the forecast in practically every sector. There is also builtinto the forecast a 10 percent decline in the international value ofthe dollar, which does have direct price implications for next yearalso. So, the whole combination of this, I think, turns on thedecisions that are made by the FOMC over the next three months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm out of names. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. Just a very brief comment, Mr. Chairman: In myexperience with businessmen, they always extrapolate the present and[unintelligible]; for example, it causes them to underestimateinventory/sales ratios because they always assume that sales are goingto continue as [they see] them now. I'll talk tomorrow about leadeffects that we ought to be considering here. I'm not that optimisticabout the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe you ought to tell us more.MR. RICE. Why aren't you optimistic?MR. ROBERTS. Well, I just wanted to introduce the idea thatthe liquidity flows through the economy, as I'm sure everybody aroundthis table knows, operate with differential lags. I've been concerned-28-12/19-20/83all year about inflation later this year and in 1985, which I think isgoing to happen. I was not concerned about the fragility of theeconomy and that is because of the flow of liquidity through theeconomy. We've had a real constraint for some time on Ml, whether youlook at it as 13 percent in the first half and 5 percent in the secondhalf, or whether you look at it as 4 or 5 months with no growth. Ithink that by the second or third quarter of next year we're going tosee some restraint in the economy, with an output effect flowingthrough on a near-term basis and then an inflation effect late nextyear. It's the worst of all possible worlds. I would anticipate thatwe will have real growth in the 3-1/2 percent area next year and thatwe still will have troublesome inflation late in the year.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I guess we come out somewhatdifferently. The New York Fed staff's forecast is for stronger growththan in Mr. Kichline's forecast. So much of this is "iffy" that Iwon't bother going into the components and how they arrive at theirforecast; they arrive at it, incidentally, with a much higherproductivity guess. I'm particularly impressed, unfortunately, by theincreased talk I hear in the financial markets about risinginflationary expectations. And I hear a lot of it. So, from thatpoint of view, there's a fairly clear implication for some snuggingup, possibly. On the other hand, though, the thing that bothers me isthat the exchange rate is getting to be a looming menace in adifference sense. The higher it keeps going the more precipitouslyit's going to drop when expectations regarding the exchange rate turnaround. It's going to drop at a time when we're nearer capacityutilization and it will have a much bigger inflationary impact. I'mnot even talking about the developing countries burden. I think it'sa real time bomb.So, I am in a quandary as to where these conflicting analyseswould lead one. If one were looking just at the domestic scene, Ithink it would be important to affect the psychology and curb somewhatthese rising inflationary expectations. I don't think that a quarteror a half percentage point is going to bring that much of a change inhousing and the real economy that it is going to slow down themomentum that much, but I think it would have a very salutarypsychological effect. However, I don't know whether it would push theexchange rate up even further. It would be my guess that it would andI just don't know if we can afford to be that asymmetric in ourmonetary policy in regard to exchange rates. When they are fallingprecipitously, we are all willing to tighten monetary policy; whenthey are rising into the stratosphere, we're not prepared toliberalize monetary policy--for reasons I understand, of course, andwith which I sympathize to a large degree. I don't know how to cutthis dilemma. The easy way out would be to say: Let's wait a fewmore weeks until what is happening becomes clear. But Ted Robert'sscenario--even though we don't believe that it's the most likely one--certainly is still in the realm of possibility. I don't think therewould be any chance of a recession, but there could be some slackeningof growth. At the present time we think there is enough momentum thatgrowth probably will be coming in higher than the 4.3 percent; we'rethinking more in terms of 5 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.-29-12/19-20/83MR. GUFFEY. With regard to economic activity in the TenthDistrict, I think we've joined the national recovery certainly, withthe exception of two major sectors: agriculture and energy. And bothof those will take much longer to work out. The agriculturalsituation will depend largely, I think, upon some drop of the dollar--if and when that ever occurs--to encourage exports; and energyeverybody knows about. But by and large I think the view ofbusinessmen and market makers in our part of the country is noteuphoric but it is very strong as to the outlook six months or sohence. In talking to those individuals, they are almost consumed withthe federal budget deficit problem and the fact that the FederalReserve is really the only player on the field and that inflationaryexpectations are just under the surface--whether they come fromcorporations and businesses taking the opportunity to try to increasetheir prices and hopefully make them stick or from wage pressures.[The view is] that inflationary expectations could take hold and be areality, particularly in the markets, unless the Federal Reserve isvery visible.In general terms, we would expect the staff forecast to bethe best of all worlds if it could be achieved. But our bestexpectations are that growth will be somewhat faster in the first halfof the year and then slow down toward the latter part of the year.With regard to inflation, our projection would be higher than thestaff's and as a result--this may be ahead of the discussion--Iprobably would join those who say a little snugging up now would serveus well in the future.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. On Mr. Corrigan's point, we don't have a charthere. We have all sorts of numbers but he has the chart. We do havevery clearly, though, a situation where we assume that unit laborcosts in 1983 are rising about 1 percent and our deflator forecast issomething like a 4-1/4 percent increase. So, it's a very wide spread.It shows up in corporate profits, and corporate profits in this cycle--for the first four quarters of the recovery, assuming our fourth-quarter forecast is correct--have risen more than in any other postwarcycle. They are close to the increase in 1975, but are substantiallyabove the cyclical performance for the first year of a recovery. Twocomments with regard to that spread--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interrupt you: The increasein profits is stronger?MR. KICHLINE. Correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How about the relationship of profits toGNP or corporate product?MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's up because the profit share andnotional margins have been rising. We think it will be at the highestlevel at the end of this year since 1977-78--a six-year high. So, ithas done very well as a share or absolutely. Two particular comments:First, going back to the staff's inflation presentation, we believethat corporations essentially price off some notion of unit labor costand a markup over that. In effect, what they're doing is looking atsome notion of trend growth in productivity; and trend growth in-30-12/19-20/83productivity, we think, is better than they may be using. So, it isshowing up here in terms of attempts to price fairly aggressively andthey're getting more profits than they might otherwise think. Mysecond point is a technical comment: In measuring the GNP deflator,as you know, import prices are subtracted out in the short run. Inthe first half of this year import prices actually declined and wereabout unchanged in the third quarter, so that for much of this year wethink that substraction process has artificially raised the GNPdeflator because the benefits of those import prices measured inconsumption, investment, or whatever, come along with a lag. So, ourstory is that this has been an unusual year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But then the consumer price index shouldbe lower but it's not; it's higher.MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's higher than the deflator but thereare different weights and other things going on. Obviously, serviceprices, for example, are very important. We suspect that 1984 will bea year that returns much more to normal in the sense that our forecasthas unit labor costs and the deflator rising about the same amount, sothat the gap we're seeing now we think will evaporate.MS. TEETERS. Jim, a technical question about this largeincrease in profits we are talking about and the increase in the shareand the probable effects that this could have on wage demands over thecourse of the year: If corporations end up with higher profits,doesn't that take some of the pressure off price increases also?MR. KICHLINE. Well, if we go back to the notion that somesense of normalcy is restored, which I think is happening here--profits have been very weak for the last 3 or 4 years--and if indeedproductivity is improving, I think it all depends ultimately on thecontext of the market situation that we have. In our forecast,markets generally will not be so tight as to allow corporations topass aggressively through whatever price increases they might want.There is restraint both domestically and from the import side. So, Ithink on profits you're right. Ultimately, how it works out willdepend in part on how this economy evolves in 1984.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How are profits in the manufacturingsector alone? You can cover that tomorrow.MR. KICHLINE. Okay, in detail.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, when you consider the automobileindustry alone, it's going to make $5 billion this year. I suspectthe profits in manufacturing are up too--just as sharply, in terms ofincreases in profits, as the rest of the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They probably are up pretty sharply, but Idon't know where they are in absolute levels.Well, I think we might as well quit for the evening, ifnobody else has anything to say on this subject, and turn [tomorrow]to a preliminary discussion of the 1984 ranges. I don't find myselfas excited about this forecast and its idealized aspects as some otherpeople do here. My ideal forecast always has a declining inflationrate. Thinking back to our discussion last month, we didn't draw much-31-12/19-20/83 -32-of a conclusion. This is the time to come to a conclusion, I suppose,in terms of inflation strategies as well as other objectives of ourlong-term forecast. We'll put that on the table bright and earlytomorrow. Nine o'clock is bright and early.[Meeting recessed]12/19-20/83December 20, 1983--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can begin with a discussion of the 1984ranges. There was some discussion in the Congress about requiringranges for 1985, or two years ahead, and we might want to considerwhat we might say about 1985, at least in a qualitative way, when wepresent the 1984 ranges. Obviously, we don't have to decide this nowor even be that precise about 1984 now. But if anybody has strikinglydifferent feelings than are encompassed in the preliminary ones--or aradically different way of looking at things--this would be theappropriate time to bring it up. I think the Bluebook paragraph ortwo about this was a good discussion of the various considerationsthat have to be brought to bear. It does fit in with our inflationdiscussion last time about what we think our responsibilities are andwhat the practical possibilities are for dealing with inflation over alonger time-frame because these kinds of things are reflected in thelong-term targets. I don't know whether you have anything to add, Mr.Axilrod, to your comments in the Bluebook.MR. AXILROD. I don't have much, Mr. Chairman. I could verybriefly point out what we were trying to do there. As you mentioned,in the first instance we were trying to discuss the tentative rangesin terms of their consistency with regard to inflation objectives.Obviously, the 1984 tentative ranges are consistent with furtherprogress in reducing inflation assuming, as is clear there, that theCommittee is looking toward lower rates of inflation than the 5percent that is currently projected for 1984. And that, of course,would have particular relevance for anything the Committee might wantto say, qualitatively or not, for 1985.On some more technical points with regard to the ranges: For1984, the Ml range of 4 to 8 percent is a reduction, of course, fromthe range for the second half of 1983 and we think it implies, giventhe 9 percent nominal GNP, a velocity increase on the order of 2percent without any interest rate rise--somewhat lower than the trendfor the postwar period years, which is around 3 percent or so but ithas occurred in a period of rising short-term rates. Now, thevelocity of Ml, as everyone knows, is going to be very uncertain andprobably will be very different if there are significant interest ratemovements up or down from the levels projected. But given thisprojection of very little interest rate change, we think an Mlincrease around the middle--or more likely in the upper part--of the 4to 8 percent would be the likely outcome, consistent with theprojected nominal GNP.I ought to point out two other things: As noted in theBluebook, the [tentative 1984] M3 range was decreased to 6 to 9percent. The problem may be that it would squeeze M3 down pretty muchif a considerable part of the credit flows continue to go throughfinancial institutions. We had two reasons for thinking it would bepossible to get M3 growth at 9 percent or below. One had to do withthe continuing efforts by banks to raise funds abroad throughEurodollars and not domestically through CDs, which would tend to holddown M3 growth, particularly if foreigners put their money in dollarsabroad. With regard to M2, I would also point out that a 1/2 pointreduction in the range from 7 to 10 percent to 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percentmight not be considered an effective reduction since the 7 to 10percent range included 1/2 to 1 percentage point of further shifts-33-12/19-20/83related to the money market deposit accounts. And so far as we couldjudge, the amount of shifting in that 7 to 10 percent probably was onthe order of 1/2 to 1 percent, but those estimates are always verydifficult to make. Thus, a reduction of 1/2 point to 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent is not, in a sense, an effective reduction. Counterbalancingthat, of course, is what we observe to be a normal reduction invelocity growth of M2 in the second year of a recovery, which wouldfor any given nominal GNP require somewhat higher M2 than mightotherwise occur. I think those are all the preliminary comments Iwould have.MR. WALLICH. Could I ask you a question, Steve? When we setthese targets tentatively in July, I think all of the aggregates wereat the tops of their ranges. That is still the case for M2 and M3,more or less, but Ml has dropped to almost the bottom of its range.So, in effect, we've had a base drift of about 3 percentage points,haven't we? If we took this not just as a monitoring range but as atarget, and if we wanted to arrive at the same level of Ml at the endof the target period, the end of the fourth quarter of 1984, we wouldreally have to go not to 4 to 8 percent but 7 to 11 percent. I saythat not because I intend to propose this, but just to indicate howbase drift seems to change, if I'm not mistaken, what one thinks isthe right thing to do.MR. AXILROD. Yes. I have not made that calculation; I wasplanning to make it for the Committee at the February meeting when weknew the actual outcome.MR. WALLICH. But something of that kind is the case, isn'tit?MR. AXILROD. Yes. If the center of the 5 to 9 percent rangewere where you wanted to start from, I'm not sure what the rate ofgrowth would be. We can calculate it while we're waiting here, but itwould be a higher rate of growth than from where you are now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we've been fairly consistentin ignoring those kinds of considerations.MR. PARTEE. That's been done and they did [unintelligible].MR. WALLICH. Yes, then we drifted up; we're drifting down.I think the down is money in the bank, so to speak. And we shouldn'tlet go--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that would only be if youattributed some special importance to 7 percent or whatever it is. Ithink what we said at the time was that we would be perfectly happywith low growth if velocity were high and we'd be perfectly happy withhigh growth if velocity were low.MR. WALLICH. Well, it doesn't change the calculations, doesit, because velocity may still change? We can't expect that the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It changes the arithmetic, but I don'tthink there's any great significance to 7 percent. Mr. Morris.-34-12/19-20/83MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have a lot of problems withthis, as you might surmise. It seems to me that the only range thatwe can have much confidence is going to be predictably related to a 9percent nominal GNP growth is the range for credit. I've been arguingfor a couple of years now that the changed character of M1 means thatits relationship to the nominal GNP is not predictable. And it seemsto me that I have two years of pretty good evidence on my side. Toassume, as apparently is being done here, that we will get a more orless normal return to historical Ml velocity--I hope that turns out tobe the case if that range is adopted--is an act of faith rather thanan assumption with any scientific basis. I think the ranges for M2and M3 are even worse, because the history of the last 25 years showsthat in the second year of expansion on the average M2 and M3 velocitydeclined by 2-1/2 percent. Therefore, if one wanted to have the rangewide enough to finance a 9 percent nominal GNP growth, the upper limitought to be 11-1/2 percent. I'm not persuaded that the staff has madea very strong case to the effect that M2 and M3 velocity are going tobe so much different in '84 than in the past. Also, this year beingan election year, I would hope that we could adopt targets that wewouldn't have to be changing just before the election. We abandonedthe M1 target in mid-1982 and we rebased our Ml target in mid-1983.To do it in mid-1984 might generate the implication that the FederalReserve was changing course for political reasons. So, I think it'smore important this year than in most years that we have somereasonable degree of confidence that the targets we're setting arecompatible with our nominal GNP objective. I don't think we can havethat confidence for these ranges for Ml, M2, and M3.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You'd like to see them all higher?MR. MORRIS. I don't know. I don't know where to set a rangefor Ml or what base [period] to use for it. I would rather eliminateMl as a target. As for taking the position to call it something else--say, a monitoring range--to my observation the market doesn't seemto notice the difference between a monitoring range and a target. Ithink the Ml numbers there are probably sounder than the numbers forM2 and M3. I just am not persuaded that the performance of M2 and M3is going to be that dramatically different from all previous secondyears of expansion in the last 25 years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have evidence on the second year ofexpansion for the previous 25 years, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. I don't have the rates of growth at hand; Ihave the velocities at hand. They are almost impossible to analyze,of course, because of ceiling rates and all that. In the second yearof expansion velocities of M2 were negative. That is, there weredrops in velocity on the order of 3 percent after the first quarter of'61 in the second year of that expansion, 1 percent in the early '70s,and about 3-1/4 percent after the '75 trough. And 1980 is irrelevant,of course. Before the '60s, in the '50s, there were increases invelocity of about 1 percent. And those were all decelerations so tospeak from the first year; some of the decelerations turned intonegative velocity. We have assumed also a deceleration in velocity ofM2. So, it's not inconsistent with this kind of cyclical experience.But we have the velocity continuing to be positive, which I think isprobably also reasonable given the changed institutionalcircumstances. It also happens to be generally consistent with what-35-12/19-20/83we can make out of our models; both the Ml and M2 changes aregenerally consistent with our new Ml demand equation and the estimatesthat come out of our model for time and savings deposits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I want to respond to your commentthat we might want to say something qualitative about 1985. Eventhough I know that we don't want to imply an automatic quid pro quo,which would be a tighter fiscal policy and easier monetary policy, itdoes seem to me that we have an obligation to spell out the overallterms [unintelligible] of the economic profile of 1985--if we decideto go that far--and that we ought to do it by starting out withdifferent assumptions: meaningful action to reduce the budget deficitand the absence of that. It seems to me that we have an obligationnot simply to preach this but to show our best view of whatdifferences there would be in the economy, even though I know it's notclear beyond 1985.MR. BALLES. Tony, could you speak up a little louder please?Some of us can't hear you down here.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm sorry. I was just saying that ifthe Chairman is going to spell out qualitative views in regard to1985, we ought to describe the scenario in general terms if there ismeaningful action to reduce the budget deficit and if there is not.With regard to the monetary aggregates, it seems to me that at thevery minimum we should raise the M3 range 1/2 point to make it equalto the M2 range. I think it's a little restrictive for the samereasons that Steve has described. And it looks strange; I don't thinkit makes any sense to have it lower than the M2 range. In general,even though I'm sympathetic to what Frank says, I don't see thattactically at this point we can afford to drop everything but thecredit target. I think that would be interpreted in some quarters asbeing politically motivated. I'm [not] quite as cynical as I was afew months ago as to the markets reacting differently to a monitoringrange as against a target range for Ml. I have the sense that themarkets are being somewhat less knee-jerk in their reaction to theweekly Ml figure. So, it seems to me it would be appropriate tocontinue with our present structure of the three target ranges--forcredit, M2, and M3--and a monitoring range for Ml. That's all I haveat the moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. With regard to saying something about 1985, Ithink that is a good context in which to talk about our views on thereduction of total spending over a period of years. I'd at leaststart out with Frank on that, but I think nominal GNP has to bereduced over a period of some years. And if we're talking in thecontext of 1985, then I think one can distinguish it from being anannual target. And that really is our strategy: a gradual reductionof total spending in the economy. Then, from that I would go on anddiverge from Frank and say that money is important because it gets usthere and that the rate of growth of money would be gradually reducedover time in order to accomplish this total spending strategy. Inthat respect, I think what is in the Bluebook is reasonable. I wouldgo much along the line that already has been put forth, and that is-36-12/19-20/83that reducing the money supply is important over time and where wecome within the target ranges depends on what happens to velocity. Wehave some ideas about that but we don't know ahead of time. In somesense that kind of communication deals with what we need to say to themarkets, which is how we're going to react next year to surprises. Weshould be very open to saying that there are these uncertainties andthat when we get surprises this is the basic structure within which wewill look at those surprises.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think we really have twoquestions that we have to address today. The first, of course, iswhich aggregate or aggregates we're going to emphasize. And thesecond is what the numerical ranges for those targets ought to be overthe coming year. As I suspect most of you would think, I stronglyfavor returning to Ml or increasing the emphasis on it. I'd make itthe primary target. It seems reasonable to me to suppose that, giventhe sharp increase in the velocity of Ml in the fourth quarter, theprobability is much greater that the traditional relationship betweenMl and GNP may be resuming. In addition, I think one has to judge Mlagainst the alternatives. And it seems to me that the case for M2 andM3 and almost anything else I can think of is really not as good as itis for Ml, despite the imperfections that Ml obviously has had in thepast. If the Committee does agree to increase the emphasis on Ml,then I think we ought to consider lowering the 8 percent top that wetentatively set for next year. If we approach the target from thestandpoint that the Bluebook does in paragraph 12--the paragraph Stevewas mentioning a while ago--an 8 percent growth at the top, given theprojection of nominal GNP of 9.1 percent from the fourth quarter ofthis year to the fourth quarter of next year, would imply a rise invelocity of only 1 percent. That is not a figure to which I wouldattach a very high degree of probability given the recent resumptionin velocity [growth] of Ml and also the probable absence of anyfurther major changes in the regulatory area. More fundamentally, 8percent seems to me just not really consistent for any long period oftime with our stated objective of dealing over the long run withinflationary problems. So, what I'd really like to do is to knock acouple of points off that. That's probably not going to be acceptableto this group, in which case I would argue that we ought to put thetop maybe at 7 percent, or if we want to be a little devious say 4 to8 percent but that we're just going to use the [lower] half of therange. But I don't like that [latter] approach, really.So far as M2 and M3 are concerned, I could accept keeping thepreliminary ranges where they were set in July, although as Stevepointed out a minute ago and as the Bluebook mentioned, that doesn'treally represent any reduction in the rate of growth in M2 for 1984.So, I think 6 to 9 percent would be a preferable figure and would givea stronger signal to the market of our anti-inflationary resolve.They will look at that and will be aware that if we stick to ourtentative 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent range, we really haven't made anyeffort because of the way the base was set. So far as M3 isconcerned, if there are these technical reasons for raising thatrange, which seem plausible to me, then I wouldn't mind having it at6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. For 1985, clearly, the purpose ought to be tocut whatever ranges we adopt still further, in keeping with our oftenstated objective of working down the rate of growth in the aggregates-37-12/19-20/83over the long run. So far as figures are concerned, I think we haveto wait until we decide what we want for 1984 before we try to put any[specific] numbers on that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. As for the 1984 targets, I see no reason tochange what we did in July. As far as the Ml target is concerned, wealready have an implied reduction of 3 percent in those targetsthrough the base drift, as I said before. I see 4 to 8 percent asmeaning 6 percent on average; that implies a velocity gain of 3percent and nominal GNP of 9 percent, and that seems to me aboutright. I would like to restore Ml partly but not fully yet and Iwould like to maintain the wider range, given the uncertainty. I havenothing to say on M2, M3, and credit.As regards 1985 and the possibility of some sort ofreciprocity between fiscal and monetary policy, I think there's anelement of realism here, as Tony says. Analytically, if we raise therate of growth of money it would just lead to higher prices in thelong run. But it's also true that if the budget is tightened andmoney remains on course, the drop in interest rates is not going to besufficient to overcome the reduction in demand. So, what we ought tohave is a temporary acceleration, if one could do that, of theaggregates. I am quite skeptical of that degree of fine-tuning. AndI really would prefer, tactically and strategically, to say that ourcollaboration comes from allowing this interest rate drop to takeplace that a reduction in the budget deficit is bringing about,recognizing that there's some risk on the down side that the interestrate drop may not be enough to keep GNP on track. Looking further,[beyond] 1985, I think we should aim at ultimate price stability. Ithink we're all aware that there are high costs. It's not very likelythat we will achieve that on a steady trend. It's much more likely tohappen as a result of another recession before which there will besome acceleration of inflation that will then lead to a sharper dropin prices, hopefully to the neighborhood of stability. But we can'tplan on that, so we have to plan on some kind of downward trend in theaggregates to achieve reasonable price stability.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would agree that in someways the key question before us now is 1985 rather than 1984. Wecould get lucky and get through 1984 in reasonably good shape, but Ithink the prospects of being able to keep the economy growing on anoninflationary--whatever that means--way in 1985 at this juncturewill be very, very [low] for all the reasons that have been mentionedbefore: the deficit, the likely build-up in business externalfinancing certainly by that time, and at least in my judgment a clearrisk that the inflation rate itself will have broken through the 5percent or higher threshold by the end of 1984. In that setting I dothink that if we were lucky, we could squeeze through 1984 withsomething that might look like the Greenbook forecast. But unlikeothers, I would not be particularly sanguine about that result. Icertainly don't consider it optimal by any stretch of the imagination;indeed, I guess I would argue that if we really want to try to insurethe continuation of a pattern of a growing economy in 1985, the bestthing we could do to produce that result might be to introduce a-38-12/19-20/83little more restraint in 1984. I'm under no illusions about theextent to which any of this can be done, or fine-tuned, but that wouldbe the direction of my thinking.More specifically, in the context of the tentative 1984targets, I am inclined to the view that the upper end of the Ml rangeis too high. As best I can understand the credit aggregate, I thinkthe upper end of that is too high as well. I don't have anyparticular views on M2 or M3, although I certainly would not beallergic to the symmetry in M2 and M3 that I think Mr. Solomonsuggested. There is another question that is laced in and out of allof these, and that's whether we want to do anything in terms of movingin the direction of suggesting through your oratory at least--perhapsa little more directly than we have in the past--that our primary,though by no means exclusive, objectives are more in the areas ofprice and financial stability. I don't know if you're game for thatright now but if we can begin to nudge ourselves in that directionwithout going overboard, I think it could serve the purpose of thisCommittee and the economy very well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, we did have a good discussion atthe last FOMC meeting about certain relationships and certain theoriesof inflation and inflation's forces and factors. It seems to me thatthat discussion is relevant to an outreaching for 1985 and to someextent to our considerations for 1984. There is some validity to thenotion that by 1985 the changes in Ml [will be behind us], howeveruncertain its velocity and however difficult it is to anticipate theresults of contemporaneous reserve requirement accounting, and thatwhat we do in the balance of this year and in 1984 will have a bearingon the conditions and activity in 1985. I would, therefore, notforget Ml regardless of the uncertainties that I mentioned, but Ibelieve they are such that we should not yet move Ml up in importancein the exposition of our policies and how we are going about[implementing] them. It seems to me that the market is focusingsomewhat more on free reserves and on borrowing levels than previouslyand that the almost obsession with Ml has diminished somewhat; I thinkthat's probably salutary. Perhaps that means the market has a betterunderstanding of what we're really trying to do. So, I wouldn'tforget Ml; I would keep it among the targets, certainly, but I believethe uncertainties are such that we need a wide range for 1984 and,therefore, the 4 to 8 percent is acceptable.With regard to your question on 1985, I would join those whosupport your presentation of perhaps a bit stronger language regardingour reluctance to fund total expenditures, a part of which is the 40percent that is [spending by] the federal government. But I'd like topick up those additional tens of billions that are off-budgetfinancing and look at the situation as one in which the financing ismuch more than 40 percent and getting up to the 50 percent or betterlevel. So, I would caution that our 1985 targeting of the aggregatesand our policies, framed in view of Ml changes and credit changes, arenot likely to be such as to fund the levels of spending that privatedemand and public demand unreined would imply. It seems to me that weare in a position of increasing that warning. I would also supportsome language indicating that, when we know what the actual growth in-39-12/19-20/83the aggregates was in 1984, our policy would most likely be to reducethe targets for 1985 from the actuals of 1984.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you mean lock ourselves in on thatone?MR. MARTIN. I would have language indicating that, given thetotal spending that seems likely to occur in the absence of remedialaction on fiscal policy, we would find it difficult in the publicinterest to fund all of that spending and that our targets would mostlikely take the form of [lower figures than the actuals in 1984]. Iwouldn't use any numbers, Tony. How do we know what the actual 1984performance is going to be? I was reviewing last year's Bluebook--nooffense intended--and I don't know how in the world we can set numbersfor 1985 when the 1984 actual is likely to be way off the expected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I too think that 1985 is goingto be a critical period, and I think it is important that we give themarkets some qualitative description of our intentions for 1985. Thatmeans that 1984 targeting is going to be all the more importantbecause of the carryover from that year into 1985. But I hope, as Ithink Governor Martin was just saying, that we will resist anyCongressional or other pressures to quantify the targets for 1985.Our strategy for both years should be, as has been stated before, anobjective of having a steady and gradual reduction of the rate ofmoney growth over time. The long-term plan, it seems to me, is tokeep inflation in check and to achieve price stability in the longrun, and that objective is equally applicable to 1985 as to 1984.With respect to the 1984 targets themselves, I guess it depends onwhether we look at the rate of growth in money that we have had from1982 until recently or whether we look at business expansion. Eitherway, as I said yesterday, I believe the rate of growth in the economyis going to be stronger than many people think and, therefore, thedanger of recession in the latter part of '84 is perhaps not as strongin my mind as in others. I also remember the discussion of inflationat the last meeting, and I'm concerned about that. The other thingthat I would say in a general sense is that I believe the markets aregoing to be looking at what we do for both years--certainly for '84--and our credibility is going to be very much looked at over the nextseveral months as we announce these targets for '84.Specifically, on the numbers themselves, I would agree thatM1 should be elevated to a more prominent position in our thinking. Idon't get very hung up on whether it's a monitoring range or a targetbut I think we ought to look at it more carefully than we have. Iwould drop that top number, as others have said; 7-1/2 percent seemsto be an appropriate number. The other two aggregate ranges seem okayto me. And I agree with Mr. Solomon that having some symmetry betweenM2 and M3 makes some sense, so I would agree with the tentative '84numbers [for the M2 range] in the Bluebook--6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent--but I'd use the same numbers for M3. But, again, I would move thattop of the M1 range down from 8 percent to something in the 7 to 7-1/2percent area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.-40-12/19-20/83MS. TEETERS. Well, I agree with [Governor Martin]. Let metake the 1985 issue. First of all, I really don't think we canforecast. As I look back over the past 5 years, we've missed turningpoints and almost everything that has happened--well, not everythingthat has happened because I think that we have to forecast and thestaff has done a good job. But to lock ourselves into something thatis as far off as two years, with all the variety that can go on, Ithink is a mistake. This year we have changed targets and we'veaccommodated to changes in the economy as they have occurred, aschanges in the various aggregates have come along, and as our forecasthas changed. I must say that from my point of view the marketsresponded [well] to what was a very reasonable shift in policy. We'vekept them informed about what we were doing. And rigidly settingtargets, particularly out two years, when we have a changing economydoesn't make much sense to me at all. If you remember the exercisesof 4 or 5 years ago when we ran the econometric model [to evaluate]probabilities, we found that we are pretty good at forecasting thenext quarter or the next two quarters. We begin to lose that andbecome less certain three quarters out and even more uncertain fourquarters out; and by the time we get to a year-and-a-half or two yearsout, the econometric models give us almost random numbers. We mightas well do what the Administration does for their 5-year projections,which is to take an annual rate of growth, just string it out, and putin a hopeful inflation number, because those forecasts for 2, 3, 4,and 5 years out don't have any reality to them. So, to lock ourselvesin now to something for 1985 doesn't make any sense. I think we cantalk about it. We can talk a great deal about the fiscal policyproblem and what that implies for monetary policy, but I don't thinkwe have to lock ourselves in.As for the 1984 targets, [many of] you seem to assume thatwe're going to be all right in 1984. I think there are a lot ofhazards out there. We still don't know what Ml is doing. I think weneed a wide range on it; I'm not terribly satisfied with 4 to 8percent, but I certainly wouldn't lower it and I wouldn't narrow it.As for M3, that aggregate always grows at a rate close to 9-1/2percent, so it is ridiculous to try to do something else with it. Itseems to me that we might as well face the reality and put thosenumbers up to 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent and know that it's going to be atthe top of the range and may be a bit over it. I think we havetroubles ahead. I hope that they will be met with as much flexibilityand as much openness as we've done this past year. I would stay withthese targets but raise the M3 numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I would join with those who see trouble ahead,but I don't think 1985 is going to be the critical year; I think 1984is. If we were to get through 1984 with an outcome on the price sideno worse than what the staff is forecasting, then we would be inreasonably good shape going into 1985. But, as I said yesterday, Ithink the risks are all on the up side. I think we're probably goingto see somewhat stronger growth and more pickup in the inflation rate.And if we let that genie get out of the bottle in 1984, it is going tobe awfully hard to put the cork back on in 1985. I can live withthese targets or I could live with a somewhat lower range for both Mland M2. But I want to remind the Committee how far these are from thekinds of ranges one would have to adopt ultimately if one were going-41-12/19-20/83to get price stability. If, for example, we interpret price stabilityas being something like 1 to 2 percent--the rate of increase we saw inthe early 1960s--that allows 2-1/2 to 3 percent for potential growthof real GNP. Hack off 1-1/2 percent for a trend increase in velocitynot related to interest rates and we are talking about 2-1/2 to 3-1/2percent for growth of Ml and maybe 1 percentage point more or so forgrowth of M2. So, we're a long, long way from where we're going tohave to be if we're really serious about getting the inflation ratedown. And if we're not serious about getting the inflation rate down,we ought to decide that and adopt a course of policy in accordancewith that view--for next year, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you serious?MR. GRAMLEY. Over the long run, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For 1984?MR. GRAMLEY. Oh no, not for 1984. I think we have to bepragmatic. We have an inherited inflation rate so what we have tostrive for is to do no worse than see a tiny bit of acceleration ofinflation along the lines the staff is forecasting, and then see if wecan do a little better in 1985. But if we let inflation getconsiderably worse in 1984, then in 1985 it's going to get worsestill.For reasons I talked about yesterday, I think that M2 oughtto be our principal target. The relationship between Ml and GNP maytend to reestablish itself on a more stable basis than we've seenrecently, but I'd like to wait for that to happen. As far as targetsfor '85 are concerned, I would not be inclined to put out any numbers.I would like to see us make qualitative statements to the effect thatwe will attempt over time to bring down the rate of growth of moneyfor reasons having to do with bringing down the rate of inflation, notas an end product in itself. But I think we ought to put out somewarnings that we're serious about this business. And if we're not, weought to tell the public that also.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What would you expect to happen inthe real economy in '85 if we made a significant cut in the moneytarget for '85 and the Congress had not or was not taking any actionon the fiscal side? I'm not necessarily disagreeing with you. It'snot a provocative question; I'm just asking what your honest guess is.Would we have a recession in '85?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I have never believed that one can findmacroeconomic reasons for thinking that fiscal stimulus and monetaryrestraint are enough to push the economy into recession. Fiscalstimulus unleashes economic expansion; monetary restraint holds itback. And it's the balance between the two that determines whether ornot the economy grows and whether we have more inflation or less. Ithink the main problems are on the micro side. They have to do withthe damage high real interest rates create in the international area,to the thrifts, to the rate of business investment, and that sort ofthing. I wouldn't be inclined necessarily to say that a continuationof current fiscal policy--that is, the current services projection ofthe growing deficit--together with more monetary restraint would push-42-12/19-20/83us off the cliff into recession. It sure as heck would create a lotdamage.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think we are having a lot of discussionabout a world that we would like to see rather than the world thatwe're actually in. The idea of gradual reductions in money [growth]over time that will bring down inflation neatly and avoid recession isa world we wish we were in. In reality we bring inflation downthrough recessions. That's where progress has come in the past and Isuspect that's where it will come in the future. If we're talkingabout further reductions in inflation over the next several years,then I think we're talking about a recession. It's not that we likerecession, but it seems to me that the two go hand in hand. Havingsaid that, I think we still have to be somewhat idealistic and put outthe message of lower growth in the aggregates, but I don't think wereally ought to kid ourselves. As far as the strategy in 1984 isconcerned, I think we ought to continue to look at a number ofvariables and be cautious of any particular one. I think Ml is stilllargely unpredictable and has an unpredictable link with GNP. Somecase can be made that it may not be as unpredictable as it was in1983, but I don't see any evidence that would [warrant] elevating itto the premier status it once had. I think there is some case forgiving it somewhat more equal status but I would prefer to keep it ina monitoring status, largely for tactical reasons. There has beensome weaning of the market from this variable. I don't think it's asmuch of a shrine as it once was and that is helpful in this judgmentalworld that we have for monetary policy. So, I would keep M2 and M3 asthe targets and M1 as a monitoring range.As far as the specific numbers, I don't have a real quarrelwith the specifications that we set in July, although I think Nancy isquite right that M3 grows at 9-1/2 percent whether we like it or notand we simply ought to realize that and at least have 9-1/2 percent bewithin the range. As far as Ml goes, I think a real issue is how muchM1 is like the old M2. To the extent that it is more like the old M2,then I think higher growth rates are more acceptable, so that a rangeof 4 to 8 percent does not disturb me. I think we do have an M1 todaythat looks more like the old M2 with its implications for velocity.Now, I like the idea that has been put forth by several people for1985--that we ought not talk about just one kind of outlook--because Idon't think a [forecast] for 1985 by this group or any other group isworth very much. I think it would be a very good vehicle forunderscoring the importance of doing something about the deficit ornot doing something about the deficit and I would take that as itsmain objective. To have at least a couple of outcomes--one in whichwe get some help from the fiscal side and one in which we don't--Ithink could serve a positive purpose.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. Well, Mr. Chairman, with respect to 1985 or anylonger-term period, I would be very cautious about expressing specificmathematical ranges unless we were required to do that by theCongress. I would rather see us have a qualitative objective, whichis to reduce inflation steadily until we've eliminated it eventuallyover whatever period that might encompass.-43-12/19-20/83As for 1984, I think the 4 to 8 percent range, in view ofwhat is developing on Ml, is probably too wide. I would be inclinedto say 4 to 7 percent, except that for whatever reasons our directedgrowth of Ml has tended to be to the lower end of the range ratherthan otherwise. So, because of that tendency, I would be inclined tosay 5 to 8 percent, raising the bottom figure. My reason is that I'mconcerned about the recent slowdown that we've had in Ml, as I saidyesterday, whether measured as 13 percent in the first half and 5percent in the second half or measured as 4 to 5 months, essentially,of no growth. In terms of the leads here, I think we have a probableslowdown in the economy in the second and third quarters already builtin; and because of the surge in money late last year and earlier thisyear, I think we have an increase in inflation built in late next yearor early in 1985. And I don't want us to be like the businessmen Irefer to who extrapolate the present and fight the ebullience of theeconomy right now. I would rather see us get Ml growing again at amoderate pace. Alternative B, which essentially suggests about a 6percent [MI growth] pattern, is acceptable to me; it may be slightlyon the high side, but I think unless we get that going we will have acost in terms of real output in 1984 and we should not be sanguineabout 1984. I would like to see us accept the fact that theaberration in velocity caused by a recession, lower inflation, andlower interest rates on these new deposit accounts may now be ending.We see a sharp rise in velocity here in the fourth quarter. I thinkwe should get onto a trend line assumption of velocity, since itclearly can't be predicted in the short run, and build our moneygrowth rates around that. If you accept that as on the order of 3percent, then the 6 percent accommodates the 9 percent nominal GNP.So, I would like to see us remove Ml from the so-called monitoringrange [status] since it really is the one variable that we can controlmost directly. I'd place it at least equal with the other aggregatesand preferably give it primary status. More importantly, I'd like tosee us do something to get it growing again. We have a forecast of 8percent in December but we've had forecasts of increases for monthafter month that haven't materialized. I note that we have beendecreasing reserves in November and December and it seems to me that'san expected result of that type of policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I can't remember the exact words we used when weannounced the preliminary targets for 1984 but I have a hunch that thewords we used suggested that the reduction in the ranges wasconsistent with our long-term program to reduce the level of priceinflation, and at this point I really don't see that we have a basisfor changing them [again]. To make a significant downward reductionin the ranges would imply a higher level of restraint than we wouldwant to have in mind. To increase them by any magnitude wouldindicate a very fundamental shift in policy, which I think would be abig mistake. So, I would be inclined to go with the ranges as we haveannounced them. For the reasons that Steve has suggested and thatGovernor Teeters has suggested, I would be inclined perhaps to reversethe ranges for M2 and M3. But I would at this point place a muchhigher reliance on Ml. I think we should put more emphasis on Ml andthat particularly relates to the conversation we had with regard toCRR yesterday. In light of the timing involved, we are getting to apoint where CRR is going to come into place pretty rapidly, and-44-12/19-20/83perhaps we should begin to [increase the focus on Ml] as soon as todaywhen we talk about the intermeeting targets.Regarding 1985, I think it's far too early to be specificabout what we would suggest by way of ranges for the year but I thinkwe want to continue to emphasize the long-range program we have inmind. I certainly wouldn't give Congress any reason not to deal withthe fiscal problem and I would not in any way suggest that if theydon't deal with it, we will have to back off on our objective for1985. I would say that we have every intention of continuing theprogram and that we will continue to reduce the ranges, but I wouldn'tbe specific with regard to amounts this far in advance of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I join those who wouldnot want to make quantitative announcements as to 1985. But I alsowould like to see us maybe quantify the time that we're lookingforward to moving toward price stability; I'm talking about a 5- or 6-year program with a gradual reduction over that period of time, yetaccommodating what may be happening in the real economy. It seems tome that we have since 1971 or 1972 continued to say that we are movingtoward price stability by reducing the money supply gradually overtime. But there has never been a program set forth by this group thatI know of in which people could look and find a result at the end orlight at the end of the tunnel. If we were talking in terms of arather specific program in the sense of an horizon over which to reachprice stability--whatever that may be, whether it's 1 or 2 percent orzero--then it seems to me that we could work into that kind of publicdiscussion what the likely outcome would be if nothing is done aboutthe budget deficit. At this point to quantify targets for moneygrowth for 1985 seems to me to be far in advance of anything we couldpredict. But in a longer-term picture it's [quite] reasonable toassume that there will be less money growth in '85 than '84 by someamount.With regard to the 1984 ranges proposed in the Bluebook thatwere set tentatively in July, I have no problem with the Ml range of 4to 8 percent. As a matter of fact, I take a little comfort from that4 percentage point spread in the range. As for M2 and M3, I wouldprobably opt to drop M2 to the same range of 6 to 9 percent [shown forM3] in the Bluebook. My reason for that, as has been stated aroundthe table before, is that it is inconsistent to have an M2 rangethat's greater than the M3 range. And it's very difficult to explainthat M3 is lower than M2 simply because we hope to fund some of thecredit needs through Eurodollars, which also implies a continuingstrength in the dollar and assumes further that European countries andother developed nations would continue to be operating at a very lowrate of economic growth. That is a picture that I think we can avoid,whether it be true or not, simply by making the M2 and M3 rangesconsistent with each other. And I would opt to have them at 6 to 9percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I'm fairly optimistic. As I said yesterday, Ithink 1984 will be okay as a year. I don't really think that it'sgoing to be as vigorous as Lyle, for example, has suggested. I also-45-12/19-20/83don't think it's going to be as weak as I suggested it could beyesterday--MR. MARTIN. Christmas is over already?MR. PARTEE. --in the particular configuration that I wasworking out. I'm not greatly concerned about 9 percent as a nominalGNP number fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter. I think it's one we cankey on. So far as I can see, the figures that the staff has given usare pretty consistent with about a 9 percent GNP number. So, I thinkthe target growth rates as specified for 1984 are in the ballpark.But we ought to do this in terms of what we think would produce orwould be consistent with about a 9 percent GNP growth.Regardless of what happens next year, though, I really dothink 1985 is going to be more of a problem. It will be the thirdyear of a recovery--if the recovery lasts all year. And that's arecovery that is getting pretty old; it's getting to the time when theinflationary pressures get greater. It certainly is going to be atime when pressures in credit markets ought to grow because of theincreasing private demand. And I would agree with Lyle that the roleof the deficit in that really is to affect credit market conditionsmore than it is to affect the economy as a whole, which has pluses andminuses from fiscal policy but may in the short run at least be aboutoffsetting. So, if we see the year of 1985 developing as one in whichwe may have credit-crunch type conditions--and that is generally nowbeing forecast in the market--do we want to say that we're going toreduce our growth rates for the aggregates because we have someconcept of a long-run non-inflationary environment, and thus ensurethat there will be a credit crunch in 1985? I doubt that we want tosay that. So, I would avoid a specific number for 1985 for thatreason, because we do want to give as much encouragement as possibleto the hope that there might be some fiscal action before 1985 isover. Again, it seems extremely unlikely that there will be any bigfiscal move taking effect in the first part of '85; it might takeeffect in the spring or the summer of '85. When we don't know whatthe timing would be, even if there is any fiscal policy action--exceptthat it seems unlikely that it would be at the very beginning of theyear--that makes it extremely difficult to state any kind of policytradeoff. So, I wouldn't specify anything for '85.I think Ml has done quite a lot better than some peoplearound the table give it credit for. But in this period it'scertainly true that it doesn't look [consistent with] the GNP number,but that's because it doesn't have the stability characteristics thatM2 or M3 or total credit have and that make them glide along at a morenormative number that isn't too far, usually, from the GNP number.But I think that the performance of Ml has not been that bad and hasbeen more indicative of what is going to happen in the economy thananything that M2 has shown over the last couple of years. I was goingto say, Nancy, that M2 is 9 percent every year, good or bad, but youalready said M3 is 9-1/2 percent regardless. So, I can't say thatexcept that it seems to me also true. M2, by the way, I thinkshouldn't show the decline in velocity characteristic of earlierperiods when we've had disintermediation because, after all, 80 to 90percent of the total is now interest sensitive. And I think the[depository] institutions will be very competitive in the rates theyoffer as credit demands increase. They certainly will try to keep the-46-12/19-20/83flows coming in and, therefore, I think we could expect that M2 willshow even more stability than it has shown in the past as theinstitutions operate on M2 as they have operated on M3 in the past--and that is to be a source of funding. So, I would give more statusto Ml. I would adopt the staff's proposals, which I guess are prettymuch the same as we had set in a preliminary way last July. And Iwould be quiet about specific numbers for 1985.One other point: I want to agree with Ed Boehne in that Idon't think we can expect to make progress every year on the rate ofinflation anyhow. I think we have to look at it as a full cycleprocess. And if we can keep the inflation rate from accelerating muchbeyond 5 percent, or certainly keep it from accelerating beyond 6percent in the course of this cycle, then we can go down to zero inthe next recession. And we'll have a much better posture for having amuch less inflationary cycle the next time around. But I don't thinkit's reasonable to say we have a 4-1/2 percent inflation forecast fornext year and in 1985 we'll bring it down to 4 percent and in 1986 to3-1/2 percent and in 1987 to 3 percent. We just can't do that. Thedynamics of the economy won't permit it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I think the concept of pricestability should be the overriding objective. And having said that, Ithink whatever words we use for 1985 obviously should reflect that. Ialso would not want to use specific numbers. But it does seem to methat the targeting for 1984 comes at a very critical juncture,certainly in terms of credibility. We have said that we will bringinflation down through a gradual reduction in the growth rate ofmoney. In order to solidify that position and make it believable, Iwould be inclined to bring the Ml range down more in line with whatBob Black was suggesting, possibly to 3 to 7 percent. I think thatwould be a very clear signal that we do remain committed. I happen tobe willing to put more emphasis on Ml, and I think it is morebelievable, and thus that it would be positive to do that. I thinkthat [range] would also be consistent with enough [Ml growth] for the9 percent nominal GNP growth. On the M2 range, I would be inclined toshade it down to 6 to 9 percent since the 6-1/2 and 9-1/2 percentdoesn't represent any real reduction. And on M3, I would probably goback to the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent because its growth just always is9-1/2 percent. It seems to me that would give a better picture. ButI would argue very strongly for shading down the Ml target for 1984.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I agree with almost everythingGovernor Teeters said. I'm just not able to look much beyond 1984and, therefore, I'm unable to say anything specific about 1985. Iwould just like to be able to say in general terms that we hope thatthings develop in 1984 in such a way that we can continue to move inthe direction of price stability in 1985.As for 1984, I think that our tentative target ranges arerealistic--that is, they are consistent with the staff forecast andwith what I expect to happen, with the exception mentioned by Nancythat the M3 range could and should be raised in order to avoid thepossibility of squeezing. So, with the exception of that minor change-47-12/19-20/83of raising the M3 range by 1/2 percentage point, I think these rangesare good, satisfactory, and realistic. I think we should reiterate invery strong terms our commitment to long-run price stability. And Ithink it's important that we demonstrate that commitment by thetargets that we select, which we've done in this case. We've reducedthe ranges for 2 out of 3 and if we can continue to do that, theinflationary expectations will be affected in a manner that would bepositive from my point of view. So, I'm satisfied with the targetranges presented except for M3. And incidentally, I'm also encouragedby the recent behavior of M1 velocity. But I'm not yet ready toresurrect M1 to full target status. I would like to watch it for awhile longer. Perhaps in July we might consider that restoration.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Sometimes, Mr. Chairman, it helps to get outsideof one's own group and kick around these kinds of problems with a fewknowledgeable outsiders, which we did at our Bank earlier this monthat a conference on monetary targeting and velocity. That was held inview of the major, unprecedented decline in velocity in '82. I'm justgoing to give a few highlights that I think may be of interest to thisgroup. A number of people who are in the room were at that conferenceor participated in it, including Steve, who was our lead-off speaker,and Frank, who chaired the panel. I made some remarks and we had someprofessors making remarks and so forth. One of the things that Ifound particularly interesting about that meeting was a comment by anofficial of the Bank of Japan who looked at what was happening inmonetary targeting across a number of countries in different parts ofthe world. Very briefly, he concluded that in those countries whereregulations--especially on deposit interest rates--have been binding,the financial innovations [aimed at] getting around those regulationshad a really major distorting effect on the various monetaryaggregates used in those countries. On the other hand, he set forth aclass of countries that had deregulated in the face of risinginflation and interest rates and found that there had been much lessdistortion in the monetary aggregates in those countries. I foundthat cross-country analysis really quite interesting because it seemedto me to be consistent with the U.S. experience. In particular, inour own country we look back at 1974 and 1975 when there was a greatdeal of financial innovation, if you remember, [to get] around theregulatory ceilings on interest rates. Ml was badly distorted. Thereis no doubt that that was about the time that I became a proponent ofM2, but of the M2 of that day. But in this more recent period of 1982and 1983 when, as you know, we had considerable deregulation and itwas proceeding quite rapidly, it's our view in San Francisco at leastthat Ml was quite little distorted on balance. The big distortions,to our surprise in a way because we expected the opposite, came in M2and in M3.Another thing, as far as I'm concerned, that came out of thatconference was something of a compromise point of view, I guess, onwhat did happen to Ml during that period in 1982 when its velocity wasdropping by an unprecedented amount. When everything is said and donethere really have been two basic explanations here and among theacademics as to what was going on. Perhaps this is a bitoversimplified, but one explanation is that it was a business cyclephenomenon--the build-up of precautionary balances and that sortthing, which in turn caused velocity to decline. The alternative-48-12/19-20/83view, which we lean toward in San Francisco, is that the big drop invelocity was a direct response to the major decline in the rate ofinflation and hence the major decline that occurred in market interestrates in the latter half of 1982--that that in effect caused theopportunity cost of holding money to drop sharply and led to not ashift in the demand for money but an increase along a given demandfunction in the amount of money that people wanted to hold in relationto income. Well, whichever one of those explanations might eventuallywin men's minds or whichever of those explanations is true, the realpoint, as I thought about the conference and its aftermath, is thatthe phenomena to which they were referring are over. That is, therecession is over; we're coming out of it. We don't expect anotherbig drop in inflation and interest rates, as much as I would like tosee that--something that could cause velocity to drop. I don't see adecrease in the amount of money demanded on the horizon either. Butthat reinforces my belief that we're well on the way toward [returningto] the more normal behavior of Ml that we had historically.In view of that background, I come out bottom line in muchthe same way that Messrs. Black, Roberts, Keehn, and Partee have here.I would restore Ml to more importance, perhaps even primaryimportance. I have to say that I'm getting a little nervous about ourcredibility being undermined in the academic community and amongserious students of money and monetary policy by our continuingofficially to set M2 and M3 targets because they know as well as we dowhat some have already mentioned around the table here: that M2 andM3 go on like Old Man River at about the same rates of growth almostirrespective of whether the economy is in a strong upswing or whetherit is in fact in the middle of a recession. I'm not against havingsome extra targets we're almost bound to hit. The best thing I cansay about M2 and M3 in terms of keeping them as targets is thatthey're almost impossible to miss. I guess that's not without somemerit compared to a target that jumps around. But, frankly, Iwouldn't give very much weight to them. I think the more we continueto do so the more we're going to undermine our credibility out therewhere it counts, or at least in some areas where it counts.Specifically, I would go in the direction that was implied inthe Bluebook that perhaps it's time to reduce the spread of the M1range from the 4 points that we now have. You all recall that manyyears ago a spread of 2 points was par for the course. I don't thinkwe need to jump down that far that fast, but I would urgeconsideration of reducing that spread to 3 points. At this time Idon't believe we're trying to make final decisions, Mr. Chairman, butcertainly I would not at this moment want to see that 3-point spreadcentered any higher than 6 percent and might even favor aiming at a 5percent midpoint. If we're going to have a 6 percent midpoint, whichis about the most I would go for, we could consider a range of 4-1/2to 7-1/2 percent, if we were willing to adopt only a 3-point rangerather than a 4-point range. It's not without precedent that we haveranges that have a fraction of a half. We did that just a couple ofyears back, so that wouldn't be a particularly troublesome innovation.In terms of M2 and M3, I guess I really don't care. I could take whatis in the Bluebook or some of the modifications that [have beensuggested] here because I don't think they mean much. They don'tindicate what is going to happen in the economy; we have very littlecontrol over them. So, for all the reasons that I've talked abouttoday and that others have talked about, and in light of the paper I-49-12/19-20/83circulated to you a couple of months back, I think the time has cometo restore M1 to at least equal weight, if not more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nobody has suggested we go on the goldstandard!MR. BALLES. Not yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] not happy with all theseMs.MR. WALLICH. We might consider targeting the exchange rate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but in practice we don't votethat way. What would you do right now? Would you ease monetarypolicy?MR. WALLICH. One would have to ease, and that is why it'snot a good idea.MR. MARTIN. On the gold standard we would have to ease,Henry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't want to defend this proposition?MR. WALLICH. No, the theoretical point is that the exchangerate should carry some weight along with total credit. I'm not sayingthat we should do what the Canadians do now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's working pretty well, isn't it?MR. WALLICH. It works pretty well. It would at the presentexchange rates; we wouldn't want to stabilize those.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we turn to Mr. Cross?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments or questions?MR. BOEHNE. This isn't just addressed to Sam, but maybe alsoto Henry or Tony. Do we know of other experiences, say in the postWorld War II period, where a major currency has gone in the oppositedirection that the current account would say it ought to go for such aprolonged period and by such a large amount?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No. I don't know of any this large.But there certainly are lags; these things don't correspond exactly.And it's really the reversal in direction that is usually most pickedup by the markets when they are looking at some [unintelligible]. In1978 when the dollar was sinking one reason we felt that we couldprobably undertake a major intervention that would stick--and we didit in November '78--was because the current account deficit was nolonger increasing and indeed was beginning to shrink in response tothe more competitive dollar that we had in the year-and-a-half beforethat. So, I don't know of any such situation; in fact, there's noquestion about it. These numbers are so huge now that there's nothingcomparable. The largest current account deficit that we ran in the-50-12/19-20/83late '70s was in the neighborhood of $15 billion. We're looking nextyear at a deficit of probably $80 billion. And there is no otherindustrialized country that has run a deficit of more than $15 to $18billion.MR. BOEHNE. It's as if we're skating on a frozen lake and wejust keep skating and we know we're going to get to the point wherethe ice isn't very thick out there.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it's a sustainablesituation in the long run. One can make an argument that it's not atime bomb--that when the dollar comes off it will come off graduallyand moderately. I don't believe that. I believe that the longer itgoes up and stays up, the faster it will come down when expectationschange. What I don't have any feeling for is the comment that Ifrequently hear--and I think Henry said this--that when the inflow ofdollars stops because of the change in expectations about the exchangerate, that is going to have a very major upward effect on our interestrates. I'm not sure that that's so. I don't know what the interestrate effect of that will be because it is sometimes argued that thebanks can bring enough back in the Eurodollar market that we wouldn'tget that much of a movement in interest rates. I don't know whetherPaul has a view on that. We may end up with just a very big impact onthe exchange rate and a very minor impact on interest rates from thecessation of the inflow of foreign funds. What do you think, Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's a danger.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The interest rates?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On both sides.MR. WALLICH. Is the result the cessation of capital imports?Capital imports can't cease overnight, of course, because our exportsaren't going to go up overnight and imports aren't going to go down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.MR. WALLICH. So in that sense while we unwind this $80 to$100 billion current account deficit we will have upward pressure oninterest rates all the time but not the full pressures at thebeginning of the process.MS. TEETERS. I might also add that the Europeans have theattitude that the dollar is going to drop sharply at some point. Theyare as much confused as we are as to why it hasn't dropped [already].But their real concern is that they perceive that [drop] as a sharpappreciation of the D-mark. They are very upset about theimplications of a sharply appreciating D-mark in the European MonetarySystem because there is no way to foretell what the relationships ofthe other currencies to an appreciated D-mark would be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At a minimum it probably will forcemuch more rapid devaluations of the weaker currencies in the EMS. Andit might even make it almost intolerable, depending on the Italian andFrench policies. It certainly will mean much more strain on the EMS.-51-12/19-20/83MR. TRUMAN. The answer to President Boehne's originalquestion is that there certainly are other examples. We have theJapanese at the moment. They have had a very strong current accountand a relatively weak [currency]--at least relative to the dollarexperience. We've had the British experience. I'm not sure exactlywhich way the British current account [is going now], but certainly inthe early Thatcher days sterling was very strong and the currentaccount was pretty good because of oil. But it was a period when thecurrency was moving in an unsustainable direction in the absence of[unintelligible] of the current account. It subsequently hasreversed.MR. ROBERTS. It was fascinating to read in the paper thismorning that the OPEC countries have a $31 billion deficit.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Everybody has deficits.MR. ROBERTS. But the OPEC world, remember, was going to endwith a $100 billion surplus.MR. WALLICH. The sum of the deficits is $100 billion inexcess of the sum of the surpluses.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions or comments?MS. TEETERS. I have one other question about intervention.What makes you decide when to intervene? What is the trigger? Is ita certain degree of movement in the rates, or what, that triggersthis?MR. CROSS. No. We keep getting asked this question over andover. What happens actually is that, of course, we are monitoring[the market] all the time. When we see a situation where it looks asif rates could be moving too rapidly or are very volatile--kind ofgaping, with one transaction here and then the next buy or sell ordermoving out of the range entirely--or just generally unsettledconditions in the market, then we talk to our colleagues at the Boardand our colleagues at the Treasury. And usually at very, very highlevels in the Treasury Department there's a decision as to whetherthey feel that it is or is not a disorderly market. Certainly, one ofthe factors that goes into their thinking is the attitude of some ofthe other monetary authorities. On the occasion when we intervened inDecember [our action] followed some intervention by the Bundesbank--indeed some intervention where the Bundesbank had come in at the endof their day and intervened in a way that was going to affect the DMin our market. They had called us up to tell us about it and to seeif we had any concerns about it and we decided, again afterconsultations, that it would be appropriate for us to go in. But weintervened in a modest way. These have all been very modesttransactions; $50 million worth of DM, at a time when the market is asbig and as active as it is, is not going to reshape the world.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In fact, there is a Machiavelliantheory which, of course, nobody here subscribes to: You can arguethat intervention in this penny ante amount is simply a way ofdiscrediting intervention as a policy.-52-12/19-20/83MR. CROSS. It shows some evidence of being willing toparticipate but in a very modest way. And I don't think anybodythinks that these amounts have any great impact. It can temporarilysettle a situation if we do enough of it.MR. WALLICH. How often did the Bundesbank operate in NewYork directly?MR. CROSS. On one occasion. This was a very unusualsituation in which the dollar was moving at a very, very rapid ratejust at the time our market was opening, and they did intervene onthat occasion in the amount of about $500 million. Subsequently, theyhave intervened in the market through the New York Fed, with us actingas agent.MR. WALLICH. How often did they do that, more or less?MR. CROSS. Once or twice--not often.MR. RICE. Do we have any problem with their coming into theNew York market and operating there?MR. CROSS. Well, we like to know what other central banksare doing in our market.MR. RICE. So long as we know.MR. CROSS. For a number of the central banks--the Japanese,the Swiss--when they do, which is very rare, we act on their behalf.And that to me is the best way to handle it. Then we can do theoperation for them and know what is happening and handle it. And theGermans did operate that way subsequent to this one occasion when theyacted directly; they were trying to make a big splash and to show theworld that they were out there selling all these dollars.MR. RICE. We prefer to have them do it through us?MR. CROSS. I do.MR. WALLICH. Peter, could I ask you: Is it right to saythat that $50 million peanuts was sterilized automatically the sameday or the next day?MR. STERNLIGHT. Probably for the reserve effect it would bea couple of days later; it was folded into all the other reservefactors that we take account of.MR. WALLICH. But you wouldn't have done anything on thatday, I suppose, if you hadn't been planning to do something anyway?MR. STERNLIGHT. No. There wouldn't have been an immediatereserve impact anyway. But we would have acted as soon as we had theinformation and folded it into all the other reserve factors.MR. CROSS. We settled two days later anyhow.MR. GUFFEY. I'm told that the Russians have been very activein foreign exchange markets, acquiring dollars. I'd just like to ask-53-12/19-20/83Sam how much of the rise in the dollar value vis-a-vis the mark, forexample, can be attributed to those apparently rather substantialactivities by the Russians?MR. CROSS. Well, it's very hard to say. Certainly, theyhave been active, particularly in the past couple of weeks, in buyingdollars. For what reason, I don't know. We have been trying to keepa log of what we hear and find out about their activities to see if wecan figure out what their approach is. But in the past couple ofweeks they have been buying very heavily in the dollar. And, as Imentioned, the Bundesbank has done really quite a large amount ofdollar sales--over $1-1/2 billion. The Russians have been buying avery large chunk of this on the other side, we think. One thought isthat they have some big year-end dollar needs, just as many othershave big year-end dollar needs. But I don't really have a goodexplanation as to why they're doing it. They seem to be buying a lotof dollars and selling some sterling, for example. Earlier this yearthey were operating on different sides of the market. We're trying toget a better assessment of their approach, but right now we reallydon't know what their purpose is in buying dollars. But they havebeen buying them heavily in Europe, in New York, and in the Far East.MR. KEEHN. Paul, are you going to cover later the currentstatus of the various external financing packages of Brazil, etc.?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought maybe we could do that after themeeting [at lunch]. Meanwhile, we have to ratify these transactions.MS. TEETERS. I move that we ratify the transactions.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.] That concludesmy report on operations, Mr. Chairman. I do have a recommendationabout leeway for the next period. Specifically, I think it would beadvisable to retain the $5 billion intermeeting leeway for changes inoutright holdings that was adopted at the last meeting. Thedifference is that this time the enlargement would be needed to copewith seasonal declines in currency and deposit levels. Also, if theintermeeting period extends into early February, we would come up tothat final phase-down step of reserve requirement ratios for memberbanks coming out of the Monetary Control Act. That's all I have, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions? In view of greatsilence, we can ratify the transactions.MR. PARTEE. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. The leeway question?MS. TEETERS. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.-54-12/19-20/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, my briefing will focus on M1--notbecause I want to overstress it, but because Ml is the aggregaterecently showing the most variable behavior relative to norms, so tospeak. That's what is perhaps most in need of analysis, particularlysince in the recent past its variations over a period of months haveoften provided good signals to follow. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. BLACK. Could I ask just one brief question, Mr.Chairman? On your experimental weekly Ml seasonal, Steve, do you havea figure for December? I gather it would be not too far off from--MR. AXILROD. Yes, for December [in] the regular series wehave 2.3 percent, a drop from 6.7 percent in November. That compareswith our projection of 8.1 percent. So, there is a big difference inseasonals in November and December.MR. BLACK. Only 2.3 percent in December?MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's about a 5-1/2 or 6 point difference.There's a very big seasonal. The seasonals, month-to-month, are verydifferent, as you can see in the series.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we might as well have a doughnut.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if anybody else wants todirect any questions to Mr. Axilrod.MR. CORRIGAN. I just have one, Steve. Is it a reasonableproposition to you and Peter to say that where you think you are nowin the borrowings is $650 million?MR. STERNLIGHT. That's the objective, yes. Some weeks comein above and some weeks below.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a pretty erratic intermeetingperiod in terms of where the borrowing and the net borrowed reservescame out. The average is not too bad over six weeks or so; it is nottoo good [in relation to the intended level] in between.We have already had quite a lot of discussion--by implicationbut not in precise terms--of where we should go in the short run. Imight say: The housing starts figures came out this morning. Just toget that on the table, Mr. Kichline, can you describe those?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. In November, housing starts rose 100,000to 1-3/4 quarter million units, annual rate, from an upward revisedlevel in October. Both single-family and multifamily starts rose inall regions in the country, mostly in the West. Permits also rose alittle and the permits for October were revised up a little as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, permits did not rise very much. I donot know if this is terribly significant, but the flash GNP will becoming out this afternoon--no, it won't be out until tomorrow. I donot know what it is, but there is a suspicion in other places that it-55-12/19-20/83may be a little higher than our staff has projected. But I do notknow for sure.MS. TEETERS. It's not a very good number.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not even a very good number in myopinion after it is no longer the flash. Unfortunately, it can beinaccurate in both directions. But it will be a pretty strong memory.I suspect we are getting a little seasonal pressure in themarkets. I think [whether or not] the reserve positions change, onewould expect seasonal pressures from the middle of December probablythrough the end of the year. We [typically] have a very erratic--ormaybe [simply] erratic--money number early in December; nobody knowsquite what is going to happen through the first week or two of Januarywhen we have often had very erratic numbers. This is well reflectedin the quite different signals that our two seasonal adjustmenttechniques provide. In trying to sort all of this out, and just togive you something to aim at: Given the strength of economicactivity--until there's a little more evidence that it is going theother way, if we ever get it--given the nervousness of theinflationary expectations, and given that the latest money supplyfigures look a little higher anyway, I don't find myself in any moodto ease. I am talking about a very short time perspective of severalweeks. Whether one would want to tighten up slightly is debatable, Isuppose. Part of my problem with tightening is that in announcing it,as we inevitably would have to do sooner or later, [the announcement]may exaggerate whatever one's intention was, unless one had a prettystrong intention. I find myself in a position where I think thatmaybe what we can say is that we will maintain the existing degree ofrestraint at least for the time being and if things turn out to be onthe ebullient side, economically and with the aggregates, we couldmake a small tightening move in coming weeks or wait for a little moreevidence. That is the way I would tend to write the directive--in asort of one-sided way.MS. TEETERS. Well, the end of the year is going to placesome upward pressure in the market area anyway, isn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it will be morethan what we have, but I would think that if we maintain this for thenext week or 10-day period maybe, it might remain under some pressureboth because of seasonal pressures and because the Treasury is doing alot of financing between Christmas and New Year's Day. Then I thinkthat seasonal [pressure] would be over.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the pressures may linger a day ortwo [longer].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe into the first couple days inJanuary--so, maybe [for the next] two weeks.MR. ROBERTS. Paul, when you say you wouldn't ease, do youmean in terms of our current borrowing standard? You're not talkingin terms, say, of looking at 2 percent money growth in the fourthquarter?-56-12/19-20/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am talking about the borrowingassumption. And I am talking about, I presume, without beingabsolutely precise--we can discuss it--measuring the prospects for anytightening subsequently so far as the aggregates are concerned againstthe standard of something like "B."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This is halfway between existingpolicy and snugging up.MR. ROBERTS. I think "B" is a liberalization of majormagnitude, if we can get it done, as against what we have been doing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't focused closely on thosefigures. I was thinking of something in that area, but we may want tolower or round some of those to whole percents. These figures for M2and M3 are pretty close, I guess, to the staff's December projection;they don't involve any particular change in trend from what we havebeen having for M2 or M3. M1 would obviously be a little higher, butprobably lower than--well, who knows what the December figure will be!MR. GUFFEY. For purposes of this discussion, I would agreeto adopting the "B" alternative as it appears in the Bluebook. Inview of the discussion and the feeling about the potential for somereemergence of price pressures, I would opt to snug up marginally orhave some nuance or whatever it may be of [snugging]. Rather thantake a $650 million borrowing level, I'd go maybe to $750 million,which implies about 1/4 percent more [on the funds rate] than what wehave been shooting at in the past. If I understand what has been saidaround the table, particularly from Peter, the pressures that arecoming on because of technical matters at year-end might move us to afunds rate of 9-1/2 percent or a bit above. I am really suggestingthat with a $750 million borrowing level we essentially would validatethat level after the technical pressures subside and end up withsomething over 9-1/2 percent and certainly not greater than 9-3/4percent. It would, in my view, present a picture that the FederalReserve has some concerns about the strength of the economy and thepotential for a reemergence of price pressures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have just one comment on that. I don'tthink we can aim at the federal funds rate as closely as one quarterof 1 percentage point. We take our chances on that a bit.MR. FORRESTAL. I came into the meeting feeling prettystrongly that any easing of policy would be a mistake. I have notheard anything in the last two days to change my mind on that score.By the same token, I don't think that any substantial tightening ofpolicy is appropriate. The decision in my mind is whether we have aslight tightening of policy, something implied by "B" or "B-," Isuppose one could say. What those numbers are, I am not quite sure.A $700 or $750 million borrowing level probably would be a degree ofsnugging rather than a tightening. I think there is a lot of merit inwhat you said about waiting to see what develops in the next week orso. So, I am happy with "B" or something slightly less than "B,"moving a bit toward "C."MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, if we did not have these Mlnumbers and were looking just at the real economy and what is goingon, I think we would have moved long ago toward a posture of more-57-12/19-20/83restraint than we have now. I can understand people's concern aboutMl, but I think we have to recall that what we are looking at is astock, not a supply; it is an intersection of demand and supply. Wehave to try to figure out where the weakness is coming from. Onecould well argue that it was coming from restraint on supply if wewere seeing either a significant slowdown in the growth of nominal GNPor a rise in interest rates or both. None of those things ishappening. Indeed, when the staff runs its model and tries to figurewhat money growth is taking place in the fourth quarter, consistentwith the old relationships that we used to have between Ml and GNPbased on the old standard Ml demand function and the econometricmodel, the answer is 8.3 percent. And I dare say that if we werelooking at 8.3 percent growth of Ml in this quarter, given the historyof very large growth for the last two years and the continuingtendency for the economy to far outrun our expectations, we would bemoving toward restraint. I don't see any strong reason for waiting.I think we ought to begin moving now toward a tighter posture. Iwould opt, therefore, for something between "B" and "C." I might goeven a little further than Roger--up to an $850 million borrowinglevel. I wouldn't want to see the fed funds rate go over 10 percent,but I wouldn't mind at all if it stayed in the 9-1/2 to 10 percentrange.MR. KEEHN. For the reasons that you outlined at the outset,I would be very much in favor of alternative B. Having said that, Iwould be in favor of modifying the directive, as I have suggested acouple of times so far, to indicate greater emphasis on Ml. Also, itdoes occur to me that this [directive] will be coming out probably inlate January or early February after we have embarked on a majoroperating change, and I think we ought to reflect that now. So,again, I'd change the directive. I'd leave the borrowing level atabout $650 million, but I would change the fed funds range to 7 to 11percent--not to indicate any policy change but simply to give us moreroom in which to operate, because I have a hunch that the funds rate,at least for the next few weeks, will rise pretty close to that 10percent ceiling.MR. WALLICH. I would go to $750 million on borrowing and I'dbe quite satisfied with 8 percent growth of M2 and M3. And if thatleads to 6 percent on M1, that would seem to me in line with theranges that we are about to set, possibly. On the funds rate, I donot particularly want to see it higher, except marginally. But Ithink we have to have a little more room on the up side, if it's notgoing to be totally confining. So, I would say 6-1/2 to 10-1/2percent.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I have observed that theunemployment rate, with the most recent data we have and the staffprojections through 1984, brings us to a position well above the so-called natural rate of unemployment that we reviewed at the last FOMCmeeting. Also, in contrast to some of my colleagues, I observe very,very little evidence of a reigniting of inflation. You cannot find itin commodity prices, in gold, or in the usual indices. If you acceptthe staff forecast quarter-by-quarter of the real GNP, it comes downnicely. One would wonder, as has been observed here previously, whatbetter configuration of a moderation in economic expansion one wouldseek in contrast to what has been projected here. It seems to me thatalternative B, which is essentially the status quo with a $650 million-58-12/19-20/83borrowing level, not $750 million, and with growth of the aggregatesas indicated is consonant with an expansion period that is almosttextbook. I would join my colleague Governor Rice in the hope that wecould restore Ml to the pantheon on Olympus in July, having the expost expertise that we all will acquire so readily in looking backwardover [the intervening] period of time. I don't think this is a timeto signal to a nervous market that we see inflation coming back whenonly the Wall Street gossip would join us in that expectation.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I don't want to overstate what I'm aboutto say, but it seems to me that we have to rely to some extent on whatwe think is going to happen down the road, simply because of the lagsinvolved. We can be wrong, however, about the future we see.Therefore, to some extent we have to ask ourselves which mistake iseasier to undo if we make it. As I look out into 1984, it seems to methat it would be easier to undo a little too much restraint now. Inother words, it would be easier to ease later in the year than itwould be to tighten because we waited too long. I think the risks inthe domestic economy are on the side of more growth than we expect,more inflation than we expect, and more accommodation on the part ofmonetary policy. So, for no other reason than just to curb a ratherbuoyant psychology out there, I think some very modest move towardtightening would be appropriate between now and the next meeting. Theorder of magnitude I would come down for is something like a "B-,"with $750 million or so on borrowing. I think that such a modest movewould get lost in the year-end churning that we're going through, soit seems to me that some time in January would be the appropriate timefor the tightening to emerge.MS. TEETERS. I think we need a period of continuousstability. My perception of the economy is that, yes, it hasrecovered in the typical fashion, but the recovery could be veryeasily upset with rising interest rates. I think we can afford towait to see what is going on. I would add to my concerns that anyupward movement in the interest rate is going to make the exchangerate worse. I agree with Tony that the more it goes up the harderit's going to fall--it's going to be rather precipitous--and that thatwould increase our problems of adjustment during 1984. So, I wouldsimply take alternative B, the $650 million on borrowing, and the 6 to10 percent funds rate range; I'd keep a fairly moderate stance at thispoint and let the year-end pressure do its thing but then come backout of it in the 9-1/2 percent range [on fed funds]. And we canreadjust; the [next] meeting is not that far away. I would also pointout to you that if we tighten now, the policy record from this meetingwill be released probably on the day that the Chairman testifies.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, in terms of the strength of theeconomy, I think one could make an argument for some snugging up atthis point in time. I think the evidence in housing is that thatsector has adapted pretty well to the current level of rates. I don'tthink there is room in the economy, given the strength of the capitalgoods sector, for any substantial revival in the strength of housing.But at the same time I could accept alternative B as written or somesnugging up; I don't feel a strong conviction as to which one isright.-59-12/19-20/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I think it's premature to tighten today. Iagree with Pres and Nancy that the economy still has quite a lot ofroom in it--that we don't really have any signs of inflation except inthe hype that the market is putting on the question. And it would bewrong to move in response to that. If we were closer to fullutilization, we would have a little less tolerance to a mistake on theup side. I thought Ed Boehne was going to conclude that since ourforecast is reasonable we shouldn't change policy. But he surprisedme by saying that since the forecast is reasonable we ought to tightenup. I guess I don't agree with that unless unusual strength developsin the period ahead. That is, we can't really stand more surprises onthe up side of our expectations; we could stand some surprises on themoderately lower side. So, I think your original proposal is a quitegood one. I don't see why we ought to bias the result by starting outwith a higher borrowed reserve figure than we have currently. I thinkwe ought to put it in at $650 million or thereabouts and then if, infact, things strengthen quite a bit in the weeks to come, we ought tolet the borrowing run up with the strengthening that occurs. I wouldfeel a good deal more willing to see some snugging if we could getsome strength from Ml. We haven't had it--except for last week--and Iguess if we did get now a rather meaningful expansion in Ml, thatwould be another signal that perhaps the economy was stronger and thuswe ought to snug. So, I would do just as you suggested in thebeginning, Paul, but with $650 million--I don't know that you spoke tothe borrowing number--as the beginning borrowing number.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Let me just add a point that I forgot tomention earlier. In terms of emphasis on the various aggregates, Itoo would put a little more emphasis on Ml--not restoring it to itsformer grandeur but nevertheless putting a little more emphasis on it.Having said that, I would also add that I'm not sanguine that themarket has learned its lesson. The relatively dispassionate reactionto Ml that we've seen over the past few months is nothing more than areflection of the fact that Ml isn't anywhere near the top of thetarget; that is, people are more tolerant of its behavior.As far as policy goes now, I am in the camp that says thebell has rung and recess is over and it's back to school. I've beenthere for some time. I do, therefore, favor a modest move now. Iview something along the lines of what Roger said as satisfactory; butpending developments in the intermeeting period, I probably would bewilling to go as far as Governor Gramley suggested. There are risksin that, certainly. I think the most pronounced ones are on theinternational side, with the exchange rate and the implications forthe financing costs of developing countries. That is the single thingthat gives me the most pause for concern and caution. As I saidyesterday, I think we're by no means out of the woods in terms ofdomestic financial problems in a context of rising interest rates,which is one of the reasons I'd rather try to do a little somethingnow in hopes of not having to do more later. Certainly, there aresome political risks, particularly in a context in which M1 doesn'tseem to be growing at a very robust rate based on our own numbers.But, again, I feel rather strongly that the risks on the other sideare greater at this juncture; in my view at least, the economy and-60-12/19-20/83inflation may be more of a problem than others see it to be. I alsoagree with the thrust of Ed Boehne's remarks. If we do something of amodest nature now, it's pretty easy to reverse it if indeed eventswarrant that. On the other hand, if we don't do something now, Ibelieve it becomes harder to do it later and I also believe we run therisk that we will have to do more later rather than less. So, I do myown balancing of these risks and I must say that I come out on theside of moving up now, say, to $750 million or maybe a bit more. Andfor the intermeeting period as a whole, pending developments, Iprobably would be willing to go further--certainly not above 10percent on the federal funds rate, but if we had to go to 10 percent,I'd go to 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. At the risk of being accused of looking at thehole rather than the doughnut, I would quickly like to repeatsomething I said last month--Chuck is smiling--that these[unintelligible] looking figures on the macroeconomic statistics arenot capturing all of reality. My deputy chairman came back from arecent meeting of the Conference of Chairman and Deputies andaccording to his tabulations there were 6 to 9 Districts that reporteddistinctly spotty trends in the economy. Yes, indeed, a lot of thingsare going well. But a lot of things aren't going well, and they'reconcentrated in areas such as agriculture, export industries, and soon. So, on a broader basis, my own reading of the economy is thatthere is not really much risk of a major significant reacceleration ofinflation. Therefore, I would come out similar to the way thatGovernors Martin and Teeters and Partee have come out. I think itwould be premature to snug. I would be in favor of alternative B andwould like to see that borrowing assumption no higher than $650million. The hoped for turnaround in M1 is still a forecast, not afact. And if it proved unfortunately not to be an accurate forecast,I would begin to get a little more worried than I was last month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you say you would like to see theborrowing above $650 million?MR. BALLES(?). No. I said I would not like to see it anyhigher than $650 million as the initial figure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there's a difference, eventhough it's a nuance, between "B," retaining existing policy, and yourproposal, Mr. Chairman. Since I indicated yesterday that I was tornbetween retaining existing policy and a very slight snugging up, Ithink your approach tries to bridge that. You said you would maintainat least the existing degree of restraint and you would have morerestraint depending on the continued strength of economic recovery andyou would drop out the section on lesser restraint so that thedirective is somewhat asymmetric. Basically, that poises us to dosome snugging but it doesn't actually do the snugging. We would stickwith the $650 million for the time being but if we see continuingstrength in the economic recovery, and particularly if that'sreinforced by money numbers, then we would do the snugging up. Idon't know--we wouldn't need a conference call then, would we, at thatpoint? Based on that directive, that would permit some snugging up.-61-12/19-20/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd need one, I think, if we wanted to gothe other way.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would align myself with those--I think JerryCorrigan said it very well and others--who would start moving against[inflation] now with a $750 million initial borrowing assumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I would support your originalproposition whereby we hold our position where we are now and couldapply more restraint if it seems necessary. So, I would supportalternative B, borrowing at $650 million, and a funds rate roughlywhere it is now.MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, although I'm concerned about thefact that we haven't been able to get M1 growing, I would be willingto accept the staff forecast for December and the 6 percent growth inthe first quarter implied in alternative B and would accept yourproposal of not increasing restraint at this time. Along with Mr.Balles, I would prefer that we make it very clear that if we don't getthat expansion in Ml, we will look to lesser restraint promptlybecause I think another full quarter of this would put us in adangerous position where we may be looking at a decline in output bymidyear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I also think your proposal is a good one, perhapscoming from my view that forecasting is a very tricky business,compounded by the District I come from. Although we've certainly seenimprovement, we're one of those very spotty Districts. And even inthe firms where we have seen improvement, I would say the attitude ischaracterized not as any kind of euphoria but as concern about thefuture. Perhaps coming from my view that Ml does continue to tell ussomething, I would not like to see snugging up occur at this time. Iguess I feel that the danger of inflation in the future may well bereflected in an early way in some of the collective bargainingagreements, and because we have a very difficult [collectivebargaining] calendar next year we need to watch [these developments]very carefully to see if more snugging is required at that point. Forall those reasons--the state of recovery and the future of therecovery, what Ml is telling us, and the fact that I think we haven'tyet seen the collective bargaining process start leading us into avery dangerous area--I favor the proposal you made, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I've been waiting in hopes thatsomeone would say all I wanted to say, and Ted Roberts came veryclose. No economist is going to agree 100 percent with anybody, so Iwould come out right where he did except I'd rather use 5-1/2 percentthan 6 percent on a quarterly average basis [for Ml]. I would stressmainly that if we don't get this growth in Ml in December, we really-62-12/19-20/83ought to have a conference call and take a look at it because if thathappens, I believe the slowdown might be more real than I now think itis and that maybe we ought to move a little against it. So, I wouldreally go with your original position.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to clarify my originalposition in the light of all these comments and see whether we can getcloser. I am partly influenced by the fact that it's just Ml that isvery low and if we write into a directive that we want to increaserestraint and have to reverse that very shortly because Ml falls outof bed, it would look peculiar and would be difficult to explain. Imust confess that I have that a little in my mind. These seasonalpressures are convenient in the sense that we're getting a little moreseasonal restraint for a couple of weeks. I think the split we havein the Committee is between [waiting or not waiting]--not necessarilywaiting until we see [the outcome of] collective bargaining agreementsor that kind of thing, which would take some months. But if we reallyget a confirmation of strength in Ml, particularly by early January--let's say December comes out more or less as projected and we getanother Ml bulge at the beginning of January, so that January growthis beginning to look high and we aren't getting any economic news tosuggest anything less than the ebullience we [currently] see--I'dbegin moving in a modest way as early as that. I'm talking [aboutmoving] maybe in the first week or second week in January.MR. ROBERTS. "Bulge" being growth over 6 percent, say?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would have to be projected forJanuary, but I mean if Ml got off to a [high] start in January. Rightnow I would say that we should try to make sure we don't get below the$650 million [in borrowing], which means obviously that we would erron the side of more tightness. Borrowing might be more likely to comeout above than below $650 million, but we would not be aiming abovethat level.Well, let me look at these [specifications]. I would notmind myself knocking the halves off of the alternative B growth rates,or [making them] a little less, if that makes people happier. Let mecome back to the federal funds rate later. Specifically, what I wouldput in the directive is a first sentence that reads: "The Committeeseeks in the short run to maintain at least the existing degree ofreserve restraint." This would be explained more [fully] in thepolicy record part. We could move up M1 if you want to. On the Mlsentence, [leave out the reference to] the relatively slow growth inOctober and just move up that whole sentence on Ml and the creditaggregate to follow the sentence on M2 and M3. That's a very subtlechange; I don't think anybody will notice it. They haven't evengotten it yet that it has been moved down. Then I'd make the nextsentence read something like: "Somewhat greater restraint would beacceptable should the aggregates expand more rapidly within thecontext of continuing strength of economic activity." I'd leave outanything about the down side; if something happened and we reallywanted to ease--if Ml came in very low, for instance--we'd have tohave a meeting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Suppose we get the continuingstrength or ebullience in the economic recovery but we don't get M1growth, would you still do a little snugging?-63-12/19-20/83MR. MARTIN. And the same lack of any [new] statisticalevidence of inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what we're likely to get inthe next two or three weeks.MR. KICHLINE. We should get the CPI tomorrow as well [as theGNP flash].MS. TEETERS. And the first Friday in January we get theunemployment rate. That's about it, isn't it?MR. WALLICH. If you wait until you see it, you've missed it.MR. MARTIN. Do you want to be too soon or too late?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you exclude food and energy from thePPI, it was still a rate of only 3 percent. And capital goods was, Ithink, a pretty good figure all around.MR. MARTIN. And OPEC is having a terrible time trying tohold the cartel together.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of the business news that we will get,part of it we'll get tomorrow. But we're now looking at just thefirst week of January and obviously I can't answer--MR. KICHLINE. We do get the employment surveys on January 6,which is the first Friday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose they came in strong. Suppose wegot a further decline in unemployment and a sizable increase in Ml;that certainly would be a factor on the snugging side. Now, if the[un]employment rate retreated .2 or .3, which I suppose it could justbecause it was down so sharply the previous two months, we'd weighthat in the balance a little on the other side. If the consumer priceindex is high, I don't have to tell you on which side of the balanceI'd throw that.MR. PARTEE. It's rather hard to think that we'll get muchnews except for unemployment. Obviously, there's going to becontinuing strength in the economy. The question is: Is it going tobe surprising strength?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would be in somewhat of a dilemma, Isuppose, if the employment numbers came in very strong and Ml came inweak. Then what do we do?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think what you do is lean in thedirection of the way the economy is going. I think all the evidenceis pointing in the direction of an economy that continues tooutperform our expectations. I don't know what the flash GNP is goingto show, but the housing starts figure this morning alone is going toadd several tenths to real GNP growth in the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't be surprised if the GNP growthin the fourth quarter came in around 7 percent. That's my favorite-64-12/19-20/83statistic. If it comes out 7 percent, it will be the most rapid threequarters of economic growth that we've had in the postwar period.MR. MARTIN. If it comes out 6-1/4 percent, as forecast, itwon't be the most rapid?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It will be just in that ballpark. Thenyou would say it's about as fast as we've ever had.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If it comes out at 7 percent,inflationary expectations will increase another notch, even though theactual hard data won't show [more inflation].MR. CORRIGAN. On this point about prices: If you go backand look at the 6-month period ending in April, the rise in theconsumer price index with or without food and energy--any way youslice it--is something like 2 percent. In the six months ending inNovember, any way you slice it, it's 5 percent or more. Now, I admitthat the wholesale price index isn't showing the same thing, but theconsumer price index is what gets into social security, otherpensions, cost of living adjustments, wage expectations, and the wholeball of wax. I find it very, very difficult to accept the notion thatthere is no evidence that price increases have started to go up.There is a doubling of the rate of increase--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any question:Prices have gone up [faster] from the midst of the recession and itsaftermath.MR. CORRIGAN. But if the consumer price index is giving theright reading, we're already at 5 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question is whether it's giving theright reading.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know if it is, either.MR. GRAMLEY. Prices always move with a lag and they alwaysare glacial in their performance unless something spectacular happenson fronts like food or energy. The underlying factor drivinginflation is wages, and wages are well known to be very sticky; theymove glacially. What we do now is going to affect wage bargainingthroughout 1984 and 1985. That is what we have to worry about. Andas the economy continues to get stronger--MR. ROBERTS. I think that is worrying about fighting thelast war. The inflation that we're going to experience here comesfrom things that have happened in the past. If we have a verysluggish Ml series, just because contemporaneously the consumer priceindex is registering a change that reflects past conditions it wouldbe a mistake to react to that, I think.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But you're talking only about thelast four months of sluggish M1 growth. I don't understand.MR. ROBERTS. No. I'm saying that the prices that will beflowing through the economy are a function of past money growth--say,in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year.-65-12/19-20/83MR. GRAMLEY. If you look at what has happened to Ml overlonger periods, I suppose you'd look back at the past four years--Iwould at least--and say that Federal Reserve policy was heavilyresponsible for the improvements on the inflation front that we havebeen experiencing. And yet if you look at the figures, you will findout that growth of money in the past four years was every bit as rapidas it was in the previous four years. You have to explain pricesother than just by what has been happening to the money stock.MR. ROBERTS. Well, the trend growth of money is about 8percent. I don't know what period you would pick, but you would get apretty closely correlated price change over any longer period of timewith the growth of money.MR. GRAMLEY. I think that is not what the figures have beenshowing recently.MR. ROBERTS. You might pick out a cycle and have adeviation.MR. GRAMLEY. I'm thinking of the period since the FederalReserve made its historic decision in the fourth quarter of 1979. Thegrowth rate of Ml since then is almost exactly the same as it was inthe previous years. The previous four years were a period ofsubstantial build-up of inflation and in these recent four years therehas been a substantial unwinding. You have to explain that on groundsother than just Ml.MR. ROBERTS. Well, one way to explain it is that the patternhas been very erratic, which is continuing this year with 13 percentgrowth in the first half and 5 percent in the second half.MR. GRAMLEY. We get inflation down with erratic patternstoo.MR. ROBERTS. Well, it creates a different situation thanjust, say, averaging a year. If you had one [half] at 20 percent andone [half] at 0 and average that out, I don't think it's the same ashaving a 9 percent year.MR. BLACK. I have some figures here that I think supportboth positions, depending on the period you take. In the four yearsbefore 1979, 7 percent is the least squares rate of growth; since thenit's 6.8 percent. But the first part of that latter period--thatwould be from '79 to about mid-'81--it was 5.1 percent. And sincethen to the fourth quarter, it is 10.5 percent. So, that supportsyour position. It also supports Lyle's.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. None of it sounds to me like it supportswhy the inflation rate was 12 to 13 percent and now is 4 to 5 percent,but that's beside the point. We need to make a decision here.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe the conclusion is that you needan erratic enough policy to eventually bring about a recession thatbrings down the inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have described the intentions here aboutas clearly as I can. What I am proposing, as I understand it, is a-66-12/19-20/83pretty quick finger on the trigger if things move in the one directionand no finger on the trigger at all if things move in the otherdirection. It doesn't mean we can't have a meeting. What we'retalking about is that this snugging up, if that is the right term,might well come about early in January. The range of what we'retalking about [on borrowings] is $750 to $800 million, depending uponjust how the numbers look.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd be reluctant, though, to raisethe federal funds range for the same reason, even though I know we'regetting near the higher end of it. But it seems to me that we're notgoing to hit the higher end and I think it would give the wrongsignal. I think we can continue using the [current] range as long aswe retain a money market directive and the markets know it has verylittle relevance. When we had a more automatic feedback reaction frommoney supply movements, then it was a reasonable constraint. But whydo we bother to continue to put the range in there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll give you three alternatives,none of which I feel strongly about: either 6 to 10 percent or 7 to11 percent or eliminate it.MR. BLACK. I'll support Mr. Roberts on that.MR. GRAMLEY. I think we need a range.MR. MORRIS. I think it could be eliminated if you tell themarket we're following a fundamentally different policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the problem in eliminating it rightat this point. Who wants to eliminate it? Only two Committeemembers. We won't eliminate it; that proposal has not attractedsufficient support. A 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent range doesn't send me.I think we could hit 10 percent. It wouldn't bother me terribly if wedo; I don't think we'll hit 11 percent.MS. TEETERS. Ranges have never been confining.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I don't think it's going to confineus all that much either. I think we could hit 10 percent; if we hitit consistently over a period of time we probably would have aconsultation. But I don't think that in itself is going to affectanything too much, so I think we're talking about cosmetics here.MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that raising it could convey thewrong impression. I think the subtleties that we're talking abouthere are just that--very subtle. And after all these months if itwere raised to 7 to 11 percent, I think it would overstate what islikely to happen and it would also be released in February, whichmight not be the most convenient time for it to be released.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't feel strongly about this. There'ssomething to what you say. The only argument I see on the other sideis that we're so close to the top of the 6 to 10 percent range, itlooks a little funny keeping it there.MR. WALLICH. If we're going to raise the borrowing, eventhough that number is not published, the text of the directive will-67-12/19-20/83indicate that it is consistent to have some reaction in the fundsrate. It is peculiar to leave it unchanged when the rate is so closeto the top anyway.MR. PARTEE. We're not going to raise borrowings--are we?--unless we decide to snug up, which is getting along into the period.Then the funds rate may go up and then we'll change the range. That'sthe order in which it ought to occur.MR. GRAMLEY. I think changing the range would not send thewrong signals; it would send the right signals. I could live with 6to 10 percent, but I prefer 7 to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many prefer 7 to 11 percent? Four.[Secretary's note: Messrs. Gramley, Keehn, Morris and Wallich.], Howmany prefer 6 to 10 percent? Six or seven--an enormous difference.Well, that suggests we leave it at 6 to 10 percent, but it's not alife or death difference as far as I'm concerned.MR. GUFFEY. Just a matter of clarification: When you makethe statement--I'm paraphrasing--that if things go in one directionyou have the finger on the trigger, are you talking about theaggregates or are you talking about economic activity? Or do you haveto combine those two things before you pull the trigger?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, to some extent you have to combinethem. But we're not going to get all that much news on the economy,as we suggested. I think that if the aggregates, particularly Ml, arerunning a little high and we haven't in all likelihood gotten adverseeconomic news, the present sense continues.MR. GUFFEY. So we are relying a little more heavily on theaggregates because--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just because of the timing. We could getsome very sour economic news. If suddenly everybody stops shoppingbefore Christmas and sales don't look so good--MR. GRAMLEY. Because they've run out of money?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --and the unemployment rate goes up threetenths of a percent and employment doesn't do much and the industrialproduction figure for December goes up only two tenths of a percent,all that would give me a little pause. But I don't expect that tohappen.MR. PARTEE. It used to be that in Chicago department storesales were negative the week after Christmas; returns exceeded sales.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only in Chicago?MR. PARTEE. If that should be picked up by the newspapers--negative sales--MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, do you suggest taking out thismodifying phrase about lesser restraint in the context of asignificant shortfall of growth in the aggregates? It's in there now.-68-12/19-20/83If we were to have December flat and January developing flat in moneygrowth, wouldn't you want to have that leeway?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we would have to do is have ameeting. The proposal is to leave it out simply to indicate thatthere is still some bias toward a little tightening rather than thereverse.MR. ROBERTS. But if that happens, you would probably have ameeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, if they were really flat, I thinkthat's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Shouldn't we put in "Merry Christmas"or something like that?MR. MORRIS. By the time they read it, it's too late. Weshould say "Happy Valentine's Day"!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Committee in the short run seeks tohave a merry Christmas!Well, what about the specifications for the aggregates? Wecan take straight alternative B or, as I said, I'd be just as happy toknock off the halves. Or we could have something different.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It doesn't make any difference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Very little.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So why spend any time on it? Infact, the advantage of knocking off the halves is that it looks lessprecise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get round numbers; that is preciselyright.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. People who know what we're doing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to knock off the halves?MR. WALLICH. I would.MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, let me reformulate. We havealternative B without the halves and 6 to 10 percent [for the fundsrate range]. "The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain atleast the existing degree of reserve restraint." We move up thesentence on M1 and the aggregates to follow the other sentence.MS. TEETERS. Ml still goes after M2 and M3, doesn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. We can't make a major change in onemeeting! And somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable shouldthe aggregates expand more rapidly within the context of continuingstrength of economic recovery. Got that? And I am saying all the-69-12/19-20/83other changes that I didn't mention there are as in this crossed out[Bluebook draft version]. This wording "consistent with the targets"is crossed out. Got it?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. I still think it's moreaccurate to say "should the aggregates expand more rapidly and/or theeconomic recovery continue at"--I don't know what word you would wantto use, Paul.MR. PARTEE. Accelerate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Because the way it reads now we'rekind of locked in depending on the aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that is correct technically,but it makes it so fuzzy otherwise. I think that's true of the way itwas last time.MR. GRAMLEY. It might give a little more weight to therecovery if we left the order of the sentence the way it is now:"Depending on evidence about the continuing strength of economicrecovery...somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable should theaggregates expand more rapidly."SPEAKER(?) That's correct.MS. TEETERS. I think that's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's an acceptable way of getting abit of flexibility there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, yes. I'm not sure it makes a lot ofdifference to me. It sounds like quite a few of you are just sayingthat the whole thing would be the same, but we would just put a periodafter "expand more rapidly."MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.MS. TEETERS. And leave out the lesser restraint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's all right. All we're doing isputting a period after "more rapidly." Okay.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin NoPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesOne dissent.-70-12/19-20/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. In the boilerplate we'll change thesentence to say that housing starts gained in November, if that'sacceptable. I think we'll have to come back to you on the date of thenext meeting. I'm not sure about my own calendar at this point, butit will probably be Monday/Tuesday of the previous week, if you don'thave problems with that. What we need to know--let Mr. Bernard know--what days you have insurmountable problems on. I suppose we can't gobeyond Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday of that previous week.MS. TEETERS. January 30, 31 and February 1.MR. BALLES. I'm having trouble hearing down here, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let Mr. Bernard know if you have anyinsuperable problems on Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday of that week;that's January 30-31 and February 1. Those seem to be the likelydays, if we have to change [the meeting dates]. [We can't do it] theweek of the 12th since I'd have to testify on the 9th or the 10th.MR. BOEHNE. You put a high probability on it being that lastcouple of days in January?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I'm not sure.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is there some advantage tocompressing the period?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I'm trying to do.MS. TEETERS. The problem would be--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you need more than one week?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably not, that's why the logical dayto do it may be on February 1st if I'm testifying on the 8th. Wecould do it as late as February 2nd, so consider that date too.Consider January 30th and 31st and February 1st and 2nd. Thesandwiches are not quite there. We [will end this meeting and] takeup this question of the foreign lending program and just dispose ofthat now if you want to.END OF MEETING-71-