Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 8-9, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 8, 1983, at 2:30 p.m. andcontinuing on Wednesday, February 9, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris 1/, and Roberts, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Ettin, J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Parthemos,Prell, Siegman, Truman, and Zeisel, AssociateEconomists1/ Entered the meeting following the action to approve minutes for theDecember 20-21, 1982, meeting.2/8-9/83Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Dooley, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMs. Scanlon 1/, Senior Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Eisenmenger 2/,Mullineaux, Scheld, and Stern, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Dallas, Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMessrs. Meek and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bankof New York1/ Left the meeting following discussion of the Committee's longer-runobjectives for monetary and credit aggregates.2/ Entered the meeting following the action to approve minutes for theDecember 20-21, 1982, meeting.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 8-9, 1983February 8, 1983--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is now time to come to order. We mightas well approve the minutes.MR. PARTEE. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we'll approve theminutes. I will welcome Mr. Roberts; I think it may be symbolic orsomething that he is sitting on the left side of the table. Where isMr. Balles?MR. PARTEE. I don't know.MR. BALLES. There's no policy significance, Mr. Chairman, inmy occupying the St. Louis seat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We do welcome you, Mr. Roberts, if youdon't say too much.MR. ROBERTS. I'm glad to be here but I make no promises.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the first hour, anyway. We might aswell go right to work on the business outlook and the longer-termranges. We may not get through that this afternoon, but I think wecan get a long way. So, Mr. Kichline and company.MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, TRUMAN, and PRELL. [Statements--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you had another page hereshowing the directive for the long-term targets over--MR. KICHLINE. We're holding that in reserve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that was a very full report. Let usconcentrate on what the outlook is. Why don't we divide it into thereal economy and prices at this point?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the real economy, if you rememberyour chart, although you have a rise in productivity in '83 you have adrop in productivity in '84, right?MR. ZEISEL. No, not a drop but a slightly smaller rise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That seems like a very low growth inproductivity for a period of expansion.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right.MR. BOEHNE. I'd just like to comment on that for a moment.2/8-9/83 -2-I've been impressed by the efforts across the board of big businessesand small businesses to cut costs. And it seems to me that the break-even point of most of these businesses now is significantly lower thanit was a couple of years ago. What I keep hearing is that if we everget a recovery, we will see substantial increases in profits, and Ithink that means bigger increases in productivity than we mightexpect. It also may mean that the unemployment rate could be stickierthan usual in coming down because there's going to be a greatreluctance to offset some of the progress that has been made inlowering the break-even point. So, based on just casual talking to anumber of people, it does seem to me that we're in for a period, if wedo get a recovery, where we probably could expect a bigger increase inproductivity.MR. ZEISEL. Well, we are faced with a situation in which ourforecast is substantially under the average performance of a recoveryperiod--explicitly, about half the rate of growth in the first yearcompared to that in the average recovery in postwar expansions.Second, we have been through a period in which the trend rate inproductivity, at least as best we can measure it, has been very weak.Our feeling is that trend productivity may be in the 1 percent rangeat this point. Earlier in the postwar period productivity ratesnormally ran about 2-1/2 percent. So, in a sense, we're operatingaround a different slope. I think those two factors play ratherimportant roles. President Solomon, we are forecasting a productivityincrease of 2-1/2 percent in 1983 and of 1-1/2 percent in 1984. So,the rate of increase shown on the chart does come down a bit.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The reason it strikes me as low issimply based on conversations with many industrialists who have saidbasically the opposite: They expect relatively strong productivitygains both in '83 and in '84 because they're assuming that therecovery in '83 will not be that rapid and that the expansion willcontinue well into '84. And they expect to see continued productivitygains in '84 as well as in '83 at about the same rate.MR. WALLICH. Aren't the swings in productivity inmanufacturing larger than they are for the whole spectrum includingservices?MR. KICHLINE. That's right. I think there are a couple ofother points. That is one of them. I would suspect that the thingswe hear relate mainly to manufacturing. That's where the cost cuttingis taking place and that's where we get the big productivity benefit.But this is for the nonfarm economy in total and I would suspect thatthere's not as much going on in the services sector, for example, asin manufacturing. The second point is that our view essentially isthat, yes, the trend rate in productivity growth is improving. Weexpect it to improve further. We have a cautious approach. I wouldalso say that some interesting things happened in 1982. One is thatproductivity started rising very early--well, throughout the wholeyear but very early in the recession. So, we had some adjustment forthe faster trend rate of [productivity] growth that had been takingplace with the massive [cost] cutting last year. The bottom line isthat there are factors that cut in different ways. I think this is aconservative estimate. If it's wrong, it's probably too low. Wemight see much better performance than we have here.2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. In support of more productivity I would alsoargue that we've got to get a considerable rise in productivity infinance. That earnings squeeze that you expect for the banks, whichis only the tip of the iceberg now that we have money market depositaccounts and so forth, is going to force economization there. But ithasn't occurred importantly up to now. When you talk to bankers, byand large they're distressed by the rise in their operating expenseslast year but they haven't done much about it; they say they're goingto. I think that they will be forced to by events, so that mighthelp. In addition to the industrial area, we might have someproductivity improvement as a result of layoffs in finance also.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you measure value added in finance?MR. FORD. Value added?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm taking for granted there isn't any tostart with.MR. PARTEE. You can have after--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do profit margins get squeezed?MR. FORD. Net interest margins.MR. ZEISEL. It's probably negative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that may be going down. We've hadcomments that productivity is too low. What else is there on thebusiness side?MR. PARTEE. I wondered if I might just ask a question aboutthe chart showing comparisons of postwar cycles on real GNP. As youcommented, Jerry, this is a distinctly less rapid recovery, by asubstantial factor, than the typical postwar recovery. You haven'tgone back to look at the staff projections of previous recoveries, butI wonder whether there isn't a tendency to understate the recoverythat actually occurs because of the obvious fact that there aredynamics in the situation that aren't foreseen at the time we startout on it. Do you have any idea?MR. ZEISEL. I think you're right. I don't have the numbersat my fingertips but I think in general there is a tendency tounderstate the vigor of the recovery. One just doesn't see thesources of additional strength. We're still hampered by thatparticular problem; when one looks at the various components and addsthem up, one gets a rather restrained recovery.MS. TEETERS. Isn't your outlook really heavily dependent onthe timing of the inventory cycle? If the inventory [liquidation]ceased as of the end of last year, we could get a very large firstquarter which could also push the whole year up to a higher level. Iwonder if you have information from the first quarter that indicatesanything on inventories yet?MR. ZEISEL. That is certainly true. And it does appear thatthe rate of inventory liquidation in the fourth quarter is larger thanthe Commerce Department estimated, or that we estimated as well, from2/8-9/83the data available at that point. And that would suggest that astronger first quarter--that is, a rebound in activity--would not beunlikely. The question is: What are the fundamental forcessustaining that growth? Essentially, the information that has becomeavailable just doesn't suggest to us that there is very muchadditional [strength]; it is possible that a slightly stronger outlookis in prospect but nothing has changed our view of the forces that aregenerating income and building activity.MS. TEETERS. My point is that when the inventory liquidationquits, at that point we could get a quarter that looks very big but isnothing more than the inventory liquidation ceasing. And it couldgive us a rather nice growth rate even for a year, if we have a coupleof fairly jagged up and down quarters as we go through the year ratherthan a constant growth rate.MR. ZEISEL. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make an observation. With a singleexception, everybody in this room has a significantly higher forecastthan what the staff has just presented. To the extent that that isonly due to what Nancy was just suggesting, that you assumed biggerinventory liquidation in the fourth quarter and presumably a lower GNPin the fourth quarter of last year, I don't think it means anything.But maybe you didn't assume that. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we come out on the high end of mostof these forecasts. We're assuming a rate of growth in real GNPfourth quarter-to-fourth quarter of about 5-1/2 percent, and webelieve it will be front-end loaded--more growth in the first coupleof quarters than in the last two. We're a little more hopeful on theunemployment side; we have that pegged at about 10 percent. But weare less optimistic on the GNP deflator; we are projecting about 5-1/2percent on that versus 4 percent in the staff forecast. Andunderlying this is an assumption of a rate of growth of about 6percent in Ml. We are influenced primarily, I think, by two factors:One is that sharp recessions in the past have tended to be followed bya little faster recovery; [the second] is the sharp acceleration ingrowth of the money supply in the last half of 1982. We are wellaware of the inferences that are being drawn from the reportedabnormal behavior of income velocity of money and the inferences thatare being drawn about the demand for money. But we did someexperiments on this; we lagged money by one quarter and by twoquarters in computing the rates of change in velocity. If you dothat, it really illustrates some rather interesting things--that thedrops are not that abnormal by past standards, reflecting the tendencyof the money supply's effect to be lagged some time a couple ofquarters later. So--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're getting ahead of ourselves.Mr. Axilrod could promptly comment on that at this point in ourconversation.MR. BLACK. Well, okay. This does get to that. But it doesaffect the velocity forecasted.MR. PARTEE. What have you lagged it--two quarters did yousay?2/8-9/83MR. BLACK. We lagged it one and two quarters. And in eithercase there were several postwar periods--MR. PARTEE. Shouldn't you have had a recovery at midyearlast year then?MR. AXILROD. It's hard to [comment] without looking intoyour projections, President Black. We did the same thing; we laggedMl and M2 one and two quarters and compared the velocity behavior ofthe past 5 or 6 quarters with the history of these things measuredthat way. With, say, M1 lagged 2 quarters--to develop M1 against GNP2 quarters later--in the 6 quarters ending in the fourth quarter of1982 we get an average decline in velocity of 1.1 percent even on thatbasis. And if you go back before 1982, you can't find any negativenumbers; you can find an increase of 0.5 percent, but you can't findany negative numbers. If you do it for 5 quarters, it's the samething. We did this for the same reason that you're bringing it up;the question was raised to us by others. We did the same thing for M2and it shows a bigger increase in demand, even on this lagged basis.So, it's perfectly true that with lags you don't get these negativerelations between money and velocity--that a rise in money thisquarter generally gives you a rise in velocity 2 quarters later. Butallowing for that over time we have the same kind of change in patternon a lagged basis that we do on a concurrent basis so far as thesedata show us.MR. WALLICH. Aren't these past data very much influenced byinterest rate patterns? In the past we've had sharply rising interestrates early in recoveries. We don't assume that this time, so weought to get rather different--MR. AXILROD. I was not projecting 1983. I was just lookingat the past.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to go on to somethingelse at this point, but you might be interested in these charts onlagged velocity, and maybe we can distribute them. You might tell us,Mr. Black, if you have that big an increase in GNP, where it mightarise.MR. BLACK. Well, I hadn't worried too much about thecomponents of it, Mr. Chairman. I would think that it would be mostlyin consumer expenditures, government expenditures, a pickup ininventories, and not much improvement in capital and equipment. Butwe really expect that velocity is going to come back. I'd like tolook at those figures of Steve's, because what we did was probably notas sophisticated as what he did. We had a decline in the fourthquarter, if we lagged it 2 quarters, of 1.6 percent in income velocityfor Ml; and for the third quarter the decline was 2.7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can return to that subject when we'rediscussing [policy].MR. BLACK. Okay. Anyway. we projected about a 5 percentpickup in velocity and that led us to a greater increase in nominalGNP than the staff has been projecting.2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I think anyone with a stronger forecast, Paul,probably would have more consumption. It looks as if the personalsaving rate was a limiting factor there, but we have to remember withdynamic properties that if you have more output, you have more incomeand then you can have more consumption and maybe not change the savingrate very much. And that's how you get a bigger--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The saving rate is going to go down unlesswe get more investment someplace.MR. PARTEE. A little, but nothing like a one-for-onecomparison if we got the growth in consumption with output toaccommodate it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I like the staff forecast for 1983 at least.And maybe that's because my numbers, which I put down in advance,turned out to match the staff's almost exactly. I look at the highernumbers that many people are now forecasting--5 percent or more forthe four quarters of 1983--and I ask myself "Why?" I wonder ifperhaps we are being overly influenced by signs that we got off to apretty good January, judging by the improvement in nonfarm employment.I think it's quite possible that if we get off to a flying start, amomentum could develop. But I think it's just as possible that quitethe opposite could happen: That after an initial burst, real GNPgrowth suddenly comes to a halt or at least slows down verysubstantially; industrial output goes nowhere; unemployment begins torise again; and a new wave of pessimism begins to set in. I think weneed to concern ourselves with that a good deal. However, in making aprojection and thinking about the course of 1983 as a whole, I reallythink the same basic factors that led all of us to worry a month ortwo months ago about whether recovery was going to happen at all, andif so when, are still there. We're still dealing with a businesscommunity that is shell-shocked, that is going to play its cards verycautiously on the inventory front, that is going to wait untilcapacity utilization has gone up, and that is still very worried aboutthe durability of the recovery. We're still dealing with very, veryhigh real interest rates and very little hope that something will bedone at this juncture about the deficit further out to bring realinterest rates down. We're dealing with consumers who, althoughthey've improved their financial positions, are not going to lead usout of this into a strong recovery; I think the state of the savingrate is one factor that argues against that. And I think the exportmarkets are just very, very weak. All this adds up to a very modestpace of economic expansion. I think the staff has it about right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I don't remember what [forecast] I sentin, so I don't have to worry about the consistency with what I say!It does seem to me that Chuck has a point that forecasters tend tounderestimate the recovery, but they underestimate the recessions too.I think there are three things that are different about this. One iswhat Lyle just mentioned about the shell-shocked business community.[Second,] interest rates are still very high and this recovery stillneeds some nourishing on the interest rate side to make it succeed.That's for later in our discussion but however you look at real2/8-9/83interest rates they are very, very high and that puts a damper onenthusiasm. The other thing--and it may be more noticeable in my partof the country than in some of the rest of the country--is that somebasic structural shifts are going on in the economy that can have amajor impact on the cyclical recovery. For example, even if we get agood recovery, the steel industry just isn't going to be what it oncewas because of the foreign sector. The automobile sector isn't goingto be what it was. We're just not going to get the same kinds ofrecoveries. It's hard to measure these structural, secular kinds ofthings that are influenced on the cyclical side. But they do seem tome to tend to put a damper on [the recovery]. Again, I may just bemore sensitive about that because of my particular District. But Ithink there's enough of it in the northeast part of the country thatit's bound to have some impact on the national figure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I misspoke before. I don't know why Ionly saw one person whose forecast was down with the staff; there arequite a few who are down with the staff, including you.MR. BOEHNE. So, I guess I'm consistent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I have all those with me.MR. GRAMLEY. There are some that are actually below.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's one that's below--MR. GRAMLEY. There have to be at least three: one nonvotingpresident, one voting president, and one Board member.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are three.MR. PARTEE. You're looking at the range there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else want to comment?MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the real sector, the number that Ihave is 4-1/2 percent, as opposed to the staff's 3-1/2 percent, andit's hard for me to get too excited about those kinds of differences.But I'm inclined to the view that the inventory [liquidation] hasprobably run its course to a greater extent than the staff has [in itsforecast]. I also think there's at least a fair potential that thehousing sector will be stronger than the staff has projected as well.The area that I find a little more provocative in looking at the rangeof the forecasts is not so much the real numbers but the pricenumbers. I have a deflator number that's a little over 4 percent andI struggled a bit to get to that number. But I do agree with thesentiments that were expressed by several people earlier to the effectthat productivity will be stronger than the staff forecast. In my owncase, I ended up using a unit labor cost number of 2 percent on afourth quarter-to-fourth quarter basis. Now, what's interesting abouta 2 percent unit labor cost number is that if you attack the GNP fromthe income side, and you assume unit labor costs are going up 2percent and you assume that unit interest and proprietors' income andall the rest do the same thing, a 5 percent rate of inflation permitssomething like a 40 percent increase in profit margin measures interms of the GNP accounts. That, together with the oil pricesituation and the food price situation, in the context of a 2 percent2/8-9/83rise in unit labor costs, leads me rather solidly to the view that wecan, in fact, do better than 4 percent on inflation. I think it'simportant to do it because if we found ourselves with the kind ofrecovery that's being talked about here and with prices rising at arate of 5-1/2 or 6 percent by the end of 1983, we'd have one heck of amess in 1984 irrespective of all the problems financing the deficit isgoing to cause in 1984. So, I am more optimistic on the price side.I think that's solid. But more importantly, if we don't get that kindof price performance in 1983, it bodes very poorly in my judgment for1984 and beyond.MR. FORD. Excuse me, Jerry, but I didn't understand thelogic of what you just said. Why are you more optimistic--justbecause it's a message that doesn't work out?MR. CORRIGAN. No, I just went through it. I said that Iattacked the question of what the inflation rate might be primarily bylooking at the income side. I started out with a 2 percent unit laborcost assumption and made a bit of a subjective allowance for oilprices and food prices and then worked through the rest of it. Itlooks very doable to me to have the inflation rate in the higher 3percent area--at something like 3.8 or 3.9 or 3.7 percent. I thinkthat's very important.MR. PARTEE. What you meant to say was that you didn't reallythink the profits would go up 40 percent.MR. CORRIGAN. That's right.MR. PARTEE. He didn't say that, but he meant to say it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said they could go up 40 percent with5 percent or 4 percent [inflation]?MR. CORRIGAN. No, with 5 percent.MR. PARTEE. And if you make them, say, 30, that gives you--MR. CORRIGAN. Again, that assumes basically nothing specialabout oil prices. Even if you take the staff's estimate of an 8percent drop in oil prices, then in a sense it's a shoe-in. If we geta larger oil price drop, I don't know. That could get to be a problemtoo.MR. MARTIN. On that point, that's the only place where itisn't unit labor costs. In my own case, it is the expectation of alarger oil price drop than the 8 percent, realizing that the naturalgas impact is in the opposite direction if you iterate through here a$3.50 or $4 a barrel change rather than a $2 or $2.50 change. I thinkwe tend to underestimate the impact of that iteration. And I think [alarger oil price drop] is definitely in the cards and will produce aslightly lower inflation deflator number than the staff's.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me ask the question the otherway, after hearing you persuasive people. What do you have to assumeto get an inflation rate of 5 percent or above?MS. TEETERS. OPEC gets together.2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll rule that out. Well, I don't know.Is that the answer? Is that the only way [inflation] gets up there?MR. BOEHNE. We'd have to have some very bad luck on the foodfront.MR. RICE. Some bad weather.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How bad would it have to be on food?MS. TEETERS. It would have to be pretty bad because thestocks are quite large at this point.MR. PARTEE. We could also get it if wage rates went up morethan the marginal [increase in the] staff projection, which I wouldassume underlies, say, Bob's higher number. You would have a biggerwage rate, [Bob]?MR. BLACK. [Yes], and I think there's going to be a big jumpin profits. I don't know whether it's 40 percent--that sounds awfullyhigh--but I think profits ought to rise quite rapidly.MR. PARTEE. More than 12.MR. KEEHN. I think there's another side to this, which ishard to get a handle on. We've gone through the break-even that Edtalked about--the reductions in the break-even capacity, if you will.There are an awful lot of people I have talked to who, as we get intoa recovery, are very anxious to raise prices. And as soon as theysense an environment in which they can raise prices, they tend to goat it with a vengeance. Therefore, we are on the high side withregard to inflation--we were on the low side with regard to real GNP--because I think we're going to see some price increases in '83 and '84that are a little hard to forecast at this point.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, but lumber prices are going down.MR. KEEHN. Really?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we have a recovery, we're going to seea lot of commodity price increases.MR. FORD. We already are starting to see some.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One could add up all those commodityprices and none of them equals a small decline in the oil price interms of impacts on the GNP. We're bound to see increases in volume--MR. PARTEE. You do hear this interesting comment that we hadthe other day: That a lot of these prices are being discountedsubstantially and that businesses don't want to raise prices, theyjust want to get rid of the discount.MR. BOEHNE. How do the indexes pick that up? Do they getthe discount prices or is that a messy problem?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Poorly, I suspect.2/8-9/83MR. MARTIN. They try, but they don't get them.MR. BOEHNE. So, there'd be some room for some effectiveprice increases without it getting into the [indexes].MR. FORD. We've had 3 or 4 of our leading businessmen tellus that [price measures are not properly weighted], when one takesaccount not just of the price but of the nonprice cost factors, likeservice and whether or not transport charges are loaded on heavily orlightly and so on. They swear that the PPI has been understatingthings--that the drop hasn't really captured the full extent of pricedeflation. There's a big gap in there. So, we have a researchproject going on because a number of our industrialists have told uswe are--or whoever puts out that index is--full of baloney on that.May I ask a couple of related questions of the staff?Another thing I heard from a number of businessmen is that ourcapacity number--we put out the industrial capacity numbers thateverybody quotes, do we not?MR. ZEISEL. Yes.MR. FORD. That tells us that industrial capacity is nowrunning at 67 percent or something like that. I had a number ofpeople, including the principal shareholder ofand a number of other major industrialistswho really look at this stuff, say to me that our index is reallypoor--not in the way we're doing the statistical work, but the meaningof it. The argument goes like this: If they really ran mills at 100percent of capacity in the way they think we measure it, they stillwouldn't make any money on some of their mills, especially those thatdon't have today's oil prices factored in. Any piece of equipment orany plant that's over 10 years old should not be counted as part ofcapacity is what they're saying. If one made this adjustment, theysay that the measured total against which we measure underutilizationof capacity would be lower and, therefore, we'd have a higher-than-recorded utilization rate. Related to that, one of the biggestcomponents of our industrial production figures that we report iselectricity production and other kinds of energy production, right? Idon't know how big a component it is, but the argument is that withthe huge jump in oil prices, even considering the recent modification,there's a trend factor toward conservation which is very stronglyreflected in things like energy per unit of output overall. If oneadjusted for this in thinking about industrial production, probablythe last 3 months instead of being down might actually be up, net ofthe conservation effect. Do any of these thoughts from businesspeoplemake sense to you, Mr. Zeisel, or Mr. Prell, or any of you?MR. ZEISEL. They make a good deal of sense and they're asource of considerable concern to us, basically. In regard to thepoint about effective capacity and the factory that can be used online, we have been very concerned about this and have been looking atit industry-by-industry. I must add that at this point it's quite ajudgment call, but it appears to us that a realistic assessment ofcapacity that really should be considered obsolete or not likely to beusable would change our capacity utilization figures by about onepercent. We'll know more when we get our annual survey. In thatsurvey, we essentially ask businessmen about what they consider their2/8-9/83real capacity and, presumably and hopefully, we get a realisticassessment at that point. Nevertheless, I'm inclined to think there'sa certain amount of elasticity cyclically in any event--that as thingsbegin to pick up, what was considered obsolete capacity may be broughtback on line.MR. FORD. Just in terms of economic logic, it would seem tome that right at that point when we had that huge jump in oil pricesthere should have been a substantial increase in the year-to-yearchange in obsolescence--just a priori.MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's right.MR. FORD. It did show up in the survey?MR. KICHLINE. Parts of it did. I don't think that one wouldhave seen these discrete changes across the board. There is a so-called vintage effect, which implicitly or explicitly obsolesced alarge part of American industry by the change in the relative price ofoil. Part of that shows up. There are several things; we also lookat the McGraw-Hill survey and the Bureau of Economic Analysis datathat are direct industry reports. In addition, we have the cyclicalproblem--and the steel industry is a classic case--where the issue ishow much tonnage they are writing off. We've been in contact withsteel companies as well as the American Iron and Steel Institute andwe have some feeling, we think, about what they are writing off in apermanent sense. Now, the issue about a hundred versus some othernumber, I think, is a very important one. We have perceived somethinglike 85-87 percent as peak rates of utilization--the point at whichwe've really had a problem in the past. So, in terms of the currentnumber or some elevated number--adjusted one percent or two or threepercent or whatever it may be--we'd relate that to something like amid-80's range as full capacity utilization rather than a hundred.All of this, of course, is related to prices. One of the issues is:What is the price of that final product that will bring back thesemills that are now viewed as outmoded? There is a price at whichthese facilities are not destroyed or mothballed forever. It's amessy area. The kilowatt hours also are a problem; that was affectedby the 1973 oil price increase. We have sent people around to everyReserve Bank in the last 2 years and we have a survey that the ReserveBanks collect for us and it's a mess. That is the final word on that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Assuming we have 3-1/2 percent growthin '83 and 4 percent in '84, do you have an estimate as to where weend up on utilization of capacity at the end of '84?MR. ZEISEL. Yes, we end up at about 74 percent as I recall.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MR. ZEISEL. Let me just make a brief comment about the useof electric power. That's really relevant on a month-by-month basis.It's far [less relevant] in the long term because electric powerconsumption is really used just within a year to [estimate] thesefigures from month-to-month. Over a longer period of time we drop outthe electric power and use shipments and physical measures ofactivity. So, the version that resulted from the run-up in oil pricesin '72 presumably is taken into due consideration by use of other than2/8-9/83electric power data later. But to the extent that these figuresdistort the month-to-month [changes], as you might guess, we do haveproblems and have to adjust for it.MR. FORD. Thank you.MS. TEETERS. Going back to the economic forecast, I added upthe numbers in our projections and I must say I was quite surprised tofind myself on the high side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So was I.MS. TEETERS. Yes, I know. In part I was surprised becauseit's usually the other way around. Part of it is inventories and, ofcourse, that could hit in any particular quarter or not hit. But theother thing that struck me is that we had a considerable increase infiscal stimulus in the last 3 quarters of 1982. We've gone from afull employment deficit of $8 billion, or 0.2 percent of GNP, to oneof $60 billion in the fourth quarter, or 1.9 percent. It bobs aroundnext year, but it's over one percent all year long. And when I didcome out high, at the staff's suggestion I went back and reconciledthe income side. I have higher growth in consumption, which doesgenerate a greater increase in output. It doesn't murder the savingrate; you can come up with a fairly good saving rate. But the otherthing that jumped out at me is that when you calculate personal taxesfor calendar year 1983, there's almost no increase. We forget thatthere's a tax cut [in the offing] and it's a big one--to the pointthat taxes will end up in 1983 within $2 or $3 billion dollars of whatthey were in 1982. And we're going to get the tax cut in a period ofrising incomes; it's not going to come in a period of falling incomeslike it did this year--a year in which it disappeared. So, I come outon the high side. I checked all my numbers and I could shave 1/4 ormaybe 1/2 point off my forecast, given all the uncertainties, but itseems to me that we have a lot of things going for us. I also assumedthat the interest rates would go [down] to 7-1/2 percent, which helpsconsiderably on an economic forecast.MS. HORN. Nancy, what is the price outlook that goes withthat?MS. TEETERS. I'm close to everybody else, or near themedian. I think I was at 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent on prices. But I doget, as a result, a much bigger drop in the unemployment rate. Itpays off.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I think this expansion in 1983 is, to perhapsan unusual degree, a composite of strengths and weaknesses. And fromrather modest strengths, a picture of an expanding economy has beenput together in the face of some very powerful negatives, especially aweakness in exports and a slowness in business fixed investment. Theonly unusually strong element that one wouldn't have counted on inother expansions is what Governor Teeters mentioned: We have a verylarge deficit and we're adding to it, and that is a somewhat unusualfeature. Now, if you look at the things that are slow, exports andbusiness investment, there is something in reserve that at some pointis likely to kick in--for exports, I guess, with a fair-12-2/8-9/83predictability, and for investment depending on interest rates and howbusinessmen feel and how cautious they're going to be. I think wehave at least the makings of getting much more strength on the up sidethan seems likely. That is, the error, if any, might very well be onthe down side. Maybe we are not giving enough weight to thepossibilities of a combination of stronger factors. But on the downside I would say we have a variety of small elements that have carrieda very modest expansion so far and seem likely to put a base underwhat we're likely to achieve. I don't see the danger of sagging orfalling back, as it were. The caution of businessmen in theinvestment area to me looks more nearly like an element of strength--something that's going to change. And if it changes more in theupward than the downward direction--if we can get a rise without thathappening now--I think we certainly have the makings of a continuedexpansion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. I wanted to raise a question on the housingforecast for the second year. Admittedly this is getting to what wehere call the long run--2 years.MR. GRAMLEY. That's the hereafter, I guess!MR. MARTIN. I thought it was 2 weeks until I read thisdocument. In terms of the second year, Jim, it seems to me that thereare some lower ceilings in certain other resource areas. We have hadshifts of resources out of the housing [area]--certain of the majorsupplier firms. I wonder if we won't reach a lower limit this timethan 1.75 million. That looked like the good old days to me. Do youhave any feeling about that?MR. KICHLINE. Well, that could be. As you know, our housingstarts forecast for 1984 is an average of a little under 1.7 million.That isn't the days of 2 million plus numbers that we had. So, that'sone element in our thinking. Another is that we think housing willstill be rather expensive in terms of mortgage rates being high andcapital appreciation prospects perhaps not being as great as in thepast. So, both from the production side and the cost and financingside, it seems to us that there are reasons to believe that housingwon't really take off as in "the good old days." But I wouldn't viewa 1.7 million number 2 years out as being terribly strong given thepent up demands that presumably are there and the demographic factors.It's pretty much a forecast that I can be comfortable with at thispoint in time.MR. MARTIN. And you are on the cautious side with regard tothe expenditure growth, I noticed, in the residential area for 1984and that's a comforting--MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's part of it too. The argument isthat people are building smaller houses and that sort of thing.MR. MARTIN. Hence your 9 or 10 percent increments quarter-by-quarter.MR. KICHLINE. Yes.2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford. No, you already spoke. Doesanybody else want to comment? Let me raise a question, Mr. Kichline.If you look at your forecast beginning now in this quarter of '83 fora year ahead, is that substantially different than the forecast youhad in the beginning of the second quarter looking a year ahead?MR. KICHLINE. Beginning in the second quarter of--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of '82.MR. KICHLINE. I think that's a question that I don't havethe answer to here. I'm not sure I want to remember!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a point not to be precise about, butmy memory is that you had a forecast of a fairly gentle recoverybeginning in the second quarter during the year ahead.MR. KICHLINE. You're talking about our projections of thespring of last year?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Exactly.MR. KICHLINE. That's right; we had forecast a modestrecovery. So, we did not put in the second-half downturn. If that'sthe question, you're right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I only raised the question because Idetect a quite different tone in this meeting from only a month ago.Everybody is assuming, or has forecast at this point, a recovery. Iwould point out that I'm not sure that's in the bag; one could havemade exactly the same forecast--whether or not you did, I think youdid--nine months ago.MS. TEETERS. I think all the rest of us did too.MR. KICHLINE. In April and May, I think that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I said one could have made that forecastnine months ago. A lot of people did. What we had at that time as Irecall were low automobile inventories and some recovery in automobileproduction and the beginnings of a housing expansion, following twoquarters of large inventory reduction.MR. PARTEE. There was tax stimulus.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And a tax stimulus coming up.MS. HORN. Which leads to the question: What is differentnow that is driving this forecast? Certainly, interest rates aredifferent. What other kinds of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Interest rates are lower now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Businessmen 9 months ago were not ascautiously optimistic as they are today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They were less cautious and moreoptimistic in my mind.2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. I think so. As a matter of fact they startedin July to produce for the upturn that never materialized.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I think we're in a recovery. I justsay that one month of upturn does not a recovery make. And the mostrecent trend in automobile sales--I don't know that it means much, butit's down, not up. Automobile production is now up very close tosales. They have a lot of incentive programs going on. We know somesectors of the economy are declining and there are also plus factorsin the economy. We'll see.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I just want to raise a question toperhaps lay a base or understanding for future discussions. If Iunderstand the assumptions underlying the staff's forecast, an 8percent M2 growth after the first quarter translates into your figureof 8.8 percent M2 growth for 1983. Is that correct?MR. AXILROD. Are you referring to the so-called underlyinggrowth rate?MR. GUFFEY. Yes.MR. AXILROD. Yes, we now think the first quarter is morelike 8-1/4 percent, given the growth rates we got with the newseasonals and the definitional adjustment. So for the year it issomewhere close to 8-1/4 percent, or a little over 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've done a certain amount of talkingabout the business and the price [picture] and we haven't done anyexplicitly, except some mention of exports, on the international sideor on the credit side. The credit side I think we're going to have toreturn to in terms of setting targets when we decide what we want todo there. But does anybody have any questions on the internationalside or on the fiscal side or the credit side? Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. If I may, Mr. Chairman, I have a question oneach. I would ask Ted Truman, and perhaps you already told us, Ted,and I didn't follow it, so could you tell us again if you did before:What is going to cause the dollar to depreciate in '83 and '84?That's a very crucial assumption in this forecast.MR. FORD. And it comes down to--MR. TRUMAN. A month ago I think I would have told you thatsome decline in U.S. dollar interest rates might do it. And thenwe've had this marking up. The major [factor] that we have beenpointing to for the past year or so, or half year anyhow, is theprospect that the already large current account deficits that we areprojecting would be even larger if we didn't have the dollardepreciation and that as a result that would just tend to beunsustainable in terms of the rest of the world absorbing that amountof net claims on the United States over a relatively short period.And the prospect is that [the deficits] will continue. That, I think,is essentially what you have to consider--plus some washing out of thesafe haven argument that was more dominant the last part of the year.MR. BALLES. Well, that's a very tough question to answer andI was really wondering what the international staff here thought and-15-2/8-9/83whether there was some assumption or view that they had with respectto relative movements of interest rates here versus abroad andrelative movements of prices here versus abroad. Do you care tocomment on that?MR. TRUMAN. On the interest rate side I provided a chart.On the inflation side we think we'll be doing a little better, [whichwould] build up the attractiveness of U.S. assets. These forecastsaren't that scientific or precise but, if anything, we would concludethat we might get more in the way of interest rate declines abroadthan is implicit in the Bluebook forecast, which does suggest thatrelative real interest rates are going to be higher. We think, ifanything, they'd move somewhat higher in the United States which iswhy, as I said in my concluding remarks, one might argue that theremight be something more in terms of financing that would come out ofthe private capital flows than one could really see in the historicaldata. That's the basis on which one might argue against [a dollardecline]: That people would be willing to continue to acquire claimson the United States or acquire dollar-denominated claims to such anextent that we would not get the decline in the dollar in 1983 thatwe're projecting and the much larger current account deficit and dragon U.S. GNP on the export side associated with that. If you took thedollar as it was and kept it at that fourth-quarter level, which isthe bottom line of that chart, that [equates to] about 1.3 or 1.4percent of GNP at the end of 1984. That is a large component,essentially, of the difference between the growth rates that we havein the staff forecasts for 1983 and 1984.MR. BALLES. Thanks, Ted. The reason I was probing on thatpoint, Mr. Chairman--if I remember my own staff's analysis--is thatabout 40 percent of the drop in real GNP in '82 came from adeterioration in the net export sector. So, this is really terriblycrucial to the outlook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question that we are in aperiod, I think, without precedent--Mr. Truman can think of all theprecedents while I assert this--in that we have had a big recessionhere and the foreign [trade] balance is declining instead ofimproving. Usually the balance improves during a recession. And itis a very large fraction of the share of the decline in GNP. If youwant to make horror stories for this year, go along the line perhapsof your reasoning: The exchange rate remains high; the trade balancegets even worse than projected; we get a big government deficitholding up interest rates, let's say; and we have a lot of foreignfinancing of the deficit. The result would be that we have a mess inthe economy: relatively high interest rates, relatively high exchangerates, and for both reasons not a good trade balance and not a good[performance in] other sectors of the economy. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I wanted to follow up on this. While Ibasically share the staff's view about the dollar, nevertheless, onehas to bear in mind that our prospective current account deficit isnot the kind of deficit that historically has caused currencies to godown. It's not the result of domestic mismanagement, inflation, andso on. It's the result of forces that otherwise strengthen thecurrency--reduction in inflation and tight monetary management. Soit's not quite clear that under those conditions a current accountdeficit is bound to depress a currency the way it does when that2/8-9/83deficit comes from other factors. I still think the chances are thatit will, and so I share the forecast. But I think one has to bear theother possibility in mind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have one other question, if Imay, and that's related to the financial aspect of the fiscalmaterial. If I could, I'd like to ask Mike Prell a question about achart in this area, the first chart in his section on the federalgovernment share of total credit flows. This is a technical question,Mike: Does that include or not include off-budget deficits?MR. PRELL. It covers off-budget items in the sense that itincludes all U.S. Treasury borrowings. It doesn't include sponsoredagencies, loan guarantees, and other federal credit programs.MR. BALLES. The other question is, I guess, more analyticaland substantive: Is there a risk, not recognized perhaps in our Boardstaff, Bank staff, or [Committee] members' forecasts here, that wereally are sailing into uncharted seas with this huge proportion ofthe total pool of credit--the bulk of it--absorbed by the federalgovernment? I'd like to know your answer. My hunch, Mr. Chairman, isthat that supports your degree of skepticism about whether in fact therecovery is in the bag. There are two things that could upset thatrecovery: the depressing effects of interest rates that are stillpretty high both on a nominal and a real basis compared to historicallevels, and secondly what might happen when such tremendous shares ofcredit get soaked up by Uncle Sam in periods of economic expansion.I'm worried about the crowding out phenomenon. Is that something Ishould worry about?MR. FORD. If I may just tack on: On that chart we'retalking about, right about now the federal government share of totalcredit flows is at an historic high. For a few weeks it's zoomingskyward and all of a sudden it levels off, while your forecastprojects continuing increases in the deficit, including the structuralpart. How do those things add up in the flow of funds [accounts]?MR. PARTEE. The other side of this is Nancy's fiscalstimulus. Don't forget that. That's the counterpart of this.MR. BOEHNE. But does fiscal stimulus mean the same thing ifit's financed through monetary policy? One of the reasons we havehigher real rates, I think, is the deficit. Whatever dollar you geton fiscal stimulus either results in some higher inflationaryexpectations or higher real rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to answer Mr. Ford'squestion, Mr. Prell?MR. PRELL. There is a complex of things here. In terms ofthe way the chart looks, plotted as it is, we picked up this sharprise in the latter part of the recession. The large amount ofborrowing that occurred in the latter part of 1982 is at a rateroughly comparable to the kind of borrowing we're anticipating willcontinue over the next couple of years of financing $200 billiondeficits. At the same time we have some slight increase in the-17-2/8-9/83overall size of credit flows. Total borrowing by domesticnonfinancial sectors was $413 billion in 1982 and we have it going upto $452 billion in 1983, which is essentially just the increase ingovernment borrowings. And then it's up to $497 billion. So the flowis growing, but its growth is slight. The proportion remains ratherfixed.But returning to the question that President Balles asked, Ithink our whole projection has to be recognized as being in thecontext of a monetary policy that we still regard as reasonablyrestraining on the growth of nominal GNP. We do have continuingpressures sustaining what are, in effect, high real short-terminterest rates. And that does lend itself to an unusual type ofeconomic recovery. We have reasonably weak investment in the firsthalf of this recovery. Housing starts do move back up, but it isn't atremendously robust improvement we see going into 1983 and 1984. Sothe composition of risk and the credit flows that we have do reflect,I think, this crowding out phenomenon in the context of a restrainingmonetary policy that's still aiming at, and should achieve, somedeceleration of inflation in the context of moderate growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. In this flow of funds chart, for example, youdon't have the business borrowing by '84 getting anywhere near whereit was even in '81. I have the same problem: As I look through thisin terms of the sources and uses, it's almost inconceivable to me thatyou could produce the kind of growth that you have there withoutputting a lot more pressures on interest rates than--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's that 40 percent increase in profits!MR. PRELL. The short-term interest rates in our forecastrecede only very slightly at the same time that the inflation rate isedging downward. At current levels one would assess short-term realrates as being rather high. And if it's hard to assess the longrates, then certainly relative to the current inflation rate those tooare very, very high. So, we have a rather restrained outlook forcapital spending.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any more questions?MR. FORD. One other thing, while we're on this page: Giventhe growing interest of the Committee in credit aggregates as apossible way of tracking or influencing real performance, could yousay just a little more about that very unusual divergence between thegrowth of domestic nonfinancial debt and GNP?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's a good question, but let'sdefer it until we get to [the discussion of] the targets because itgoes right to that question of where a credit aggregate, if we use it,should be in the light of history. Is there anything else just on thegeneral business picture, the international picture, or the fiscalpicture? I would summarize my own view on this in a way that JohnBalles probably [was getting] to: There are a lot of reasons why theprice outlook looks pretty good; the business outlook looks prettygood except for the budget deficits ahead and except that theinternational outlook is a hazard, and except that we still have2/8-9/83[potential] problems with real financial disturbances, internationallyand domestically, which I'm afraid will be aggravated at some point bytoo sharp a decline in the oil prices. We have a little problem thathas been alluded to here as to how aggressive both labor and businesswill be in their pricing as the economy expands. I've been relativelyoptimistic about that but I don't know if there's any basis for beingrelatively optimistic. If Mr. Keehn is right--I think you were theone who commented on that side--then we have another problem. Ifeverybody's going to be very aggressive [in their pricing] with sixmonths of rise in new orders, I don't know where we are [going]. Onlytime will tell, I guess. Let us turn to Mr. Axilrod. If you canclarify all this in a statement shorter than the remainder of ouravailable time, my congratulations.MR. AXILROD. Well, the statement will certainly be shorter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure of that.MR. AXILROD. I might say well in advance, because it relatesto a question that was just raised about credit, that throughout thisall of our money assumptions and our credit assumptions are in somesense high in terms of rates of growth. It came through in PresidentBlack's question about velocity and its lagged effects. They are all,over 1983, high relative to what one might have expected looking backat historical patterns in previous cyclical periods. That carriesthrough to Ml. To a degree it carries through to M2, though it's hardto interpret that extracting from the shifts because M2 is such adifferent animal, given interest rates. For that matter it's hard tointerpret Ml. It carries through to M3 and it carries through tototal credit. So, we're getting a somewhat smaller increase innominal GNP relative to the increase we're expecting in all of theseaggregates. And, of course, that is what happened last year. We gotenormous drops in the velocity of all these aggregates last year. Wedon't have anything like that [projected for] this year, but there'ssome sense of a little less lift in GNP relative to the aggregatesthat carries through into this year. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You indeed finished before exhausting allour time. How successful members of the Committee were in followingthe complexity of your statement, I'm not absolutely certain. As youwere talking, I wrote down some observations and questions. I thinkwhat Steve has said is right in our traditional framework, with allthe appropriate qualifications. It assumes we're going to havetargets on these various things, as we've discussed before. And wewill look at velocity hypotheses to set them down. Let me just maketwo assertions to start with--or one assertion with two subdivisions.I don't think we have any escape from an unusual amount of uncertainty--uncertainty in the technical sense--in approaching this subjectright now. I will assert, and I think it is true no matter how youlag these things, that velocity is off the map, as Steve indicated atthe start, so far as 1982 is concerned and because we have all theseuncertainties about shifts. But I also think there's a more basicuncertainty about the economy, which was reflected in our earlierdiscussion--the international dimensions, the deficit, the "financialcrisis" possibilities. [Those concerns] are there.Against that, let me raise some basic questions and then someoperational questions. I suppose the first basic question, which we-19-2/8-9/83more or less disposed of last time, but I want to repeat is: Do weneed these targets at all either legally or economically? I think wetentatively said yes, we should go ahead with them. And by targetsI'm talking about these monetary targets; one can conceive of someother kinds of targets. A subsidiary question is: How firmly shouldthey be put forward and on what basis do we change them as the yearprogresses? And in evaluating that decision: What do we see as therisks with respect to the economy or to inflation, particularlywhether they're asymmetrical, in playing our hand? As part of that Isuppose a question is: What concern do we have about interest rates,whether or not we target them? Those I see as general questions onwhich we have to reach some consensus. And then, assuming we're goingto have monetary targets, we have those questions about which one weemphasize, what we do with the shifts, what the base is for M2, howmuch weight we put on Ml, and how we treat this credit aggregate.Probably other questions will arise, but I think those are alloperational. This draft directive takes one stab at trying to answerthe questions, reflecting pretty much the state of the discussion as Iunderstood it after our last meeting. With that much introduction, Iwould appreciate some comments on what I characterized as the morebasic questions. Maybe we just ought to discuss those a little beforewe get into which target, which base, and so forth.MR. BOEHNE. May I ask a question before we get into that?Picking up on the uncertainties, what do you see are the mainuncertainties as far as the DIDC is concerned? Do you see a goodchance, for example, of a business Super NOW account coming along orother kinds of changes that would--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't know. I would guess againstit, but I'd put the odds at 60/40 or something against. But I tellyou, with all the other uncertainties, I see that one as about 18th onthe list although it would obviously affect M1 if the DIDC did it.MR. PARTEE. Yes, it would affect the Ml target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a subsidiary question to "What do wedo with Ml?"MR. MORRIS. There is a new development that is relevant tothat: The Fidelity Fund is introducing a new money market fund thatwill offer unlimited checking. There will be no service charge butthe cost of handling the checking would be deducted from the revenue.So it will have some [lesser] flow of yields than their present funds.If others follow, then quite clearly they could force the commercialbanks into competing, which they haven't done yet, on the Super NOW.That would also force us, of course, to determine how we would treatthis new money market mutual fund in Ml. Presumably that would beopen to businesses and that would give those in the business communitya vehicle for having an interest-bearing checking account if theywanted it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to impose too much order onthe discussion, but I will deem those questions as appropriate when weget to the question of what we do with Ml. I'm thinking of the moregeneral questions of how we evaluate the general risks in terms of thevery broad strategy of how we play this and what kinds of targets wewant and how firmly we adhere to them. Governor Wallich.2/8-9/83MR. WALLICH. I'd like to put forth just two or three verysimple propositions. I think the case for money supply targetsremains that they are a better protection for the central bank thanother forms of targets or no targets at all. Even though theexperience we've had in the past year might disillusion one quitesubstantially, and even though one might have believed all the timethat it's interest rates and not the money supply that govern theeconomy, I think the Congress has given us this mandate to use moneysupply targets and an opportunity to do something that is publiclymuch easier to defend than an arbitrary setting of interest rates.So, I would continue with the targets.I think the uncertainty that has been revealed during theyear in terms of the behavior of velocity is so great that we do haveto give ourselves more leeway. But I would look for that leeway in awider range around the midpoint that continues to be whatever we thinkis the most likely single course for that aggregate. If instead of 3percentage points we have 5 percentage points [as the width of theranges], it seems to me that under the circumstances, given what hasbeen observed by the public about the aggregates, that would beacceptable and understandable. Our task, then, would be to arrive atsome conception of what the midpoints are of the aggregates on whichwe want to target. I think we can either put M1 on ice temporarily ormake it relatively innocuous by having a wide range around it thatgives us flexibility. And we could have additional flexibility bysaying that at midyear we may want to review that. That may be atrade-off, so to speak, for a lesser width of the ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just insert an observation here. Idon't know how many of you read the Economic Report [of thePresident], but it went through various iterations before the finalversion was produced and I didn't read the final version. So, I speakprojecting changes that were made in earlier drafts. As originallywritten, it had a very great retreat from certainty of monetarytargeting, without any question, because it recognized the changes invelocity. It basically took the position that you have to blendtargets with judgment. In some earlier drafts it came very close tosaying what we should do is target nominal GNP, which is somethingthat at our last meeting we pretty much decided not to do. I thinkthat has been toned down as the drafts proceeded but there is stillsome implication of it I suspect. But that's the way they kind of getout of this box: You have to be reasonably flexible with the targetsand look very hard at GNP and inevitably forecast, I think, the GNP insetting the targets or in altering the targets. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I find myself in substantial agreementwith Henry. I think we do need to continue to target the aggregates.I believe it is an opportunity--and also there's plenty of basis forit--for widening the ranges. In addition the tone of the Council [ofEconomic Advisors] report is that you have to be flexible. Theydidn't exactly say target nominal [GNP]. I just read that before Icame into the meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure they didn't exactly say that.MR. PARTEE. They didn't exactly say target, but they saidsteer by nominal GNP and to the extent that we seem to be achieving aresult that is not consistent with what we wanted in nominal GNP, be-21-2/8-9/83prepared to change our targets. Well, some notion of uncertainty andof that kind of flexibility could very well [be read] into it. Theonly thing I disagreed with [Henry on] is that although I wouldn'ttarget primarily on Ml, as previously we did, I do believe that M1 sofar has stood up a little better than the other aggregates. And,therefore, I see no reason, as he commented, for benching it for thetime being or sidelining it. I see no reason for doing that so longas we leave in the caveat that if the DIDC does something big, thattarget, of course, will have to be changed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a distinction there, as afootnote to what we said. Right at the moment M1 may be standing upbetter as a technical matter; it's not as distorted by theseinstitutional things. It is at least as far off in its velocity overthe past year as the other measures. They all are.MR. PARTEE. But I don't see that there's an awful lot tochoose from.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it's probably neither more nor lessover the next few--MR. PARTEE. Even the credit aggregate is way off.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But even if you keep an M1 target,Chuck, you would deemphasize it and say that--MR. PARTEE. Yes, I wouldn't target primarily on Ml.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. --basically the reserve path is drawnon the basis of derived M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I think the situation presently is one in whichwe have to regard our principal objective for 1983 as making sure wedo whatever is necessary to permit a recovery. And we have to beawfully careful in defining our financial objectives to make sure thatwe keep that in mind. Having said that, I still think it's importantfor us to continue using quantitative targets of some kind. If we goin the direction of trying to target on interest rates, we will besending signals that we have changed our fundamental long-runobjectives of policy. I agree with Henry completely on that. And Ithink if we start targeting on interest rates, any hope that we'regoing to make progress on the budget is going to go right out thewindow because Congress is going to say "Well, if you can do all thosegood things on interest rates, then what's the point of our being moredisciplined?"In thinking about the targets, I have come to the conclusionthat Ml ought to be confined to the nearest waste basket at least forthe next 5 years. When I look back at 1982, I don't think thisdecline in velocity is an accident. The 8-1/2 percent increase we hadin M1 over the four quarters consists of a 3-1/2 percent increase inold Ml, which is the measure on which we based all of our historicalrelationships between M1 and GNP, and a 35 percent increase in othercheckable deposits. My point here is simply that we have no real ideawhether this new composition of M1 will give us a cyclical and secular2/8-9/83pattern of M1 anything like the old one or not. And the Super NOWs,of course, make it much worse no matter how much shift adjustment wemake for them. So, I think we're in a position in which we ought togive zero weight to Ml and ought to concentrate our attention on thebroader aggregates. And I think there's much to be said for using acredit aggregate in some way; I don't think we can use it for a targetin the same way we've used the monetary aggregates because we simplydo not have the kind of data availability, much less capacity tocontrol it. But using it as an information variable--telling us wherewe have been, giving us additional flexibility in adjusting ourmonetary targets as the year goes on--is potentially a very valuableuse of that kind of financial variable. Also, if we focus on a totalnonfinancial debt variable the way the staff has suggested, it alsohas the other very substantial benefit of in effect saying to theCongress: "Look, if the number we're shooting for is, say, $450billion, and the federal government is taking $210 billion, then weonly have this much left for the private sector and anything you cando to bring down the deficit will increase private creditavailability."MS. TEETERS. May I ask the staff a technical question? Dowe have the same velocity problems with the old M1 that we do with Ml?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will defer that question until we get tosetting the targets.MS. TEETERS. I'm just curious.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, restrain your curiosity until we getto setting them up. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Generally, along with Governors Wallich andPartee, I feel that, yes, we do need to have some kind of monetarytargets. The key questions, of course, are what degree of emphasisand what range we should use, etc. Taking a leaf from your book, Mr.Chairman--you mentioned that we could have made the same economicforecast in the spring of '82 that we're making now and that the thingblew up on us--I would caution that the big surprise that we've hadsince our December meeting may be that M2 was the aggregate that washugely impacted and that Ml wasn't. That isn't necessarily settled incement, though; that could change. I'm not sure why or how or when[this might blow up on us] but, frankly, I would reserve judgment asto whether the relative stability that we see in Ml, which is a bigsurprise, is in fact something we can continue to count on. AlthoughI would like to see Ml included--Steve has given us both the pros andcons of doing it--I would be cautious and at a minimum defer judgmentuntil the spring of the year, perhaps in April, about whether we'regoing to have an Ml target for 1983 at all. I would add anotherthought--maybe piggybacking, if that's the right word, on Steve'spoint--that there's a good case to be made for using the first quarteras a base for M2. The same logic that led him to that conclusionwould lead me to the conclusion that if we are going to use Ml, weperhaps could consider the first quarter also as a base for the yeareven though there haven't been any big changes, net, so far.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I can interrupt. I think you'regetting a little ahead of this, John. All I'm interested in at this-23-2/8-9/83point are broad observations about the targets and how we deal withthem.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't think there's a need togo around the table. We went over this in great detail.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll find out whether there's aneed to go around the table. You can make an observation if you careto make an observation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. I don't think that there's anyalternative to having some kind of broad targetry. There's nothing toput in its place that's acceptable to the Committee, as we know fromearlier discussions. Now, if you don't want to get specific, then Ihave to stop there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments on this?MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of this question of how firmly we putforward the targets, which I obviously think we need, I certainlywould favor the direction that I think is implied in Steve's commentsand your own, but I'd be inclined to go maybe even one step further.And that is, in your testimony at least, in some carefully construedway, I'd suggest that we might indeed use the GNP as a bit of asteering mechanism. Again, I don't want to get trapped into thebusiness of saying we're going to use it for a target, but I do thinkthere is something to be said for getting a little more flexibilityinto the approach by saying that we're more willing to look at GNP andbe guided by it rather than trying to make the case for flexibilitysimply on the basis of all these technical arguments about thecomponents of the Ms, which people don't understand or care about.The one other point I'd like to make quickly, in terms of asymmetry orlack of risk, is that at this point I do see a somewhat asymmetricalrisk in one sense on the up side. But I can't ignore the fact that ifone of the things that you and others have mentioned goes wrong on thedown side, while the probabilities of that may be smaller, theimplications are much larger and we'd really have one heck of a mess.So, I have some asymmetry in my evaluation of risks; it's asymmetricalin its own right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. My asymmetry is in the opposite direction. Ithink a need for an intermediate target will really be important whenwe get to the point where we have to start pushing interest rates upto prevent an acceleration of inflation. And it seems to me ifthere's one lesson from the last 3 years, it's that having anintermediate target gives us a good deal of political shelter thatinterest rate targeting does not. I think the public did have aperception that it was appropriate to decelerate gradually the rate ofgrowth of the money supply and I think we could generate a perceptionon controlling the rate of growth of credit. But if we suggest [weare] sitting out there managing interest rates, we don't have thatpublic perception going for us.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure whether I understand whatyour asymmetry is.2/8-9/83MR. MORRIS. I understood that Jerry thought the real problemof risk was on the down side. I think in any liquidity crisis thisCommittee is going to say the heck with the guidelines, we're going toput enough liquidity into the system to take care of it. Andpolitically that will never be a serious problem. The real problemcomes when, say, in late '84 or '85 we have to push interest rates up.If we don't have something we can point to that's demanding that we dothis in the public interest, I think we're in trouble.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's why you want to keep targets.MR. MORRIS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you also want to make the targetrelatively tight, whatever that means, at this stage?MR. MORRIS. I want to make the target meaningful in thesense that I think our problem in the last year or two was that wehave been in a situation where we had to abandon the M1 targeting twotimes out two years. We were presumably following the shift adjustedMl in 1981. That came in very low and we decided not to bring itwithin the range. I think that was a sensible decision, but it didmean that we were not targeting at the end of the year what we plannedto target at the beginning of the year. [Last] year we also madeanother sensible decision not to try to force Ml back [down to] withinthe top of the range, which I think would have been disastrous. Butwe lose a lot of public [understanding] and strength from having anintermediate target when we have to keep abandoning it because thedarn thing is getting the wrong--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I guess I'm lost. What do youconclude now for '83 on the basis of all this?MR. MORRIS. I conclude from this that we should go totargeting some broad aggregate, which is not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Other than Ml?MR. MORRIS. [Other than] Ml and M2. I don't think we couldset a guideline for M2. I think the only one of the Ms that's leftthat has any validity--and by validity I mean something that is notgoing to be dominated by financial innovation--MR. GRAMLEY. What is it you are arguing for--M3 or L?MR. MORRIS. M3, L, or debt.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want a firm target for a very broadaggregate, then.MR. PARTEE. Which we can't achieve.MS. TEETERS. We don't have any influence on those, really.MR. MORRIS. I think we can influence them just as easily aswe can Ml. There's a mythology around this table that we have anextremely tight control over M1. I think it's a lot of nonsense.-25-2/8-9/83MS. TEETERS. We don't have any control over credit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. MORRIS. I don't believe that. I don't believe that.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with a good deal--infact most--of what has already been said. Particularly, I agree withGovernor Wallich and the view that we ought to continue targeting theaggregates and should avoid explicit interest rate targeting for theessentially practical reasons that he set forth. I would like toemphasize, though, that we ought to keep in mind at all times what weconsider to be a desirable level of real interest rates and, while wedo not make these explicit, I think we ought to continue to look atinterest rates and keep in mind what range of rates we think would beconsistent with the results we would like to get. I especially agreewith Lyle that we ought to keep in mind that the main thing we have toachieve now is to get a recovery going and to try to nurture thatrecovery. Therefore, as we target aggregates I would favor settingtargets for Ml, M2, and M3, as well as domestic nonfinancial debt. Iwould want to remain very flexible in my view of which aggregate wasthe one to target on at any particular time. I would want to make itvery clear in our public statements and in the record that we feelfree to shift from one aggregate to another depending on itsusefulness. If we find that M3 is more useful than Ml or vice versa,we should feel free to make that shift in emphasis as we have in thepast. I would not at this point be prepared to throw Ml in the wastebasket. When things settle down six months from now, it may turn outto be a much more useful aggregate to target than it is today. So, Iwould emphasize two things: (1) we should maintain our flexibilityand our right to choose and shift the emphasis from one aggregate toanother from time to time; and (2) that we not take our eyes off ofinterest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I agree with Henry for a change and, GovernorPartee, I do like the analogy of the fig leaf you cited last time. Ido think that the monetary aggregates provided a very good politicalshelter for us to do the things we probably couldn't have doneotherwise. I don't see that we can move to a very broad aggregate andhave any influence on it because I don't know what the relationshipsare to GNP in these cases and I don't think we have the instrumentsthrough reserve management to affect to any marked degree the growthof those very large aggregates. So, I can live with monetarytargeting for another year. But I do have one major plea. I agreewith all the [comments] about wide ranges and flexibility. I'm not sosure we should hopscotch from one to the other, Emmett, but if we haveto we might--MR. RICE. Why not?MS. TEETERS. I don't know, but I think it'll break down alittle.MR. PARTEE. But it sounds like we would take the one thatwe're within [the range].2/8-9/83MR. RICE. I don't know why we can't, if we explain in therecord why we are doing it.MS. TEETERS. Now, that's my major point here. I think wecaused a lot of disturbances in the market last year that weren'tnecessary by not telling people what we were doing. It was prettyobvious by midyear, and certainly by fall, that we needed to changethe targets. We have consistently refused to change targets from theoriginal specification of them 18 months in advance. If we had goneahead and said that due to technical factors and due to liquidity weare going to change the ranges by a certain amount, it would havesettled a lot of the uncertainty in the market. I think interestrates would have started coming down in March of last year instead ofjumping off a cliff in July. If we do go this flexible route, I thinkthere is an increased responsibility to be very open about what we'redoing and to make it public; it seems to me we should tell peopleexactly what we're doing or what we're trying to do and why we'retrying to do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, my position probably will notsurprise many people, but you may see that I have an unusual degree offlexibility this time. I think we ought to continue to target theaggregates and I think we ought to include Ml in that for a couple ofreasons. For one thing, it has been less distorted. That may nothold over the long run; I don't know. We can address that if itdoesn't. I think it's important for our credibility that we put M1 inif at all possible, but I do think there's substance in the argumentsmade by those who say that it's going to be a little different kind ofbeast than we've had in the past. So, I would widen the range on theup side because it's probably going to contain a larger element ofsavings and also because it has grown so fast that I don't think wecan risk decelerating it that fast without jarring the economy andknocking off any recovery that may be developing. And if we shouldtry to use Ml, then I think that ought to be the main basis forconstructing our target paths because we found out M2 doesn't workvery well. We could, I suppose, use a target shadow reserverequirement, as Steve suggested in the memo last time, of 4 percent orsomething like that. But the truth of the matter is that even thoughwe've gone through the motions, we really have not been doing any kindof reserve targeting during this period. In fact I argued that wereally ought just to admit we were pegging the federal funds rate,which is what I think we've done and I think that was appropriateduring this period of uncertainty. But if we're going to get back toreserve targeting, it has to involve something that is to a largeextent reserveable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts and then Mr. Solomon.MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I'm very conscious, having justleft the private marketplace, of the fragile position of commercialbanks and also the concern over large government deficits. But Ithink that another major concern out there is that the Federal ReserveSystem not sort of operate without any guidelines. I think that themarket expects specific guidelines and, if we don't have them, therewill be an anticipatory effect in the market that will be negative interms of interest rates. I would, therefore, strongly favor our2/8-9/83maintaining targets for monetary aggregates. It appears to me from myvery limited ability to study this matter that M1 has exonerateditself extremely well during this period and, on the assumption thatvelocity will return to a normal pattern, I would hope that M1 wouldbe very strongly represented in those monetary aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In addition to targeting M2 and M3, Ihave a slight preference for continuing to target Ml but I'd make itclear that we are continuing the present policy of deemphasizing it.If we do not say that, we are going to return to a situation where themarkets are mesmerized by the Friday numbers and we're going to have alot of volatility again and we're going to feel much more handcuffed.I think we do have the need for the kind of flexibility that we havedemonstrated in the last few months, so I could live either withdropping M1 or leaving it in. We can leave it in but I think it'sessential to make clear that it is going to be deemphasized and thatbasically there's no perception that we're making a significant shiftfrom the present conduct of monetary policy back to a strictermonetary targeting.MR. RICE. Would you accept deemphasizing it for now?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.MR. RICE. "Now" is the emphasis?MR. PARTEE. How do you answer Bob's point that we don't haveany reserve targeting at all? We just target on net borrowedreserves--that is, the funds rate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we all know what we're doing.The net effect of our monetary policy is still restrictive and themajority of the market perceives it as such because they look at thelevel of real interest rates.MR. PARTEE. I do not see the evidence that we have arestrictive policy. I think credit is beginning to flow and flow invery large quantities.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean in the first quarter?MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would agree with those who are advocating acontinuance of targeting Ml, M2, and M3. I would not favor droppingMl. I don't have the exact wording of how to handle it, I guess. Iwould not be quite as strong as saying that we are not going to payvery much attention to it and rely more on M2, based on the veryrecent evidence that we have that Ml seems to be behaving a littlebetter in this transition period. I would probably be inclined tolook a little more at Ml but I also agree that flexibility isessential because we're dealing in a very, very uncertain time, withthe numbers apparently changing with each report that comes through.-28-2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. I would join those who support targetingaggregates. My own predilection would be M2 and M3 at this time, witha statement that we would review Ml. I would go along with John thatwe review this in April and not wait until midyear. I think that weneed to target aggregates for a couple of reasons and they areimportant reasons. First, they form a basis for communication; theyprovide a certain degree of understanding not just on the Hill but inthe financial community. Secondly, although this may sound a bitextreme, I think that despite our exceeding the targets by such alarge amount they provide a certain amount of discipline internally onourselves. I believe we must go to wider ranges to reflect theuncertainties, though in so doing it may be appropriate--I would justraise this for consideration--that in communication with the Congresswe indicate it will be a rather short-term objective of ours to bringdown the rates of growth in the aggregates at such time as therecovery will not be impeded thereby. And I'd say that we wouldattempt to exercise our best efforts not to have such a turn be abruptor the method in which it was done itself be disruptive. I certainlysupport those who believe we should use so-called informationalvariables. It seems to me that we must mention nominal interestrates, not in the sense of a target but as an information variable,because of the credibility question. If we don't mention that we aremonitoring that informational variable, I don't think we will bebelieved. We should likewise mention as an informational variable thedomestic nonfinancial debt for all the reasons that have been advancedhere in that it does move us a bit toward the GNP inference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I go along with the targeting for all thereasons that have been given, not the least of which is the politicalsheltering. I do think, however, that we have to look through thesetargets to the real economy and therein comes the flexibility. Itseems to me that the consequences, both social and economic, of nothaving a recovery this year are so large that we have to look throughto the real sector. Not to include M1 seems to me to emphasize theflexibility that we're trying to convey here. If we include Ml, thereis so much accumulated devotion to that particular indicator--with theFriday afternoon releases and all of that--that to bring it back nowis to go counter to what we're trying to emphasize, and that is theneed for flexibility. So, in addition to the technical reasons, whatwe're trying to communicate leads me not to include Ml at this pointand go with M2, M3, and with credit as an informational variable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. Starting from the premise of targeting aggregates,my preference is to target narrower aggregates both for reasons ofcontrollability and historical relationships with GNP and so forth.Because I favor targeting narrower aggregates, I favor a flexibleapproach. That flexibility would be on the side of what I think hasbeen referred to as technical reasons--that is, I think we'd have tobe explicit that we would be flexible with Ml targets, depending onour fragmented readings of what its velocity is going to be. That'sthe danger, certainly on the Ml side. With M2, along with thevelocity problem, there are also the shift problems. And, of course,-29-2/8-9/83the shift problems could develop with Ml as the year goes on. So it'sthose kinds of flexibilities that I'd like to see introduced into thetargeting exercise. I very much agree with Nancy that if we take anapproach that is flexible with regard to targets, we must be very openin our communications with the markets. They must believe that we'reengaging in an honest flexibility and I think that would beaccomplished by frequent and fairly open communication.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to define dishonestflexibility?MS. HORN. No, I'm going quickly onto the next subject!MR. PARTEE. It's sustained upward bias.MS. HORN. I agree with Frank about the risk question; Ithink the risk is on the up side. In particular, if we take thisflexible approach, I think we will be very sensitive as a Committee tothe economy needing more liquidity. Hoping that that doesn't happen,then we're going to need the backbone--and the political protectionthat we will get from the targets will have to come into play--if weget into a situation where we need to start increasing interest rates.And if we build in too much flexibility, that of course takes a bit ofthat protection away.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I miss you, Mr. Guffey?MR. GUFFEY. Not yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I had your name and I crossed it offwithout even hearing you, I guess.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I may not have anything to say that hasn'talready been said. If so, I'll just repeat what has already beensaid. I would join those who would retain the aggregates targetingbecause, first of all, I don't think we have any choice. Legally, Ithink we're obliged to do so and it's a question of which aggregateswe select. My own preference would be to target Ml, M2, and M3, andadopt the debt aggregate. My purpose is twofold. I think FrankMorris said it very well: They may not be used in our implementationprocess in the immediate period ahead, but they have served us verywell as a political shelter. And that wheel is going to turn backaround and we're going to need them again. To abandon them now or todilute them in importance would be a mistake for the future, as far asthe public's perception is concerned. I am concerned, however, aboutthe recovery and that we ensure that the recovery takes place. Iagain agree with Frank that this Committee should look through theaggregates to ensure that recovery does take place fairly early inthis year. I hope that's the case, at least. What reinforces myfeeling of targeting the aggregates is the fact that the markets areused to looking at them and if we fuzz them up too much without anyhistorical connection with what we've done in the past, we're buildinguncertainty in the markets. The risk of delayed recovery that Ibelieve is out there is enhanced as a result. This is beyond whereyou want to go at the moment, Mr. Chairman, but I would set thesetarget ranges in such a way that they can be easily equated to what wehave said and have tried to do in the past and move to the lowerlevels. It bothers me a bit when we talk about a 9 to 13 percent2/8-9/83range for M2, for example, and not talk about the 6 to 9 percentrange.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I would join the consensus in favor of continuingwith the targeting [of the aggregates]. I've certainly been impressedwith the analysis that was done with regard to the shifts that aretaking place in the aggregates. Nonetheless, we are in a period withan extraordinary amount of noise and uncertainty. Therefore, I wouldbe in favor of continuing to target Ml, M2, and M3, but I would movethe bases as far forward as we possibly can to get behind us as muchof the shift that has been and is taking place. I would keep a heavyeye, or if not heavy certainly a concerned eye, on interest ratesbecause unless we get the recovery more solidly in place than it isnow, we'll have a great deal of trouble. And in all of our publicutterances we ought to make it perfectly clear that as we go throughthe year we are going to be adjusting the ranges, the base, and ourwhole approach to this to provide for the shifts that are takingplace.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. I was listening to you when you said that youwanted to get back to ask if there were any fundamentally differentthings that the Committee wanted to consider. In listening to whatwe've all said here, where we are headed--unless somebody does come upwith a different approach--is to [take a decision that would] add tothe noise in the marketplace. I want to be specific about what Imean. If you take all the things that have been mentioned here todayso far, and that a lot of people nodded their heads in favor of, whatthey come to is this: We haven't voted on it yet but I'd be willingto bet money that by the time we're done voting we will have agreedthat there are going to be more aggregates to look at. Specifically,we're going to add a credit variable or two. We're generally in favorof leaving Ml in, although with much less emphasis. There's strongacceptance of the reality that there is going to be more base driftthis time than ever before--and if I remember the numbers right--bothon M1 and M2. A number of people, at least Jerry, Ed, Lyle, Roger,and a number of others, have said "Let's look through all this to thereal economy." That to me is another way of saying we're going to tryto impact the economy directly. And I don't think it's too much of astretch of the words to say we want to [fine] tune the economy inreality. We think we can do it. We've all used the word flexibility.Everyone who has spoken so far has used the word flexibility, which isanother way of saying wider bands and more allowance for moving thingsaround. And everyone is advocating the wider bands themselves.When I take all of these feelings that we've expressed, Mr.Chairman, it raises the question in my mind, in line with yourquestion: Why are we dealing with monetary aggregates at all? If yougo back to how we got there, the monetary theorists who pushed thiswhole concept had as one of the fundamental parts of the concept thatwe shouldn't try to fine-tune and especially shouldn't try on a short-term basis to be flexible about a lot of things. We should be lookingat some aggregate that hopefully has some relationship to what we'rereally trying to do over a long period of time and just let it go in asteady way and the market will know what we're going to do next. And2/8-9/83with these six or seven dimensions of flexibility that we're puttingon everything--! There are two or three people down this side of thetable who in different ways all stuck to it. Karen almost jumped onthe table and then backed off. Nancy said it. What we're doing is weare looking at the real economy, trying to manage it in real terms,and de facto we're using interest rates as the principal variable toattempt to do that. That's what we're doing.So, my answer to you would be: If we're going to do allthese other things, then it would be in the interest of not creatingmore noise in the markets just to say that we are now going to attemptin our collective wisdom to manage the real economy out of a recessionwithout managing it back into inflation and the principal thing we'regoing to do is move short-term rates. Because I think that's thetruth. Isn't that what we're really doing? It looks that way on thecharts to me. So, just in case somebody wants a fundamentalalternative--all the rest of the things all of you have said arevariations, I argue, on this theme of flexibility, more targets, andwider bands--I'll offer a basic alternative, if for nothing else butthe sake of discussion, which is to stop all that stuff and tellpeople that we're trying to set interest rates that will get us out ofthe recession and hope that it won't have side effects that will getus back into another round of inflation after it's over. That wouldbe in my view a more fundamental change and one that I don't want tosay I'm personally advocating 100 percent; but if the drift of theopinion around this table is to do all these other things, let's atleast consider that as an alternative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you've put your finger on a pointthat I was going to make in summation. I would not carry it to thepoint that you carried it, but what I hear around the table--withmaybe your exception--is unanimity on targeting, which is where wewere before, and a lot of flexibility. I think those arefundamentally incompatible in a conceptual sense, if you push this farenough. In one theory of targeting, anyway, you'll go a long waytoward undermining what you are targeting if you're very flexible inhandling it. I detected a lot of nuances or differences, which givesus a job to reconcile. I wouldn't go all the way to targetinginterest rates very firmly because I think there are targets otherthan interest rates that we could adopt instead of monetary targeting.We can look at a lot of things in addition to interest rates, which Ithink is probably what we're doing. But I did want to note that Ithink the Committee is on two horses; I'm not saying wrongly. Butthere are two horses: One is targeting and one is flexibility. Andthey have two different names.MR. FORD. They tend to go in opposite directions.MR. RICE. It's because of the uncertainty that we weretalking about earlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'm not saying it's wrong. I'm justsaying that we better recognize that that's what we're doing. Andinevitably, then, you have to put emphasis on other things, whateverthey may be at the time--whether it's interest rates or nominal GNP ora number of other things that have been mentioned. As to whether it'sreassuring or unreassuring to the markets, I think you could ask avariety of market people and they'd give you different answers to that-32-2/8-9/83question depending upon their own predilection. So, that point Ithink one can interpret for oneself. I have a little strategicdecision to make on whether we finish tomorrow or not[unintelligible]. Does anybody else want to comment on these generalthings in response to what they have heard from others if it doesn'ttake too long? But I think we are where Mr. Ford suggested. Thereare a lot of variables and a lot of nuances--or more than nuances--ofdifferences as to what to do with all these variables. And how wecondense all that into a directive is the problem. I think this draftthat we have in front of us more or less reflects the flavor of theconversation, whether or not it reflects it in the details thateverybody would like to see. That's where we are. We can leave itall until tomorrow or we can continue for another 10 minutes or so, Isuppose, tonight. If people want to stay for another 20 minutes maybewe could dispose of all these more or less technical questions thatI've been deferring about lagged velocity and the question of [thebase] that John Balles raised. What else was raised that was more orless discrete? Why don't I just throw open [the discussion] if peopleare willing to sit here until quarter to six to get more underbrushout of the way.As I read this conversation--tell me if I'm wrong--weprobably can work more or less from the directive that we have beforeus. I'm not arguing that people wouldn't want to change some of thewording, but I think it very broadly has this flavor of targets withflexibility that I hear around the table. Why don't we deal with thislanguage here, which is fundamental I suppose, on how stable velocityis? On the face of it, it wasn't very stable last year. And thequestion has been raised: Does it look that much more stable iflagged?MR. AXILROD. Mrs. Low will pass out some charts that theCommittee could look at. [See Appendix.]MS. TEETERS. What about the velocity of old Ml?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's here. Oh old Ml! I don't knowwhether Steve is prepared to cover that one, but it's a reasonablequestion.MR. AXILROD. Governor Teeters, old Ml last year grew 3-1/4percent; new M1 grew 8-1/2 percent. Our quarterly model equationwould have predicted a growth of 5-1/2 percent, given interest ratesand GNP. So, [the model result] is in the middle. It was no moreaccurate--well, the difference is small--on old M1 than it was on newMl. It just underpredicted one and overpredicted the other.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand it. I would havethought that old M1 was much closer now. What are you calling it?MR. AXILROD. It was 3-1/4 percent, Q4 1981 to Q4 1982.MS. TEETERS. That's the growth of old Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was the growth of old M1.MS. TEETERS. What's the velocity of old Ml?2/8-9/83MR. AXILROD. Oh, the velocity of old Ml! I'm sorry, Ithought you [meant growth]. The velocity of old M1 would have been alittle plus.SPEAKER(?). It went up a little.MR. PARTEE. A little [plus].MR. AXILROD. Zero with no change. But I was [addressing]the question of whether our model predicted it. That's another way ofgetting it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's another way of getting to theanswer. But I am not sure what your answer is. I take it GovernorTeeter's assertion or question--MS. TEETERS. No, question.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --is: Has not the velocity of old Ml beenmore consistent than that of new Ml?MR. AXILROD. Well, I can only answer it at the moment forlast year. If you get beyond that, old Ml went to pot with the NOWaccounts and all that. I still have in mind what happened a lotearlier when there were no differences between old Ml and new M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A lot earlier there was no difference, I'msure.MR. AXILROD. Last year seems to me the only relevant year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're probably right.MR. AXILROD. One easy way to get at that is to say we havean equation based on the whole history and that the infamous, in asense, quarterly equation in our model just says there has been adownward demand shift in M1 since the mid-1970s. That equation, givenincome and interest rates in the last year, said Ml would haveincreased 5-1/2 percent. The old Ml increased 3-1/4 percent. So, theequation overpredicted for the old Ml. The new M1 increased 8-1/2percent and in that respect the equation underpredicted. I findlittle to choose by the time I put myself in that framework. Now, ofcourse, Governor Gramley is right that it probably doesn't take intoaccount this special effect of OCDs and NOW accounts and the fact thatmaybe the behavior is a little different. They have a somewhatdifferent elasticity. The elasticity of M1 with respect to income andinterest rates may be changing as the composition changes. We have aproblem there, no doubt.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say the equations are not muchdifferent. They're on the opposite side of this. Suppose you take avery simplistic notion and say velocity was averaging 3 or so percentfor a long period of time. I take from what you're saying that in1982 old Ml velocity was about zero. Zero is closer to 3 or sopercent than 8 percent was--well, not 8 but--SPEAKER(?). Minus 5.2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Minus 5? Okay, minus 5; that's right.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we on the staff here tend to lookat velocity with interest rates taken into account. And there was asharp drop last year in interest rates. So that's why we tend to lookat the model, which enables us to look at both the impact of incomeand interest rates together. That's why we did it the other way.MS. TEETERS. Wait a minute, Steve. Let me just see if I[understand]. Given the drop in interest rates you would haveexpected a drop in velocity, if nothing else changed.MR. AXILROD. We expected some drop in velocity.MS. TEETERS. That's what you're saying: a drop in velocity.MR. AXILROD. There's some--MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the other way you can interpret Steve'sremarks is that what you should do, according to the model, is takethe growth rate of old M1 and the growth rate of new Ml and averagethe two together. Then you get the right answer.SPEAKER(?). That leaves us another problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're holding an array of charts beforeus, upon which maybe Steve will make the assertion--I'll make it forhim for purposes of testing--that there is no significant differencebetween lagged velocity and otherwise. I think we can detect a slightdifference in the most recent period, maybe only because we don't haveanother quarter for M1 lagged one quarter in that first chart. Isuspect the next quarter would show the lagged relationship with asteep decline. I say that because we had a 16 percent rate ofincrease in Ml last quarter and nobody thinks that the GNP is going toapproach an annual rate of increase of 16 percent this quarter.MR. AXILROD. Another thing to observe, Mr. Chairman, isshown in chart 5 in the way that we plot the growth rates; they areobviously highly variable for both. The standard deviations are ameasure of variability. There is little to choose between thestandard contemporaneous and the alternative, which is to use a lag onthese. In all cases the alternative is a hair better than thestandard, but the difference will not be of any significance. None ofthis means that velocity isn't going to turn around in '83, lagged,unlagged, or any other way. But it--MR. BLACK. Could I make at least one observation, Mr.Chairman? Steve, I don't think there's anything incompatible withwhat we did [in Richmond] and what you did here. You have not usedsemi-logs on this scale. So, on the vertical scale, an absolute dropthere would be comparable to a much smaller drop down here. In thefigures that we had looked at back to '54 and '49, the change invelocity lagged one or two quarters was really not that different.So, we were talking about two slightly different things.MR. AXILROD. A general point I made earlier in the evening,Mr. Chairman, was that whether you look at velocity contemporaneouslyor lagged, there is a marked change in the behavior of velocity in '822/8-9/83relative to historical experience. Lagging it doesn't change that.And that's the only point I wanted to make.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I circulate a memo to showsomething differently?MR. GRAMLEY. Just don't expect us to read it, Bob!MR. BLACK. Okay. I think there are precedents. Steve isright that nobody knows what velocity is going to do in this upturn.It may come up and it may not; I don't know. I'm just saying that Iwas surprised to find out, as I read this, that there were precedentsto this kind of drop. But they were in periods before this chartbegins; they were earlier in the postwar period. And they may or maynot be indicative--MR. AXILROD. Yes. We only went back to where we hadquarterly data.MR. BLACK. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Interestingly enough--and I think MikePrell may have mentioned this--on the credit flows we had the samevelocity phenomenon. We had something like it in the 1950s for verybrief periods. But you have to go back to the 1950s.MR. PRELL. It is shown on the chart on page 9 in the creditaggregate memo where we did take it back to the 1950s.MR. FORD. On the credit [memo]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was the memo distributed to youearlier. The other question that arose was about basing. There'sjust a feeling that if you take M2 in the extreme form, if we have atarget for the year and use the fourth quarter of last year, we aregoing to have a big number, whatever the number should be. It's goingto be outside the range of anything we've talked about. If we use thefirst quarter, it still has quite a lot of [that problem] because M2was rising so fast during January at least. The only way to cure itis by taking as a base some period that we haven't reached yet. It'smuch less true in the other aggregates. But it's true in spades ofM2. So we're left with this simple choice. If we're going to use anM2 [target] and if we use the traditional base, we're going to have avery large number. The pros and cons of--MR. GUFFEY. One alternative to that, of course, because ofthe historical significance of the fourth-quarter base is to use thatbase and for the purpose of your testimony use the underlying growthrate that is assumed and adjust that by the shifts as we go throughthe year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do that theoretically, Iguess. Maybe I just speak for myself but I thought it was the generalview around here that it is awfully hard to do that this year becauseyou can't deliver those estimates of the shifts with a straight faceand say you have any confidence in them. If you just change one ofthose percentages a little, you're way off.2/8-9/83MR. GUFFEY. I understand that. But the other numbers don'tmake any more sense, particularly for the Committee setting itstargets. And the fact that we're pursuing the course that'sconsistent with what we've done in the past is probably the mostimportant message that this Committee could deliver to the public andto the markets in the period ahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that connection, I would only pointout--and it surprised me a little--Mr. Axilrod's latest estimate. IfI read it correctly in the Bluebook, he is saying the estimate is nota good one in terms of being a reliable estimate. His estimate ispresumably the center of some range; I don't know whether he said thator not. If it is the middle of some range, what it says is that wehave no basis whatsoever for thinking that M2 was high in the last twomonths. In fact, it was a little on the low side. I don't thinkthat's the public appreciation. That hasn't particularly been myappreciation. I don't think that has been the appreciation anyplace,but that's what it says.MR. FORD. Is that going to sell? Can we sell that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm wondering myself.MR. FORD. I'm serious. I don't mean this as a facetiousquestion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. I doubt it, but we--MR. GRAMLEY. I think we shouldn't try, Mr. Chairman. Theidea of shift adjusting--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's a question that's fullysettled.MR. GRAMLEY. When the magnitudes are $200 billion in twomonths it is absurd because if you get a very minor change in thatpercentage that comes from non-M2 sources, it makes a fundamentaldifference in your appraisal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can't say it is not great. Even ifyou believe Steve's number as a center of a range, which he says is avery bad estimate, all you can say is that it's not clear that it'shigh or low.MR. GRAMLEY. And you ought to make that point. But I thinkit argues strongly for using a February-March base instead of afourth-quarter base.MR. MORRIS. But the problem--MR. GUFFEY. I'd just like to follow up by saying that I'drather fuzz up the adjustment than I would the basic underlying growthrate we're shooting for. And I'd assume the 8 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. You can still argue that from February-March2/8-9/83MR. GUFFEY. Well, the historical connection is what I thinkwould be important to the markets.MR. MARTIN. I think the shock in the market of the verylarge rates of change that result from using the fourth quarter [as abase] would exceed any kind of side or pseudo analyses that we'veshifted the base. I think those large percentage growth numbers wouldbe a shock.SPEAKER(?). I agree with--MR. PARTEE. Well, Roger's going to take them out, Paul, as Iunderstand it. He will show a figure that is like the 8 percent fromthe fourth quarter to the first quarter.MR. GUFFEY. Absolutely.MR. PARTEE. And then you've got to [unintelligible].MR. GUFFEY. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The markets are so conscious of this$200 odd billion that has moved that I think they would be surprisedif we were to base [the target] on the fourth quarter and incorporatethis massive redistribution. I think it would be very understandablethat we would take the February-March base. Oh, I'm sorry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no, I'm just--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At least I have the clear impressionthat they would be surprised. They would know the imprecision of ourshift adjustment estimates. We'd have to say so quite honestly. AndI think they would understand, given this massive movement that'sgoing on, why we would take a February-March base. It's not so muchthat the size of the numbers bothers me, although I think there arepeople who don't understand and who will be shocked by the numbers,but I think the market would feel [a February-March base] is a littlemore accurate way of doing it.MS. TEETERS. Tony, I agree with you if one thing is true,and that is if the adjustment is slowing down. How fast has it beengoing the last week, Steve?MR. AXILROD. The MMDAs?MS. TEETERS. Yes.MR. AXILROD. It has been down to about $20 to $25 billion aweek.MS. TEETERS. I like the idea. I want to get a nice stablebase, but if the base is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just try this. Suppose we usesomething like the February-March base for M2. Is that consideredcompatible, in terms of whatever presentational objectives we have inmind, with using a fourth-quarter base for the other numbers? Let mesay that the reason it's not clear is that M1, we think, was distorted2/8-9/83in the fourth quarter and probably not much in January. So thatdistortion is already largely in the base. Maybe that's bad. Wethink M3 is on the plus side by some unknown hazy amount in Januarybut not like M2. It's a small fraction of what M2 is distorted by andwill probably be less as time passes. So, there's a bit of distortionbut not very much if we use the fourth-quarter base for the othernumbers. So, we use a fourth-quarter base for those two aggregates,let's say, and for credit, but an advanced base for M2.MS. TEETERS. What do we do if we get corporate Super NOWs?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We hit that problem--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We cross that bridge when we get to it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Either way we'll have--MR. PARTEE. We'd break that series too. That's what we'redoing, really--not so much shifting bases as breaking the series andstarting out with [a different] M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is a kind of break in the series.MS. TEETERS. We might as well break all of them and beconsistent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'm not sure about that, Nancy.We have such an overwhelming case on the distortion in M2 in terms ofthe numbers one can point to whereas we have a much more modest reasonfor shifting the base on Ml and M3. I think one could make anargument either way. My preference would be to show that we aremaintaining continuity where we can maintain it--where the distortionis not too great. So, I would have some preference for theasymmetrical treatment of the base, which I think just the sheermagnitude of the numbers would justify.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's getting late. Let me assert, andpeople can argue against this tomorrow if they want to, that forpurposes of putting in numbers in these blanks we will assume thatwe're going to do what Tony was just suggesting: We'll talk aboutfourth quarter-to-fourth quarter numbers for everything except M2where we will talk about some advance date as the base. Whether thatshould be February-March, I don't know. In saying that, we would haveto say that we assume that this [shifting] will slow down drastically.If it doesn't, we will have to look at the number again. So, whenwe're thinking about numbers, the staff's estimate--which is probablyno better than anybody else's--. Or maybe it is better. Let mereword that. It's probably better than anybody else's but thatdoesn't mean it's very good. But we may have to say something aboutit in the directive. The staff has already assumed that just using aFebruary-March base for M2 until the end of the year we're stillgetting some upward bias by an order of magnitude of--MR. AXILROD. Well, we've assumed, given what's in that longfootnote, [the upward bias] to be about a point of growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From February-March?-39-2/8-9/83MR. AXILROD. From February-March to the end of the year.And that's assuming that [MMDA growth] slows down to $12 billion aweek [on average in February] and to $8 billion a week [in March] andall that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, just keep that in mind as anoperating assumption. You are assuming that M3 is artificially pumpedup for the year by nothing?MR. AXILROD. Virtually. It's very hard to read. We assume,though it's hard to make any assumptions, that it was somewhere on theorder of 3 points in January and with this slowdown in MMDAs thatwhatever they want to do with CDs they will do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On M1 you're basically assuming nothing atthis point from a fourth-quarter base?MR. AXILROD. That's right. But we feel quite uncertainabout that because we're not sure why banks have behaved this way withregard to Super NOWs. There is some idea that it could take off oncethey start competing actively for MMDAs. That's in the back of ourminds as a possibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, unless people take violentexception, let's make those assumptions as operating assumptions. I'mtrying to keep the discussion manageable.MS. TEETERS. May I make just one small plea for the otherone? The year that we had the shift-adjusted NOW accounts--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other one being what?MS. TEETERS. To put them all on a February-March basis. Theyear that we had the shift adjustment for NOW accounts, I was almosttotally confused as to what our targets were. We had shift-adjustedand nonshift-adjusted [figures]. There's something to be said forhaving a common base for all three so that we remember which one we'reon if nothing else.MR. FORD. You're going to eliminate unemployment for Fedwatchers if there is anything difficult!MR. PARTEE. I'm not sure whether you addressed thisquestion, but I don't know that I agreed with the point that Steve wasmaking about cutting the range on M3 because there was no reason tothink that the institutions will want a larger market share. And,therefore, I think we ought to be careful about that.MR. AXILROD. It wasn't clear, Governor Partee; they may wanta lot larger share than we have in here. We still have a relativelylow share.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. AXILROD. We have an increase of around 8 or 9 percentagepoints in the market share of banks and thrifts together of totalcredit and then some cutback in money market funds. If they want alot larger share, then I think it would be difficult to cut M3.-40-2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. One point we ought to keep in mind in thinkingof the M1 target and using the fourth quarter is that we in effect aresaying that that horrendous drop in velocity, which largely took placein the fourth quarter, is either going to get reversed or we're goingto put it into our targets somehow. Otherwise, you see, we're notgoing to forgive that big fourth-quarter growth; we're going to makeup for it later on. Or to put it differently, if you look at page 15of the Bluebook and take the first-quarter average for 1983, just foralternative B we have 8.7 percent first quarter over fourth quarterlargely because of what happened in the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're talking about Ml?MR. GRAMLEY. M1, yes. I think going back to that base ofthe fourth quarter for Ml is very, very risky. Now, I'm prepared todo that if we're prepared to put a zero weight on the target. To methat's a good compromise: 95 percent weight on M2, 5 percent on M3,and 0 on Ml.MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] M2 very stable, yes.MR. GRAMLEY. You can use any base you want. But I thinkthat's a very, very risky business.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, if I could have one final shot atthis: I could accept what you're proposing but I would again callyour attention to the remarks, which I interpret as a warning, thatSteve just gave us that Ml could spring to life and the Super NOWscould spring to life. That's why I thought a little while ago and Iguess I still feel that a more conservative or safer approach would beto do the same thing for M1 that we've talked about doing for M2--using a first-quarter base--so that we could make sure that thisapparent approximately zero net effect in the different accounts willcontinue through this quarter. I hope it will.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying just technically use thefirst quarter as a base for M2 because I think it falls betweenstools. It still gives us a high number for the year because itstarts at the beginning of January so low. I'm trying to get overthat hump so we don't have an artificial, if that's the right word,high number for the year. And we've got to go at least to February todo that. I don't think we have to for M1. But I suppose in terms ofsymmetry we could say all the targets begin in February-March. But werun into the other problem in that I think it will eliminatecontinuity where continuity is possible. That's what we have tobalance, I guess.MS. TEETERS. Couldn't we develop a technical relationshipbetween the February-March base and a fourth-quarter base?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, sure. You just have to put in ahigher number.MS. TEETERS. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But then we'd have this visually highnumber. Arithmetically, one can reduce it to the same number.-41-2/8-9/83MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, for us to try to ponder overnight:Which approach do you find easiest to use vis-a-vis the public, theCongress, and the financial markets--basing on the fourth quarter,basing on the first quarter, or some of both?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who knows? This is somebody's instinct.My instinct is the same as Mr. Solomon's. We can go back [to thefourth quarter] for M2--but then we end up with this horrendous numberand are forced to say that it's so big because we're assuming Xpercent of it is shifts. And then if asked how we defend that number,we say we can't. It's a guess. That's not a very pleasant positionto be in. However, if we [advance the base] for all of them, thenpeople will say: Well, you really took a free ride on everything fora quarter. None of [the options] is totally satisfactory because whatwe're doing is not totally satisfactory intellectually.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The other thing is that as the mediareport on our progress or performance during the year they alwayscompare what the rate of growth is compared to what our target was.But they don't go into the technicalities of what the base was.MS. TEETERS. That argues for one base.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know. You get a somewhatbetter reading from the media on performance as the year develops.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, except that we won't on Ml. We werein this trap before because [unintelligible] the facts. We get thesechanges in the beginning of the year on an M1 target; we'll probablybe above the target in the first quarter for the reason Lylesuggested. So everybody says we're above the target and we have toget growth down. We may not have that--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but if we deemphasize it, thenit's not going to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we deemphasize it enough, it balances.MS. TEETERS. We can always raise the targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but if we put it on this silly fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter basis that we do, we can't raise the targetsenough. We're always going to start above wherever it is.SPEAKER(?). At some point we can raise it enough.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, you're assuming for M2 avelocity of circulation of roughly zero in '83?MR. AXILROD. Right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And for M1 on your alternative IIhere you're assuming a velocity of circulation very slightly negative.MR. AXILROD. No. I would say that we have a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter growth on the order of 6 percent. So, a slightpositive is what's in my mind; it's right here in the Bluebook on Ml.That, as Governor Gramley mentioned, would imply a slowdown from here-42-2/8-9/83on out, on a quarterly basis, to something on the order of 5 percentor a bit under in growth rates. Our quarterly model, for what it'sworth, given the interest rates and income, would predict about a 7percent growth in Ml. That was one of the reasons I thought that ahigher growth than 5-1/2 percent was likely; I couldn't see thisdownward demand shift we've been experiencing occurring this yearbecause we're not ratcheting up interest rates and all that. So, Iwould say 6 or 7 percent seems to me about the right Ml.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All these fine velocity assumptions thathe made in the Bluebook rest upon a staff forecast that probably has alower nominal GNP than everybody else's forecast, or is at the bottomof the range, anyway, of everybody else's forecast. If everybody elsereally believes his or her forecast and believes this velocitybusiness, we ought to have higher--MS. TEETERS. Higher targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Higher targets.MR. AXILROD. Or, we might get more GNP with the same money,higher velocity, and not much interest rate change, if everyonedecides to undo their liquidity. That's a possibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but you're saying if your velocityassumption is wrong.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.MR. BLACK. Steve, if we've made our computations right, anassumed M1 growth fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter of 6 percentimplies a 1.4 percent rise in velocity of M1 over that year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With their forecast?MR. BLACK. That's right, with their forecast.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. That's why it would be aslowdown from now on.MR. BLACK. That's the reason I went into that issue awhileago, Mr. Chairman, and you thought I was premature. I was trying toexplain why ours was high and it was based upon an assumption that itwould bounce back, which it may well not do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One percent, historically, would not bemuch of a bounceback.MR. PARTEE. No, it's--MR. BLACK. No, we assumed about 5 percent. That was reallythe reason I went into what you thought I was going into prematurely:to justify our high forecast.MR. AXILROD. But it is of interest, Mr. Chairman, that a lotof the slide occurred when interest rates were going up cyclically.-43-2/8-9/83And in '71 when they didn't go up cyclically, the increase was 2.9 orsomething like that on velocity.MR. ROBERTS. Interest rates are now going up, however.MR. AXILROD. Well, we're not projecting [that] as part ofthis whole projection.MR. ROBERTS. It could be wrong.MR. GRAMLEY. In which case the staff's forecast probablyalso will be wrong--not in the direction of more nominal GNP but less.MR. BLACK. Well, we know everybody is wrong. We just don'tknow who is the most wrong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll see you tomorrow morning atwhen--9:00 a.m.?MR. BERNARD. 9:00 a.m.[Meeting recessed]-44-2/8-9/83February 9, 1983--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, ladies and gentlemen, afterlistening to our conversation yesterday, it seems to me that thistentative directive is probably a reasonable reflection of our concernto have targets but be flexible. So, I would suggest we assumesomething like this draft directive will be used. There will bechances for editorial comments, but let me just suggest in theinterest of focusing the discussion and expediting things that we putsome numbers in those blanks. And on page 3 of that directive I wouldtentatively suggest that we eliminate the alternative for M2 [thatmeasures the range from] the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter,just for purposes of the discussion at this stage anyway, and assumewe're going to [measure it] from February-March to the fourth quarter.If we take the middle course of what the staff says is consistent withtheir forecast--recognizing that very large amounts of uncertaintyexist about that and recognizing also that their forecast for nominalGNP is lower on average than other peoples' by 1 percent or somethinglike that--that says basically 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for that period,allowing for 1 percent or so of shifting from that base.MR. AXILROD. That's right; it would be about 8 percent plusaround 1 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That could be rounded up to 7 to 10percent, I suppose, or rounded down to 6 to 9 percent, but we're inthat range. Turning to M3, for the fourth quarter-to-fourth quartercomparison the staff says 6 to 9 percent, period. That could bepushed; last year it was 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent, so I think we're inthat range. Whether or not we want to include Ml in the same sentenceor make that a slightly more subsidiary sentence or tentative soundingsentence is an issue that we can return to. But the number that theyhave for M1 is 3 to 7 percent; that could be made slightly higher, Isuppose. So, we're around 3 to 7 percent or 4 to 8 percent, I think.And for total nonfinancial debt, which we really haven't discussedmuch, they propose this rather peculiar result in terms of past cyclesof 8 to 11 percent, which they'll have to justify at some point--alittle more than I think we've already discussed. It contemplates intheir forecast a further decline in credit velocity, which would beunusual during a period of recovery. But I take it they're preparedto defend that proposition. I just throw those out as a focus foryour discussion. Let's see what comments we get on them.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have a question of Steve. I hadthe impression, Steve, that when you shift the base to February-Marchfrom the usual average of the fourth quarter, that 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent is tighter than 9 to 13 percent. Am I correct?MR. AXILROD. Well, for the top in a mild sense it is. Ourpoint estimate [on the fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter range], suchas it is, is 11.8 percent, within the 9 to 13 percent range. So, it's1.2 points from the top of the range. Our point estimate on the 6-1/2to 9-1/2 percent range from February-March is 8.9 percent. So,relative to the 9-1/2 percent it's 0.6 point from the top of therange. With a 7 to 10 percent range, it would be more comparable interms of distance from the top of the range.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.2/8-9/83MR. AXILROD. But that's only in that arithmetic sense.MR. PARTEE. And you've allowed about 1 point for continuedshifts?MR. AXILROD. From February-to-March, that's right.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know about the 1 point; it couldbe a lot more than that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The second question I have is: If wewant flexibility, shouldn't we aim for a four-point spread in M2 thisyear instead of 3 points?MR. AXILROD. Our technical reason for narrowing it when thebase is February-March is that just a little more of the year is doneand the more of the year that is done, presumably the more you know.So, you could have a narrower range. Also the argument is that thebulk of the shifts is behind us, and the reason for the wide spreadwas to take account of the uncertainties about the shifts. Of course,it's highly uncertain in any event. But that was the reason forsuggesting a slightly narrower spread.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though you eliminated Januaryfrom the base there are still a lot of uncertainties.MR. AXILROD. Yes. Our thought was that most of the shiftwould be done. Now, to the extent that isn't true--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we would have to go back and look atit anyway if most of the shift isn't done. If we get into March orApril and M2 is still growing rapidly, or if February and March aredistorted, we better go back and look at it again. I think that'sclear.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm a little worried that 6-1/2 to9-1/2 percent may be a little tight. I certainly would opposerounding it off downward.MR. WALLICH. I feel the same way. It seems to meflexibility appears at all margins, and here's one more--the width ofthe range--where we ought to allow for it.MR. MARTIN. I would echo Governor Teeter's comment ofyesterday. I'd rather have a narrower range and then at midyear goback. We admit we don't know what the behavior will be and we cancontinue to reinforce that position and go back in July. If we haveto change it, we can change it then.MS. TEETERS. We may have to change it before then.MR. MARTIN. All right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's look at them one by one, if that'sthe way you want to do it. Let's look at M2. Does anybody want to goabove 7 to 10 percent?2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. One way of handling the binding aspects of thisis to widen the range and make it 6 to 10 percent, extending the upperlimit. That has the additional virtue of maintaining the same lowerlimit as we had last year.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I might say that when we put theranges that way, they weren't centered on the midpoint. And thereason was that in the previous year the FOMC had established a rangeand said it expected growth around the upper end. For that reason wesimply didn't suggest ranges that were set on midpoints on the thoughtthat the same range would then accommodate lower growth if possible.So, these were not set at midpoints for M2.MR. PARTEE. Steve, if I read that footnote connected withalternative II correctly, [the consistent range] would be 7 to 10percent. The footnote says that [the ranges for the threealternatives] would be from 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent through 7-1/2 to10-1/2 percent.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.MR. PARTEE. I assume that the middle one, alternative II, is7 to 10 percent.MR. AXILROD. That would be leaving that same gap, GovernorPartee, of a little over 1 point above the expected--MR. PARTEE. I just wanted to make clear that we weren'treally talking about liberalizing what had been proposed in--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the area that we're talking about, 1/2point is inconsequential. There's a certain argument for making it 7to 10 percent because they are round numbers and why have spuriousprecision.MR. PARTEE. I think that's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A range of 7 to 11 percent doesn'tsound good. It sounds like we're really gambling!MR. WALLICH. I think 6 to 10 percent would be a littlemore--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure what that gains you.MS. TEETERS. I get the impression--MR. RICE. I don't know what it does.MR. WALLICH. Well, it gains you two things: One is thegreater leeway and the other is a lower midpoint.MR. PARTEE. Of course, we've never been any place close tothe lower end of the range in the last several years for M2. And toleave it at 6 percent when we have a new instrument seems funny to me.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though I like the four-pointspread, I'd like it on the up side.2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I'd rather have [unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It probably is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I sense 7 to 10 percent as a temporaryfeeling here? Let me move to--MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, could I just ask if this decisionrelates to the strategy?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is all highly tentative at thispoint.MR. RICE. [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I assume something like that. We'llget to this language, but roughly, yes.MR. RICE. While I support the decision that was just made onthe 7 to 10--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Very tentatively.MR. RICE. Yes, the tentative decision. I have some concernsabout the strategy and the relationship to the alternatives that weselect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's get to that in a minute and wewill reach an iteration. Now, on M3, again just as a starting point,the staff says flatly 6 to 9 percent, for whatever that's worth.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think you ought to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent range is what wehad last year. Is it worth horsing around with the half point?MR. MORRIS. Yes, particularly because 6 to 9 percent isgoing to be too tight next year in 1984. We'd have to raise it.MR. PARTEE. When we start to get some expansion in the[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why would it be too tight next year?MR. MORRIS. Well, in the first year of recovery we normallyget more GNP for M3, or M3 velocity tends to rise in the first fourquarters of recovery and to be essentially flat--no velocity change--in the second year. I think Steve would support me on this: that wewould have to raise it next year.MR. AXILROD. I'm afraid, President Morris, that we have notreally worked it out in detail that far ahead. I really don't haveany comment on that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it's worth cutting it ahalf point.2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I would prefer the higher number, Paul. Thebanks have been adding a lot of securities and I think they'llcontinue to do so. And I think the S&Ls will be aggressive. Theywill pay down some debt but they're going to be looking for places toput their money. So, I'd hate to see that reduced.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If, as we agreed yesterday, theystrive for a larger market share and are more aggressiveintermediaries, [M3] could easily come in higher. I don't see thepoint of cutting a half point on the up side.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, a partial answer to GovernorPartee and President Morris: As a percent of total credit ourprojections in the flow of funds at this point assume that thrifts andcommercial banks together take 35 percent of the market in '83 and 30percent in '84. I haven't worked that through to M3 as such, whichwould have to take account of money market funds and shifts fromraising money abroad through CDs and that sort of thing. That [shareof the market] going back from 1980 to 1952 has generally run in a 40to 60 percent range. So, [our projection] is well below the norm ifthe norm can be thought of as the previous 30 years. And, as GovernorPartee has suggested, we may be too far below it if the depositoryinstitutions get very aggressive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was it in 1982?MR. AXILROD. We have it rising from '82, which was 27percent; and in '81 it was 30 percent. Those were all low years.MR. PARTEE. Thrifts were really squeezed.MR. AXILROD. But before that, numbers in the 40, 50, and 60[percent area] are what you would have seen. That's [higher] becausewe think much of that money is being raised through the bond markets--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. Again, I do not havea strong degree of conviction in the area of a half point.MR. GRAMLEY. I think we gain nothing by cutting it a halfpoint. We allow ourselves a little more flexibility by leaving itwhere it was.MS. TEETERS. There is some advantage in making it the sameas M2.MR. MARTIN. Except that we're going to sound like the UnitedKingdom.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. When we shave off a half point likethat, we imply a level of precision in our thinking that seems to meinconsistent with all the uncertainty we keep talking about. I wouldjust stick with the provisional target we set up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I hear any other comments? Hearing noother comments, we'll put it tentatively at 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.MR. BALLES. May I ask a question, Mr. Chairman? Could Ijust ask you to review quickly what you said on Ml? I'm not sure I--2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. We haven't done it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're getting to Ml right now.MR. BALLES. I thought you had already passed it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. M1 is now before the house. Thestaff says 3 to 7 percent for the middle course on their forecast.MR. AXILROD. Again, Mr. Chairman, that range is not centeredon the midpoint [of our forecast]. We left everything along [thelines of] the Committee's previous decisions that growth would berunning toward the upper ends of the ranges.MR. PARTEE. What was the midpoint?MR. AXILROD. In my view, the midpoint [for Ml] consistentwith the 8 percent underlying M2 growth would be in the 6 to 7 percentrange unless one thinks in some model sense that there's a downwarddemand shift.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You assume, though, no change on businessdemand deposits?MR. AXILROD. And that assumes that the DIDC doesn't doanything on the business demand deposits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that doesn't assume much on SuperNOWs, I take it.MR. AXILROD. It doesn't give much room for Super NOWs andassumes that we don't experience again the downward demand shift thatwe had from 1974 on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can make it 4 to 8 percent.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a pitch forthe 4 to 8 percent for several reasons. As I understand the Boardstaff's projections for the first quarter, Steve, Ml is expected togrow at a 5 percent rate, roughly, for February and March. Our SanFrancisco money market model, which we started with last year, isprojecting about a 10 percent growth in those two months. Time willtell which projection is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 10 percent growth in what 2 months?MR. BALLES. A 10 percent average growth in February andMarch. And I would hate to see us get trapped in a posture where toolow a range would force tightening and produce a premature rise ininterest rates in view of the uncertainties that I feel about thesolidness of this business recovery. Therefore, I would hedge my betand go for 4 to 8 percent on Ml.MR. GRAMLEY. I would strongly support that. An additionalargument for the ones that both John and Steve have given is the factthat we're looking at responses to Super NOWs which at the presenttime are being conditioned by the fact that the banks and the thriftsare just being flooded with money on MMDAs. I think a very logical2/8-9/83possibility is that, as the MMDA rates settle down, interest in SuperNOWs is going to build up, and none of us knows exactly how muchallowance to make for that. I think we ought to provide flexibilityon that score.MR. MARTIN. Yes. I would add to that. It seems to me thatthe thrifts still have a competitive device that they have notexploited. My conversations with many of their representatives thisweek in Washington go to that conclusion. This is a vehicle which canget them into a side of the financial markets that they're veryinterested in. And I think this is one of the arguments forseparating the [Ml] comment here and not making it pari passu with M2and M3. We really don't know what is going to happen when certainfinancial institutions begin to exploit this in this calendar year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. The editorializing is something Iwant to return to when we get beyond the numbers. And maybe I'd makethis range sound a little more tentative.MR. PARTEE. May I ask a question? Steve, your own [Ml]projection for the first quarter is an increase of 8.7 percent, isn'tit? So, you must be projecting substantially lower growth rates asthe year goes on.MR. AXILROD. It's about 5 percent for the rest of the year.It's roughly the same as in February-March. I should add that ourmonthly model would say around 9 percent at current interest rates,somewhat similar to what President Balles mentioned. Our quarterlymodel at around the current interest rate gives the quarterly averagethat we have here, around 8-3/4 percent. Take your choice on whichmodel you go by. We put a little more weight in this case on thequarterly model, which gives this slowdown. Of course, it could besomewhat higher in the coming months.MR. WALLICH. But the uncertainties are so great on M1 thatif we don't want to express them by some qualification of it as atarget, then I think we need a wider range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll come back to that question onqualifying it as a target. It's a question of how strong it'simplied, right? It's not implied in this sentence but it's implied ina later sentence.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, there's one other--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I hate to say it but it seems to methat all it does, even with 4 to 8 percent, is move us slightly awayfrom the upper end of the range without even allowing for the growthof Super NOWs later in the year, etc. In the course of conversationswith some key market people, in general I've noticed that they givethe advice that according to the market it's much better to projecthigher targets and hit them during the course of the year than it isto worry about the initial effect of the higher targets. That is justthe general advice I heard from one of the key people in the markets.So, even though we will have deemphasizing language, I assume, I'm notsure that 4 to 8 percent does anything more than move us slightly to amore realistic range. And it still doesn't allow for any Super NOWgrowth.2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I rather like 4 to 8 percent, though, becauseit's less than we had last year. We had 8-1/2 percent last year?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. PARTEE. It's a little less at the upper end. I think ifwe went above 4 to 8 percent, we might as well forget it. Already itseems to be quite a liberalization of our previous targeting.MR. MORRIS. I think if we forgot it, it would be a big stepforward.MR. PARTEE. I realize you feel that way and probably Tonydoes too. But I think there are others who would like to keep it,including myself.MR. BLACK. Then you'd have to [marry] alternative II intoalternative I.MR. PARTEE. Well, except that I think their [unintelligible]figure is too tight.MR. BLACK. Well, I mean that we've taken a couple of thefigures out of alternative I and set them into alternative II.MR. PARTEE. And we do have to remember that we have a higherforecast than the staff for the GNP. So, I would move 4 to 8 percent,Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't heard any contrary viewexpressed strongly.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I didn't express it very stronglybut I feel it very strongly. I wouldn't go as high as that. I think7 percent is as much as we dare risk. And the only reason I'd bewilling to go as high as 7 percent would be that I think there isprobably going to be a higher element of savings in M1 than we've hadbefore. Otherwise, I'd say 6 percent is as high as we ought to go.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have an opinion?MR. WALLICH. The previous midpoint was 4 percent, with the2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range. We can achieve that midpoint by theadmittedly rather extravagant range of 1 to 7 percent. Then wehaven't raised our target any time.MR. BLACK. One percent is too low even for me. Even threepercent is too low.MR. PARTEE. Seven is too low.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will assert that when the width of therange gets to be 6 percentage points, we might as well not have one.MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to be associated with a4 to 8 percent range, with the hope that the midpoint of the range iswhat we'd be working toward. I think we have to come off a rapidgrowth rate slowly instead of abruptly.2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else want to speak to thispoint? I seem to have a considerable opinion for 4 to 8 percent.Well, let us pass on to total domestic nonfinancial debt. You havesome more or less elaborate analysis suggesting that total domesticnonfinancial debt is the [measure] we ought to be using. I guess whatit shows is that on these growth rates it makes a trivial difference,so I'm not sure it's worth an elaborate discussion. I'm just talkingabout the definition now--whether we use total nonfinancial debt,total domestic nonfinancial debt, or total domestic nonfinancial debt[plus net stock issues]. They all seem to have more or less the same[projected] growth number.MR. ROBERTS. May I ask why we're establishing such a targetat all? It doesn't seem to relate to anything, as I read thematerial. There seems to be an assumption that we're going to use atarget like this. I don't understand what the purpose of it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not exactly a target, but this has acertain history. We can do what we want to do, but we have beenrequested to provide such an associated range anyway.MS. TEETERS. What do we do with it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're dropping out the bank credit here--and whether we want to do that is another decision--so, it fulfillsthe role that bank credit used to do. I think what we do is look atthis [sort of range] to see if it confirms a contrary indication ofwhat is going on as time passes.MR. GRAMLEY. There's a very good reason for looking at whathappens to debt growth in a year in which the monetary aggregates maywell be developing a new kind of relationship with GNP that we don'tfully understand. I would hope we'd use this seriously. And I dowant to say something about the numbers at the appropriate time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you go ahead right now.MR. GRAMLEY. I think another way of getting a perspective onit--and none of us really has looked at this number very closely--isto look at the flow of credit implied and how that relates to thelevel of GNP forecast for the year. We're starting with a range thatin my judgment is too low. The 8 percent lower limit would imply agrowth of credit equal to 11.7 percent of forecast GNP. And thatwould be the lowest ratio we've seen since 1970 in a ratio which has asecular tendency to go upward. Furthermore, if you take out the $210billion the staff is forecasting that the government will borrow, thatleaves $171 billion for private domestic nonfinancial borrowing. Thatratio is 5.3 percent of GNP. You have to go back to 1950 to findanything similar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is if we took 8 [to 11] percent.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. The midpoint is 9-1/2 percent and is alsoin my judgment very, very low. It leaves a ratio of private creditexpansion to GNP of 7-1/2 percent. There's only one number since 1961that was that low: 1975. So, we're talking about recession levels ofprivate credit expansion relative to GNP.-53-2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. The height of the number is accounted for bygovernment.MR. GRAMLEY. Right. Of course.MR. PARTEE. But even the aggregate number in Appendix IV inthe Bluebook is 13.9 percent, which is not up much from last year andis well below what it was running earlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What page do you have?MR. PARTEE. Appendix IV gives this. I'm looking at the farright hand set of numbers in the middle column.MR. GRAMLEY. To put Chuck's point in a different way: Thereis a secular upward movement in this ratio. We get in the 13 to 14percent range, as a portion of GNP, for the first time in 1972-73.We're talking about a very, very stringent set of credit marketconditions that would lead to that kind of ratio of credit expansionto GNP. I think 9 to 12 percent would be more appropriate in terms ofthe kind of credit market situation we all want.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I understand this table thatMr. Partee has called to our attention. What column are you lookingat?MR. PARTEE. The last set of numbers is the ratio of the flowof credit to GNP. The middle column--these abbreviations are suchthat it's hard to make it out--is the private debt, isn't it?MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's the domestic nonfinancial debt.MR. PARTEE. That is the domestic, right.MS. TEETERS. That includes the government?MR. PARTEE. That includes government, yes.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that includes the government.MR. PARTEE. And we certainly ought to include government.MS. TEETERS. We know there was an increase during the 1970s.As we came out of the '75 recession, the ratio went up to--MR. PARTEE. To 17 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The nearest equivalent here is 1975, ifthe forecast is right, and it's 1.4 percentage points--MR. MORRIS. But we're not targeting the flow; we'retargeting the percentage growth.MR. GRAMLEY. But that's a flow.MR. MORRIS. We're targeting this first set of numbers.MR. PARTEE. I know; but they have to relate.-54-2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. I'm just looking at it a different way and onethat to me is a more familiar one. And I think what it says is thatwe're targeting on growth rates of private credit relative to GNP thatare [comparable to] the ratios of 10 years ago.MR. FORD. But Lyle--Mr. Chairman, may I address this? Itseems to me one should think about the overall balance sheet. Nowwe're talking about the other side of the balance sheet than the onewe normally talk about. Isn't your argument tantamount in some senseto saying that there's a low saving rate in our economy, which we havein our forecast and which affects the flow of funds overall plus otherthings? You're suggesting we take it as a given--as something that weimplicitly accept--that there's going to be a huge bite of federalsector borrowing as projected in the nice charts we had yesterday,even with the cheery assumption that it's going through the roof rightnow but it immediately levels off for some reason. I still don'tunderstand the chart from yesterday's presentation. Another way ofsaying what you're saying is that if we choose these numbers we'retalking about now, we're not leaving room for the private sector.Doesn't that translate into saying "Let's monetize the federal debt"?MR. PARTEE. Yes. I wouldn't have put it that way, though,Bill. I think Lyle is the one who made the point about the privatesector. I'd look at the total, including the government, and say itought to be in reasonable relation to the kind of growth in GNP thatwe hope to achieve.MR. FORD. Why not? It would be nice if you could have it.It depends on the policy guide.MR. PARTEE. And I think Lyle is right that the number is alittle too low.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at this other column onvelocity, however, you get a different answer it seems to me. I havea little trouble seeing how we're going to justify all this debtexpansion. We will have as low a velocity number as we have ever hadexcept for last year.MR. PARTEE. That is to say that the debt number is prettylow.MR. AXILROD. Well, another way to look at it would be thatGNP [growth] is very low. We have a bigger percentage increase inthis debt aggregate than we do in GNP. And our past experience inrecoveries was that that wouldn't take place. So, one other way tolook at it is that your GNP number might be a little low. Of course,that would then lower that ratio that's troubling Governor Gramley.MR. MORRIS. Our analysis of debt indicated that a 7 to 10percent range would be adequate for 1983. So, I think 8 to 11 percentis going to be plenty.MR. GRAMLEY. We're talking about a ratio of private creditexpansion to GNP that we last saw maybe in 1954-55 or somewhere aroundthere. You'd think somehow--2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand this, Lyle. Thisnumber you're looking at is this last column, isn't it?MR. GRAMLEY. I'm looking at the middle column of the lastrow. And then I'm saying: What if we took out the governmentcomponent of that and got to the private ratio?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. You're looking at private. Ifyou look at the total, this number is high relative to the 1960s and alittle low relative to the 1970s.MR. GRAMLEY. You will note that this ratio has a secularupward trend to it. It started out in the 6 to 9 percent range in theearly 1960s and got up into the 12 to 14 percent range in the early1970s.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Showing credit inflation.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, that's part of it.MR. MORRIS. And it has been declining since 1978.MR. GRAMLEY. We don't need to roll back the world that fast.MR. PARTEE. You certainly don't want it to be 16 or 17percent.MR. GRAMLEY. No. I wouldn't suggest anything of the kind.MS. TEETERS. Lyle, may I ask what you did? Did you take the$413.3 billion in the middle column in the third set of numbers andsubtract out $145.6 billion for the federal and then on the $452.3billion did you take out $218 billion?MR. GRAMLEY. Yes. Well, from the $452 billion I took outthe staff's [projected deficit] number, which I think was $210billion, and I got a figure--I don't have the numbers--whatever 452minus 210 is. And I divided that by the GNP and got 7-1/2 percent. Ilooked at my own tables here, which I happen to have with me, tocompare that 7-1/2 percent. And when I went back, I thought: Well,in 1975 we had 6.9 percent. And then I went all the way back and hadto go back to 1961 to find any comparable ratio.MR. BALLES. You know, 1976 was 11 percent.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we don't feel extremely confidentabout all of these numbers--and Mr. Prell may be able to make somecomments on how he got to here a little more elaborately--but if weattempted to have a lot more private credit, we believe that interestrates would be a lot higher in that process and we wouldn't get theGNP because the rise in interest rates would begin to cut it back.So, this is where we came out with a consistent set of relationships.We didn't think that there was room for any more private credit withinthe monetary targets and given the government's [needs].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But to state it the other way around, youare also saying, if I understand it correctly, with this relatively-56-2/8-9/83small amount of private credit you think interest rates would declineand the GNP would rise as you projected.MR. AXILROD. Yes, [with rates] stable and maybe edging down.MR. FORD. That comes out of this chart show.MR. GRAMLEY. But let's get this causation straight. You donot put interest rates up, if you were targeting on credit aggregates,by having high credit aggregates. The reason that credit expansiondeclines is precisely because interest rates go up. We want a targethere, I think, that accommodates a sufficient expansion of credit atsomething close to prevailing interest rates. That's the way onewould have to look at it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what they say they've done.MR. GRAMLEY. I think the argument almost came out the otherway around. That is, that you could have low credit aggregatesbecause there may be sufficient restriction on the economy withpresent interest rates so that private credit demands are not going tobe strong. I say that may well be, but we may be misappraising thelevel of interest rates necessary to hold credit expansion down thislow. And I want to make sure that our credit aggregates are not thattight. It's because I'm taking these numbers seriously--and I hope weuse this number seriously--that I'm arguing this strongly. Maybewe're not going to, but maybe--MR. MORRIS. The velocity of debt in the first year ofexpansion tends to be about 2 percent. So, if you had an 11 percentrate of growth in debt in the first year of expansion you should beable to finance 13 percent nominal GNP [growth].MR. GRAMLEY. That 13 percent could be used to set themonetary aggregates very low. Typically what we have had in the earlyperiod of recovery is a marked increase in interest rates from verylow levels, which leads to economization of money and credit use. Butthat's not the situation we're in now. We're already starting fromreal interest rates that are very high and we're worried about whetheror not interest rates are going to go up enough to choke off therecovery. And one way to guarantee it is to set both monetary andcredit aggregate targets that are too low.MR. FORD. I would say the opposite. You're talking aboutlong-term rates when you're talking about capital. What we have toworry about in the marketplace, if we do some of these things--set theaggregates too high and throw in this credit aggregate with it--isthat the bond market, which seems to have flattened out and isstarting to tick up now, could take off on us and we could get theexact opposite of what you just said. I'm still trying to figure outwhere the bottom line of the paper is that the staff did. But I readone thing over and over again. In terms of comparison with moneymeasures. M1 performs as well as the best of credit measures. Look atthis chart that was given out yesterday, which shows the huge increasein velocity there. That's the same thing you guys are complainingabout--the monetary velocity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A huge decrease in velocity.2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. A decrease, yes. That's the same thing.MR. FORD. It was a dramatic change.MR. PARTEE. One does see the same effect running through allthese numbers.MR. FORD. So why add another obfuscating factor to the setof already imperfect measures? What Lyle is saying--if we were tostate it in [our targets] and then take it seriously--could beinterpreted in the money markets as saying that we are worried aboutadequately financing the federal deficit. Another way of saying whathe's saying is: Let's monetize the debt.MR. WALLICH. I think that's the right way of looking at it.The question is: How much credit expansion can the economy standwithout inflation? And the sad fact is the government limits theamount that the private sector can have. We have to recognize that bylimiting the total credit expansion.MR. FORD. And you can't say: Let's take the government partas a given and then add on and make sure there's enough there for theprivate sector, which is what I hear Lyle saying. That's another wayof saying we will monetize the debt no matter how big it is.MR. GRAMLEY. Monetizing the debt in that sense, Bill, wouldmean taking off all limits and I'm not arguing that. It's a questionof what particular numbers are appropriate, and there can bedisagreement on whether or not 8 to 11 percent or 9 to 12 percent isappropriate. Arguing that raising the limits by one percentage pointmeans monetizing the debt seems to me to be a bit extreme.MR. WALLICH. Well, we have the other targets that wouldprevent that anyway. But I think what you're saying, Lyle, is thatthe deficit really is cutting very deeply into permissible privatecredit expansion. There's no way of getting around that by sayingthat we will have more private credit expansion anyway. That wouldlet the total become excessive.MR. GRAMLEY. All I'm arguing is that we're dealing with anew ratio that none of us really knows too much about. I'm saying, inmy judgment, 8 to 11 percent is just too tight. It's as simple asthat.MR. ROBERTS. Is the question, since we can't control thismeasure, what it will turnout to be if we set the aggregates? Wedon't control this measure, do we?MR. PARTEE. If the aggregates run off [track], we may usethis to look to see whether we--MR. ROBERTS. But it's just a monitoring device.MR. PARTEE. It's more a monitoring device; I think that'sright.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It can influence one's decision.2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. We want to have the right setting if we're goingto use it as a monitor.MR. ROBERTS. When you say influence your decision, Tony, doyou mean that if it were running differently than you expected, youwould do something differently in terms of the aggregates?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let's say that we had a verydifficult decision to make. This is just one more straw on one sideor the other--whether it's running tight or running easy--that wewould look at. To some degree we also are influenced by the exchangerate and by a lot of other things. I think it would have someinfluence.MR. ROBERTS. So, it should be consistent with theaggregates, if there is any relationship.MR. MORRIS. Another way of looking at it is to look at thefirst column where you see that the highest rate in the whole periodsince 1960 was 13-1/2 percent. So that 11 percent historically is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 12-1/2 percent.MR. FORD. It was 13-1/2 percent in 1978.MR. MORRIS. 13-1/2 percent in 1978. First column.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're looking at the middle column.MR. PARTEE. That's total [debt]. You want to look atdomestic, which is the second column.MR. MORRIS. All right; then it's 12.9 percent. Therefore,it seems to me that in the first year of expansion, when businesscredit demands are not going to be all that strong, 11 percent isplenty high.MR. WALLICH. But those were years of much higher rates ofinflation, weren't they?MR. MORRIS. That's exactly why I think we don't need 12percent.MR. MARTIN. Those were also years in which the criterion ofbusiness managers for financing was leverage, leverage, leveragewithout any expectation that leverage would ever work against them.There will be some tendency to try to shift toward equity and try toreduce debt. We are leaving out the equity sector, and we know weare, for the reasons that were given in the paper.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that Mr. Morris' point lookspretty persuasive to me, Mr. Gramley. What do you say to that?MR. GRAMLEY. When you look at the 3 years we've justcompleted and see that we got away with 9-1/2 to 10 percent expansionin total credit, you say to yourself: Well, maybe that's enough.What I want you to recall is that in those 3 years we have had nogrowth in economic activity at all. None. We've had extremely high-59-2/8-9/83real interest rates. It is no surprise that debt expansion assumes avery low--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had inflation 5 percentage pointshigher on top of it.MR. GRAMLEY. This relates to nominal GNP and how fast creditgrows overall. Nominal GNP figures clearly were much higher in thelatter part of the 1970s.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was nominal GNP growth in 1980 and1981?MR. KICHLINE. Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter in '81 it was9-1/2 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. No, you need year-over-year figures for these.MR. KICHLINE. Year-over-year in '81 it was 11-1/2 percent.I don't have the number for '80.MR. AXILROD. These are sort of fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter.MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, I guess you're right. These are kind offourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think it is fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Frank, the fellow who has beenpushing this is Ben Friedman. I don't remember when I talked to himwhat his numbers were. Have you had a conversation with him?MR. MORRIS. To my knowledge, I don't think he's recommendeda target for it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have an instinct that not very manymarket people would be familiar with this and spend a lot timeanalyzing whether this is easy or tight with the exception possibly ofHenry Kaufman and Ben Friedman. I'm sure Ben will be commenting onit. I was just wondering.MR. MORRIS. But a 12 percent rate of growth will not lookvery tight to those guys.MS. TEETERS. Even more important, the way the sentence isworded is terrible.MR. PARTEE. I would like to make it 9 to 11 percent, Paul.I think that would take care of all our problems. That range isawfully wide; a 3-point range in a number as large as this is awfullybig. I think 9 to 11 percent would take care of the problem of thevery low number; Lyle looks to the bottom end of the range. The highnumber wouldn't be as high and wouldn't bother [other] people. Andfor my purpose, the midpoint would be 1/2 point more and I think thatis about what it ought to be.-60-2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. I think that's basically [unintelligible].MR. MORRIS. 9 to 11 percent.MS. TEETERS. May I suggest in addition that we change thewording of that sentence? It says: "And the associated range ofgrowth for total domestic nonfinancial debt has been establishedat...." It sounds as if we know what we're doing.MR. PARTEE. That is too serious.MS. TEETERS. We think it may be in that generalneighborhood.MR. BOEHNE. I think the word "estimated" is a good idea.MR. BALLES. "Estimated" is good, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a little odd that we have avery narrow range for the figure we don't know much about.MR. PARTEE. The difference between the high and the low endsmust be around $100 billion when it's 9 to 11 percent.MR. MORRIS. It's a more reliable number, so we don't need awide range.MS. TEETERS. Yes, but I think we should also--MR. PARTEE. The number we're talking about is around $500billion.MR. GRAMLEY. You're right. When you add one percentagepoint to the flow, you get an extra $4.8 billion. An extra $4.8billion of credit is a lot.MR. MARTIN. Let the record show.MS. TEETERS. Shouldn't we also add a sentence?MR. FORD. You sound like Everett Dirksen--a billion here, abillion there!MR. PARTEE. It adds up to [real] money after a while!MR. WALLICH. It's the percent that counts here and not thedollars.MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm talking about the dollars because alot of people look at those flow of funds numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's the total of this figure?MR. PARTEE. It's around $500 billion.MR. GRAMLEY. It was $4.8 [trillion] at the end of 1982.MR. AXILROD. $4.8 trillion is the stock.2/8-9/83MR. FORD. Think of it as 50 percent more than GNP. Right?MR. AXILROD. Ten percent of $4.8 trillion is $480 billion.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I would also like to add asentence after this.MR. FORD. How can you miss a target that's 50 percent--?MR. PARTEE. When you have a 2-point range that's a hundredbillion dollars.MS. TEETERS. I would like to add a sentence in here thatindicates that we have not bought Ben Friedman 110 percent--that we'relooking at this as something we would follow rather than use as astrict target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There already is one in there.MR. WALLICH. To give it a 2-point range when the others aremostly 3 points I think gives it a special status that will beregarded as being particularly confining when we really mean it'sparticularly loose.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. Who the heck knows whatthis figure should be, but I'm a bit bothered by a lower figure than 9percent which is where it has been running roughly. Presumably, we'redisinflating during this period. We haven't had a figure--MR. PARTEE. We haven't had a figure as low as 9 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. During the inflationaryperiod, we haven't had a figure as low as 9 percent.MR. PARTEE. We're talking about all this financing by thegovernment, which is a part of it, and we have a low end that's belowanything we've had.MR. FORD. The last time it was below 9 percent the economywas a lot healthier than it is now, gentlemen. That's what we'retrying to do, isn't it? I'm not kidding about this. That is theother way of saying it.MR. PARTEE. 1970 was the last time it was below 9 percentand that was a recession year.MR. FORD. There was accelerating inflation in that period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It got down to about 9 percent in '74 and'75 when there was more inflation than there is now.MR. WALLICH. Well, the aggregate responds very little toinflation. Otherwise, it should be 5 percentage points lower now thanit was at its peak.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's 3 or 4 percentage points.-62-2/8-9/83MR. MORRIS. It's responsive to nominal GNP, Henry, not justinflation.MR. PARTEE. The chart looks pretty good until the lastcouple of years.MR. GRAMLEY. [Unintelligible] economy from the liquidityposition of businesses and individuals. And it clearly has a verystrong secular upward trend. It always has; that went on before therewas an acceleration of inflation [unintelligible]. If you go back tothe 1950s, you'll find there was an acceleration in the growth of debtrelative to GNP.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's true. The velocityhas been unchanged for 20 years.MR. AXILROD. I think, Mr. Chairman, we have a very modestgrowth in nominal GNP here and we're getting [rising] economicactivity only because we have very low growth in prices. Our problem,we thought, was to explain why total credit growth was so small withthis kind of nominal GNP, given--MR. KICHLINE. So large.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So large.MR. AXILROD. I meant so large, pardon me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's where I start out. De novo, thequestion I have is: Why is it so large? Why is credit in the firstperiod of expansion expanding faster than nominal GNP?MR. PARTEE. Maybe because a dollar government bond doesn'thave the kick that a dollar Carter bond does.MR. AXILROD. Part of our answer was that we weren't gettingenough strength in economic activity to generate a substantial cashflow to businesses, so we weren't getting them able to finance asmuch, relatively speaking, internally. The character of thisexpansion is somewhat different from the character of earlierexpansions. It's slower. It's dominated by government.MR. CORRIGAN. That's the problem. It is totally dominatedby government. And I don't know how you can walk away from that.MR. FORD. Remember, if you don't like the crowding outargument in that we're taking the government's share as given, anotherthing that's implicit in what Lyle is arguing is that you willincrease financial leverage of corporations. Because what you'retalking about providing them adequately with is debt, which asGovernor Martin noted, has to be related to equity. And what he justsaid is that there's not going to be equity forthcoming for whateverreason. That's in the forecast. I'm not arguing with it. But thelogical conclusion is that if we put a high number on the range and ifwe make the credit available to the private sector after thegovernment gets its share, the net result will be an increase in thedebt/equity ratio of corporate America. And that ratio, if I'm notmistaken--I'd like to ask the staff--2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. You can't reach that conclusion, Bill, becauseone of the biggest sectors in here is the consumer--mortgage debt andconsumer debt.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I hate half points [in the ranges],but the arithmetic resolution of this problem would be a range of8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought of that, but it seems to methat implies some precision. I wonder if it's wise to make that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We just did, under your urging, for M3.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe we should just stop with whatwe had already set up before.MR. PARTEE. I would buy 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would like to make one suggestion.I don't feel that strongly about it, but I'd like to point out thatthere is an advantage in addition to this associated [debt] target ofleaving in our traditional associated bank credit target for tworeasons. One is that we always hit it for some strange reason, andthat's very nice to have happen. [Laughter] The other one is thatthere are a lot of people in the markets who aren't going tounderstand [the debt aggregate]. If they do, it's very--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course their argument is that we getthat [bank credit] figure on a much more up-to-date basis.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And it seems to me that there wouldbe some sense of continuity. If people see that same bank credittarget of 6 to 9 percent or whatever it is that we've had every year--and we always hit it rain or shine--they're going to tend withoutdoing any independent analysis, which will be limited to a very fewpeople, to feel reassured about the higher numbers on this broadcredit measure because they'll assume it's consistent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have the number for bank credit?MR. AXILROD. Well, the number for bank credit that falls outof this whole consistent set of data is 7.8 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's still within 6 to 9 percent;it's still the same thing.MR. MORRIS. Keep 6 to 9 percent.MR. PARTEE. It really ought to be depository credit, but wedon't have a number for that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe we wouldn't hit it that way.MR. BLACK. If we vote on these, as I've figured it, we'venow substituted all the specifications of alternative I and the rateof growth from a February-March base for M2, and we're calling italternative II.2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's correct, I guess. One could argue,however, that these are all based upon a somewhat lower GNP thaneverybody is calculating.MR. MORRIS. Furthermore, the M2 number is based on sheerspeculation on the part of the Board's staff that after the end ofMarch--MR. PARTEE. So are the other numbers.MR. MORRIS. --M2 is going to grow 8 percent.MR. BLACK. I was just thinking on the mechanics of voting.I might say I favor old M2 and you might say you favor the new M2. Iwas just pointing out that a transposition has sort of taken place,rightly or wrongly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are right. Well, what do you thinkabout this bank credit issue? We could write a sentence in heresaying that this would be consistent with a bank credit range ofto _ percent. That gets another number in there; I don't knowwhether that's good or bad. I don't mind saying that at some point.We could use it as a transitional device but not monitor it, or put itin parentheses.MR. BALLES. What advantage would there be of that, Mr.Chairman? I thought initially we were aiming at substituting abroader measure of credit than the narrow bank credit measure whichhad been affected by the degree of intermediation or disintermediationor whatever. I suspect we might be getting too many targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, it adds another number andthat's a disadvantage. I think we ought to say some place, though wedon't necessarily have to say it in [the directive]--we can say in thetext of the [policy record]--that we have this range and it waspointed out that this was the practical equivalent of the 6 to 9percent range for bank credit.MR. PARTEE. That's all right.MR. GUFFEY. I think that's attractive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we do that. Take a noteof that somebody. Why don't we go back over this and look at thelanguage, paragraph by paragraph. I had a very minor change back inthe boiler plate part. In line 20 it says "Growth of M2 surged to anextraordinary pace in January." That's certainly right. Then it says"largely reflecting...." If I understand it correctly, it's more thanlargely reflecting. It misimplies that it's only partially [thereason]. So far as we know it may be the whole [reason]. We don'tknow. I would make a big change and substitute the word "apparently"for "largely." Somebody says it's just an arithmetic thing; I guessit's what you're measuring from. In lines 12 and 13 it says "Inrecent months the advance in the index of average hourly earnings hasslowed appreciably further." I guess that depends upon precisely whatmonth you're comparing it with.2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. We could say "slowed further, but notappreciably."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't remember exactly what the numberswere. I thought the January figure was a little lower, but I justfigured--MR. GRAMLEY. If you take the period from last September toJanuary, you get a 5.3 percent rate of increase. The third quarterwas 5.5 percent, measured from June to September. There has been atiny further slowing, but not a lot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just take out the word "appreciably." Isthat okay?MR. GRAMLEY. I definitely think that would do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Does anybody else haveanything on the boiler plate part?MS. TEETERS. I do. On page 2, line 37--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not the boiler plate.MR. PARTEE. It never changes.MR. MARTIN. This is the armor plate!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That first sentence is certainly boilerplate, but I--MS. TEETERS. It was the first sentence that I had troublewith.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we are down after line 33. What doyou have, Nancy?MS. TEETERS. First of all, the word "sustainable" is usedtwice and I don't know what it means to say "a sustainable pattern ofinternational transactions."MR. PARTEE. We never did.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only virtue that it has is that wehave an unsustainable pattern. We've had it for years and we haven'tchanged the sentence.SPEAKER(?). Steve, what was the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the question is whether we want tochange something--this particular sentence--which has in fact beenboiler plate. I raised the same question. Actually, it may be morerelevant now than it was before in terms of the exchange rate. Iwould be inclined to leave it. But nobody's going to notice itbecause it has been there forever.2/8-9/83MR. WALLICH. It's very hard to say anything about thebalance of payments; still, something should be said. And then we'llin effect have to say something about the dollar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anything else in that firstparagraph? Anything down to line 49?MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, in line 44, I would prefer to putthe lower market rates of interest after declining inflation becauseit sounds as if the declining inflation is what is causing the lowermarket rates of interest. It would read then, starting at line 43,"...and that the availability of interest on large proportions oftransactions accounts, declining inflation, and lower market rates ofinterest...."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything else in that first paragraph?Let me go to the next paragraph, which is bracketed. It seems to methat that ought to stay in, but I wonder whether we shouldn't reversethis somehow. I don't have any [precise] language, but something like"In establishing growth ranges for the aggregates for 1983 theCommittee felt that M2 might be more appropriately measured after theperiod of highly aggressive marketing of money market instruments hasbeen completed. The Committee also felt that a somewhat wider rangeis appropriate for Ml." We need some language in there, I think, tomake that range sound a little more tentative, consistent with therest of it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. "For monitoring Ml."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that would be all right with me.And that would be explained a little later, if that's--MR. WALLICH. I think we ought to say something here toindicate that these ranges are more uncertain than in the past sincewe haven't quite said that except for Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it says that right now. That's thelast sentence. I think the whole thing conveys that. The firstparagraph says something about that and then this paragraph concludeswith it. I'd make it "Those growth ranges will be reviewed in thespring and altered, if appropriate, in the light of evidence" etc.Then what this is saying--let me just be clear--is that we may look atM2 [after] we see what happens in February and March and see whetherwe like that as a base or whether it [should be] changed. And we'llsee whether we have any stronger feeling about M1 at that time, whichis before the normal period [for our review of the ranges]. Okay?MR. AXILROD. Did you want the narrowing to apply to the M2range as well?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.MR. MARTIN. Altered.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we're changing the word "narrowed" to"altered."-67-2/8-9/83MR. KEEHN. Maybe it's a minor point, but in lines 53 and 54we use the phrase "after the period of highly aggressive marketing of[money market deposit accounts] has been completed." We are implyingthat by using February and March as the base that the aggressivemarketing will be over then. I'm not sure we can say that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We could say] "subsided." It dependsupon what one means by "highly."MR. KEEHN. I'd give it a more temporary--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The distinction is between highly and notso highly.MR. PARTEE. "Subsided" is a lot better word.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Subsided" is all right.MR. KEEHN. Yes.MS. TEETERS. Should we add "hopefully"?SPEAKER(?). Perhaps.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We just talked about the tentative numbersfor the next paragraph. I think Governor Martin raised some questionabout how M1 is stated. Let me suggest this. It would read as it isexcept for putting an "and" after M2 and before M3. "For the periodfrom February-March to the fourth quarter a range of 7 to 10 percent...taking into account the probability of some residual shifting...."Well, there's a question right there. Do we attempt to quantify thatresidual shifting? I would say we ought to quantify it very roughlyin the earlier discussion [in the policy record], but we don't have todo it here. Then just make it "and for the period from the fourthquarter of 1982 to the fourth quarter of 1983, M3, which appears to beless distorted by the new accounts...." And then say something like"A tentative range of 4 to 8 percent"--if that's what we have--"hasbeen established for M1 assuming Super NOW accounts are not vigorouslypursued and that the [proposal before the DIDC for] business demanddeposits isn't adopted."MR. PARTEE. Is not adopted?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is not adopted. It's not "business demanddeposits," but put in whatever the right language is.MS. HORN. The implication of that is that Ml is receivingsubstantially less weight than M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We say that specifically in the nextparagraph, I think. It comes up again in the next paragraph.MS. HORN. You'd like me to wait until discussion of that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can't determine this paragraphindependently of the next one; I think it does have that implication.So, whether or not you like the language in the next paragraph, it'sdesigned to make it consistent with the next paragraph.-68-2/8-9/83MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, that language about the SuperNOWs--if it says we assume nothing happens on that--may compromiseyour position at the moment with the DIDC. Does it bother you at all?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd just say that we had to make someassumption one way or the other.MR. GRAMLEY. But you used the wording that this range makesno allowance for any marketing of Super NOWs for businesses. It wouldbe a little difficult--MR. PARTEE. Not marketing. It's the possibility of them.MR. GRAMLEY. The range makes no allowance for that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't mean to give definitelanguage. I haven't any language here, but I don't mean to make itread as though that decision is prejudiced; it's just a factualstatement of what our assumption was in establishing this range. Wecan accomplish that.MR. PARTEE. We have to be a little careful, I think, withthe phrase we have about Super NOWs too. Of course, they're beingmarketed now to households.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't any language written down.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe "assume no unusual..."MR. PARTEE. Yes, some institutions would say they're pushingthem pretty heavily.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we say "assuming Super NOWaccounts do not draw a substantial amount of funds from outside of MI"or "draw only modest amounts of money from outside of Ml." And Ithink we could say "assuming that interest payment on transactionsaccounts is not extended beyond the present eligibility."MR. PARTEE. Or "extended to corporations and otherbusinesses" or something like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either "corporations or other businesses"or "beyond the present eligibility." It's just meant to be a factualstatement of what our assumption was in establishing a range.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What will you answer if some memberof the [Congressional] Committee said: Does that mean then that inthe DIDC you are going to oppose the extension to corporations?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just means that's the assumption thatwe made.MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I probably will say yes, anyway, but thathas nothing to do with this.-69-2/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I do believe the comment [on the DIDC proposal]has run pretty much close to this, hasn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure, but that's my impression. Ihaven't looked at it myself.MR. CORRIGAN. On the following paragraph that deals with thequestion of emphasis on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not quite to the following paragraphyet until I make sure there are no more comments on this one.MS. TEETERS. Should the range of bank credit go with this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think we agreed to put that in the[policy record] text earlier, not here. It will go in the summary ofthe discussion or whatever we call it but--MR. PARTEE. It's not a specified target.MR. AXILROD. In the summary we could indicate what the totalcredit would be of which we think bank credit would be about so much.That would take care of it.MR. BOYKIN. The only question I would raise as far asnumerical sequencing is: Why not address the Ml situation up front--address it first? I realize it's being downplayed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the reason. Again, I thinkthat is dependent upon what we say in the next paragraph. I justthink it's better this way if it has a little less emphasis preciselybecause it does have less emphasis.MR. BOYKIN. I guess my basic problem is that I wonder if Iwould give it quite that much less emphasis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's going to come up in the nextparagraph. Let's turn to the next paragraph, which starts out bysaying "[In implementing monetary policy,] the Committee agreed thatsubstantial weight would be placed on behavior of the broaderaggregates."MR. CORRIGAN. I do have a bit of a problem in terms of thisquestion of emphasis on Ml. As I look at it, we're talking abouttargets in general that at least strike me as being toward the highside in a context in which there's at least a 50-50 chance that we aregoing to get some recovery, if not a fairly robust recovery, invelocity. Now, if we find ourselves in that situation, M1 with allits imperfections and everything else is really the only device touse, in terms of the way we run monetary policy, to be able to snugup. That may develop out in the year some time, but I--MR. PARTEE. But, Jerry, that's a pretty good sentence thereat the top of page 4.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do you say that? I don't understand.2/8-9/83MR. CORRIGAN. Why do I say it? I guess I have at least adegree of concern that we could run into a problem on the up side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but why is that only going to bereflected in M1 and not the other Ms?MR. CORRIGAN. Well, in terms of open market operations, thefact of the matter is that--take the extreme case where it's not evena question of emphasis but we have nothing there on M1--as a practicalmatter our ability to react in a reasonably effective way to what ishappening with M2 or M3 or credit or whatever is limited.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand that. If they'rerunning high, we tighten up.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, let me see if I may help on thispoint. We would lose the automatic adjustment mechanism to a largedegree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Less automatic--MR. BLACK. The Committee sets the initial borrowing targetand after that all the Committee has is the automatic part because wedon't participate in any ad hoc adjustments. I sure would like tohave that automatic part fairly strong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's less automatic; I agree withthat. I think the Committee does participate; it's less automatic butit's there. If we want to use it, it's there.MS. HORN. Jerry's point that we're going to need M1 later onfor the upside possibility is one that I agree with. And it seems tome that while we have uncertainty about economic activity and themacro outlook, one of the things we could do as a Committee is saythat we will react to M1 going above the target. We will react lessquickly than we did historically; historically we tried to get it backin [its range] over a 10- to 12-week period between discount rates andreserve movements. We could say we will react less quickly as aCommittee. I'd like to see Ml receive more emphasis than thisdirective puts upon it.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we're talking about long-range targetsfor the moment. And if Jerry's problem becomes a real one, the way wecan deal with that is in the short-run directive in May or June orDecember or whenever the date is by providing more weight to M1because then we'd get the more automatic response. So long as wehaven't thrown it out, as I suspect [we may have], we're all right.MR. BOYKIN. But the fact that we are talking long term iswhy it seems to me that just the sequencing of it gives a little moreweight to [its deemphasis]. I'm not arguing about the qualifyinglanguage but since we are looking out for a year, if what Jerry saysdoes materialize, it seems more logical to be consistent and addressMl, M2, and M3 as we traditionally have. I think it would leave theimpression at least that M1 is not as abandoned as it apparently isright now.-71-2/8-9/83MR. BOEHNE. I think you have to look at where we've comefrom, though. We have deemphasized Ml, in fact, in recent months.And while we may feel a little better about putting M1 back in amonitoring sense, what really has happened over the last 6 weeks thatwould make us jump from essentially not using it at all to putting itback up there?MR. BOYKIN. I'm not arguing for jumping that far; I'm justarguing for acknowledging that there is such a thing now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to put a little balance on thisdiscussion in that direction, my concern about that sentence on thetop of page 4 was that it was too strong. I'd ease it slightly andsay "While the behavior of M1 will be monitored, the weight placed onthat aggregate over time will be dependent on evidence."MR. FORD. What kind of evidence may I ask, Paul? Remember,if you go back not 6 weeks but back to last fall when we were arguingabout M1 in a discussion like this, we were saying that we wereworried about what would happen when the all savers [certificates]matured and we were worried about what would happen with MMDAs. Butwe had double-digit growth of M1 before October and after October,CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My answer to that is that there's noquestion M1 is running high relative to targets. We can make thesetechnical adjustments, but it's running high when you look at thatwhole period. But the relationship between Ml and the economy I don'tthink has settled down, to say the least. And my problem is that Idon't know how soon I would have the intestinal fortitude, if that'sthe right term, to say that I have any conviction on what the velocityis of M1. I'm not [just] assuming that it's distorted by thesetechnical things. If we had an undistorted Ml figure, I'd say: Okay,it's undistorted, but what its relationship is to the economy, I don'tknow at this point.MR. FORD. But what Jerry is saying is: Why should we startout by assuming anything except that velocity is going to make acomeback? And the weaker language we put in now will probably be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The target assumes velocity is going tomake a comeback and I assume it's going to make a comeback, rightly orwrongly, to some degree. But on the question of whether the velocityis going to be 1 percent up or 5 percent or 6 percent up, I will tellyou I'm a complete nihilist. That's my problem.MR. FORD. All I'd say, along the lines of what Jerry thinks,is that the farther we let this horse out of the corral, the harderit's going to be to jump back on it when we think we need it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suffer from the disability--I'm sorry--of not understanding Jerry's point in the first place. I don't wantto jump back on it if I don't have any confidence in the darn thing.MR. CORRIGAN. Let me try to make the point a littledifferently, then. I am thinking out perhaps well into 1983. I'm notworried right now and I probably won't be worried for at least anumber of months. But I could be worried come the summer or sometimewhen I see the velocity rising 4 or 5 percent and we're at the top of-72-2/8-9/83the M1 range. We'd have a mess on our hands at that point to suddenlybe in a position where we have to reemphasize Ml because we want to beable to live with the automatic mechanism in a more direct way. Ithink that is a very difficult position.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You would agree, though, that bydefinition if we went back to that situation of giving it that muchemphasis, we would then have more confidence that velocity was tellingus something.MR. PARTEE. I think that's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, therefore, one would handle itthe way Lyle Gramley suggested: that if that situation does arise,then it's perfectly consistent with this. Right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have two parts to yourstatement. The first part I understand--that it's running high and byimplication nominal GNP is running very high and you want to tightenup. I think that's separable from the automaticity issue where youjust say Ml is running high, let's tighten up.MR. CORRIGAN. My question is that I'm not sure the extent towhich, in fact, it might be separable. That's what I worry about.MR. PARTEE. I guess I'm somewhat sympathetic with that too.I think this is tending rapidly to become an argument between thosewho like M1 and those who like money market conditions.MR. CORRIGAN. Actually, I don't like Ml.MR. PARTEE I would have thought that we might say here "Someweight will be given also to Ml, depending on the performance ofvelocity"--that is, velocity coming back. It's a shading.MR. GRAMLEY. Is this simply added weight? If we're settingany kind of target for Ml at all, we presumably are putting somethingother than zero [weight on it].MR. PARTEE. Well, this doesn't say; it just says it will bemonitored.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because it says now "monitored closely,"you see.MR. PARTEE. Some weight, with the amount depending on theextent to which it resumes a predictable velocity relationship. Thatway, you see, we'd be in a position as velocity comes up to give itmore weight. We would have positioned ourselves for it.MR. CORRIGAN. That's the point I was trying to make. Youjust made it much better than I did.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know where we are. I'm abit bothered by the word "closely." That's my only problem.MR. MARTIN. Yes, let's delete "closely."-73-2/8-9/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it helps any, but ifyou want to get your point in, instead of saying some weight we couldsay "with the degree of weight placed on that aggregate over timebeing dependent on...." Is that all right?MR. CORRIGAN. That helps me.MR. PARTEE. It's the kind of thing we can more easily changeand give more weight to it as time goes on.MR. GRAMLEY. We could monitor it "carefully" instead of"closely," Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's just monitor it.MR. MARTIN. Well, we do everything carefully.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have it now reading: "The behavior ofMl will be monitored, with the degree of weight...." Now to thiscredit flow issue. We're on that sentence.MR. BALLES. The more I listen to this discussion the more Iwonder whether we are on the wrong foot here. Is it really the degreeof weight that we want to emphasize or is it the appropriate range ofgrowth that would be the thing to concentrate on?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would argue that appropriate growth,which is obviously relevant here, is covered in this other sentencethat says we're going to look at that again anyway. I think they aretwo different points and I guess it's just a question of where wediscuss the two different points.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The [appropriate] range of growth isgoing to depend on what velocity is.MR. BALLES. Well, that's right; the two are opposite sidesof the same coin in a way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They both are relevant. My sense, as amatter of drafting, is that this paragraph is directed explicitly tothe degree of weight. In the paragraphs before we said we are goingto have to look at it again in terms of the range.MR. BALLES(?). True.MR. PARTEE. Just in the interest of being clear with mysuggestion--since you didn't adopt it, maybe you didn't understand it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other possibility is that I didn'tlike it!MR. PARTEE. Well, that's possible. I assume this is ademocratic matter and, therefore, let me be clear. I would say "Someweight will be given to the behavior of M1 also, with the degree ofemphasis dependent on the extent to which that aggregate over timeshows velocity characteristics resuming more predictable patterns."2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will tell you why I don't like it.[Unintelligible] is that I think right away the market is going tosay: What's going on with M1 beginning right now in February? Andit's going to put us in a box; they're going to be looking at thoseweekly figures very closely.MR. MORRIS. That is precisely the danger.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's a real danger. Oh, they lovethose numbers, that action!MR. MARTIN. The Reuters tape on Friday afternoon--MR. ROBERTS. Well, you can't assume that's irrationaleither, if the marketplace judges it to be important. I think themarket is concerned currently about the rate of expansion in the moneystock.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, if we return to the kind ofweekly volatility that we had before, it would seriously impede therecovery. And I don't think it adds anything to our anti-inflationaryposture to have that kind of weekly volatility.MR. ROBERTS. No, but I think we should stay hinged to a rateof growth in Ml, and we've done that. And the assumption, as Iunderstand it, is a resumption of normal velocity. I don't seeanything wrong with that. I think this wording looks all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I see anything wrong with itin the future, which is what I think this wording conveys. I don'tlike the implication that in the next few months we're going to be atthat mercy.MR. GUFFEY. Does what you just said imply that if velocityreturns to some normal pattern based upon historical experience, we'llgo back to targeting Ml as the single aggregate as we did at some timeearlier?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't foreclose that. It doesn't saywe're going to target it as the single aggregate; I don't think weever did.MR. GUFFEY. Primary is right. I think I would opposegetting back--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We say that, but I'm not even sure howtrue that is. Look at 1981. M1 was running low and we said: Well,let it run low because the other aggregates are running high. That'sexplicitly what we said.MR. GUFFEY. We were also working against inflation then andwere all willing to see Ml run low to try to achieve lower prices.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was certainly a factor in it, butthat's not what we said.-75-2/8-9/83MR. GUFFEY. My point is that if this is taken to mean thatif the one condition is met--that velocity returns to some normalpattern--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A predictable pattern.MR. GUFFEY. --a predictable or historical pattern--then Mlassumes some importance, as I think it did before, then I think someadditional language might be appropriate. In fact, I rather likeChuck's language of emphasis rather than characterizing it as is donehere in this sentence.MR. MORRIS. My only problem with it, Mr. Chairman, is that Idon't see that we have a basis for differentiating Ml and M2. Thatis, M2's velocity is certainly as unreliable in this situation asMl's.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question. I just don't know.I guess we're saying the opposite.MR. GRAMLEY. All we need is a sentence here that keeps ouroptions open. I think we're arguing much too hard about details ofthe language. We want to keep the options open.MR. BOEHNE. What about an approach something like this:"The behavior of Ml will be monitored closely. Should evidence[emerge] that velocity characteristics are resuming more predictablepatterns, the Committee will reopen the issue of the weight that itwill place on Ml." I'd suggest something like that, which pushes tosome future point a discussion of where Ml fits, depending on what theevidence is. I think that connotes the idea that it's not being givena whole lot of weight in the very current period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any particular problem withwhat you're proposing. It seems to me it is virtually identical towhat we have here. I would, frankly, take out the word "closely,"which I think maybe confuses the issue at the moment. But insubstance what you said is the same as what this sentence says. It'sa drafting preference.MR. BOEHNE. I think, though, that my approach does give acoloration to it that the Committee is keeping open the whole issue ofthe weight that it's going to give to Ml. This [wording] gives anautomaticity to it that if certain preconceived conditions arise, thenthe Committee will automatically go back to Ml. My wording pushesthat decision into the future, should that evidence exist.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You interpret it as a diminution of Ml atthe moment.SPEAKER(?). Postpone it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have a clear split here betweenthose who want to imply a stronger possibility of a return both to anemphasis on Ml and a greater degree of automaticity and others whosimply want to be neutral about keeping the options open. I guessthat's what the argument is about. I tend to agree with the secondview. And I had thought that was the thrust of the consensus view-76-2/8-9/83generally--that we don't want to imply to the market that we are beingextremely sensitive and that there is a near-term probability. I dowant to be neutral on Ml. The big question in the market is: Howlong is the Fed going to continue its current approach to monetarypolicy as opposed to at what point do they [return] to some moreautomatic emphasis on Ml? It seems to me that in the face of that, weought to be carefully neutral.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I interpret it, the sentence asmodified by Mr. Partee suggested a stronger Ml and I guess Mr. Boehneinterprets his suggestions as being weaker on Ml. And what we have isin the middle. So, I guess I'm left in the middle. If I don't hearviolent objections, I'm left with the question of whether the word"closely" is in or out.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would hope it would not be in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would [too].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I happen to agree, as I said earlier.I just think that the market is extremely sensitive to the question ofwhether we are leaning back toward Ml again.MR. PARTEE. If we don't put it in, it sounds as if we'repaying about the same amount of attention to M1 as we are to the totalcredit flow. We are also saying that we are monitoring that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We can say "carefully," though.MR. PARTEE. Carefully, as opposed to our usual sloppy--?MR. FORD. You can intentionally monitor your speedometerwhile going 85.MR. GRAMLEY. You can even monitor it while--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. We have all the options.We can not look at the speedometer, we can look at it, or we can lookat it very closely or we can look at it carefully.MR. WALLICH. No, I think this states that--MR. FORD. The question is where you put your foot!MR. WALLICH. Where we ought to be guided in choosing theseoptions is that for a while we'd just be looking at it and it may bevery high. It can't go on very high indefinitely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the word "monitored" assumes thatif you look at the speedometer you pay some attention to it now andthen. It's just the degree of attention you want to pay to it.MR. FORD. It depends on whether it's a governor on themotor.MR. WALLICH. Yes, the degree changes over time.2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the issue is whether"closely" is in there. We can substitute "carefully." How many want"closely" in there?MR. MORRIS. I would suggest "casually."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I interpret that as a vote against"closely." Who wants "closely" out? You want it out.MR. MORRIS. I don't have a vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, everybody will vote in this general[poll]. Who wants "closely" in? I guess we have a majority to takeit out, but that was not the most overwhelming vote I ever saw!MR. BLACK. Could we say that some members will monitor itfervently?SPEAKER(?). Closely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's go on to credit flows for themoment.MR. CORRIGAN. Is the word "degree" in that sentence or not?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I assume that we're using "degreeof."MR. CORRIGAN. "With the degree of weight," okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That implies, I guess, some weight rightfrom the beginning. Well, I now have it without the "closely" butwith "the degree of" in there. On credit flows, this question hasarisen before, and here is the sentence that's supposed to answer thequestion: "Credit flows, while not directly targeted, will beevaluated in judging responses to the monetary aggregates." That'sone of the more declarative sentences, I think.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's nice and straightforward.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comment on that sentence?MR. BLACK. Shouldn't we spend a couple of hours discussingwhether [evaluated] carefully or not so carefully?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Last sentence.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we ought to leave in what isbracketed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If what is bracketed is left in, just inthe interest of clarity, it ought to say "including evaluation ofconditions in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We are doing that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to leave that? I think we aredoing it now. Is that the consensus?2/8-9/83MR. MARTIN. It would be incomplete without it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that completes the long-term ranges.Let me go back after all this discussion [to the numbers]. We put intentatively: 7 to 10 percent for M2, with a February-March base; 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M3; 4 to 8 percent for Ml, with a note at theend of that. I take it we're using "estimated" instead of"established" for the 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent range for credit. Andin the text of the discussion [in the policy record] that will berationalized with the present range for bank credit. And that does,as a matter of fact, correspond pretty much--maybe exactly--toalternative I. I note again that most of you at this point have aslightly higher GNP [forecast], nominal and real, than the staffestimated in establishing the alternative II ranges. Unless anybodyhas a further question, we ought to vote.MR. WALLICH. I find confusing the reference to credit flows.Is that specifically what we mention as total--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are you?MR. MARTIN. Page 4.MR. WALLICH. It's on page 4. We have "Credit flows, whilenot directly targeted, will be evaluated." Are these credit flows thetotal domestic nonfinancial debt? If so, then I think we ought torepeat that because the way it is stated in the earlier paragraph, itlooks like a quasi-target. And here we are saying we are nottargeting it directly.MR. GRAMLEY. But we use "associated range of growth" on theprevious page. I think it's just a reiteration, making clear thatthis--MR. WALLICH. But the distinction is that "associated range"is the same as "not directly targeting."MR. PARTEE. You would like to use the same title.MR. WALLICH. Yes. It's only known to this group.MR. BALLES. There's a different problem too. On page 3 wetalk about total domestic nonfinancial debt and on page 4 we talkabout credit flows. We know that we mean the same thing; I wonder ifreaders will.MR. WALLICH. Exactly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't really care, but I don't know whenthose data come in. Presumably, we'd be looking at credit flowsagainst the background of that range; we get some clues without havingthat precise number [for total domestic nonfinancial debt] in front ofus. It sounds awfully technical to me to repeat total domesticnonfinancial debt. But if that's what you want to put in, I'mperfectly happy to put it in.MR. WALLICH. That leads to this---79-2/8-9/83MS. TEETERS. Why don't we put "credit flows" as the title?MR. BALLES. We could just call it "debt expansion."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Debt expansion." That's fine.MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's closer.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Rather than getting all that technicalabout it, "debt expansion" is fine. If there are no other comments, Iguess we can vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black NoPresident Ford NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn NoGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoFour against.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, we will go to the immediate[policy]. I don't know whether we need any more discussion from Mr.Axilrod at this point or whether we need a coffee break.SPEAKER(?). Yes, I think so.SPEAKER(?). [I need] a lot of that coffee, Mr. Chairman!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we have a brief coffee break.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We live in a wonderful world where settingshort-term targets is affected by the last figure we have. We live ina world in which we've just changed all the seasonals and patterns andall the rest. As a preliminary, Mr. Axilrod ought to discuss withoutthe latest numbers, which we'll tell you about in a minute, what allthese revisions did to last year's numbers and [this year's numbers]to date.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the benchmark revisions, whichwere put in the appendix to the Bluebook, lowered the growth in M2from 9.8 to 9.2 percent, largely because of the exclusion of IRA/Keoghaccounts for the year; they had no effect on Ml, which grew at about8-1/2 percent, and reduced M3 growth for the year as you see from 10.3to 10.1 percent. However, for M1 within the year there were verysharp changes in the seasonal pattern, which changed the months andquarters to a substantial degree. The growth for Q4, which on the oldseasonal pattern had been 16.1 percent, changed to 13.2 percent. TheJanuary growth for Ml was reduced to 9-1/2 percent from the higher2/8-9/83number, 12-1/2 percent, that it had been before the seasonal revision.These changes in the seasonal pattern were reflected also in theweekly data. You may remember that the last week published, the weekof the 26th [of January], showed an increase of $2.7 billion for Ml.Now it has a decrease of $2.6 billion but the preliminary data we haveshow substantial increases thereafter for the weeks of February 2ndand February 9th, suggesting that we're on track toward a higher M1 inFebruary whereas we had revised down the January growth by 3 pointsand thought it would continue at the lower growth rate. The data forearly February on the revised benchmarks and seasonals suggest thatwe're on a higher track for February than the estimate of around 6percent we had in the Bluebook. I don't have additional data.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are several points. The growth inM1 in the last quarter of last year has been revised substantiallydown. It's still high, but instead of 16 percent it's 12-1/2 percent.MR. AXILROD. 13 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's something like that, if I remember.January, with the radical revision of data for the week of the 26th,which may or may not be right, is now less than 10 percent instead ofover 10 percent.MR. AXILROD. 9-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you show, [if] one can believe it,that the radical revision is promptly offset the following week, whichgoes into February, with a further increase the following week of somesubstantial size. That now makes February look higher than January.The data are subject to equally radical changes in the rest ofFebruary. What to make out of all of this, I don't know.MR. AXILROD. It makes it difficult, Mr. Chairman, on theface of it to think that Ml is going to slow substantially in Februaryand March on average from January.MS. TEETERS. Do you have a revised M2 for January, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Not at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we return to what we want to do.When do we meet again?MR. BERNARD. The end of March--March 29th.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. March 29th. A period of--MR. MARTIN. Close to seven weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Seven weeks exactly. I don't quite knowwhat numbers to put in here. And the question is whether we need anynumbers.MR. WALLICH. I would agree with that.2/8-9/83MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, maybe Steve could explain to ushow he intends to operate. It might help us decide what kind ofnumbers we put in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how he intends to operate dependsupon what we decide here.MR. PARTEE. Bring in borrowings.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Basically, thinking back to theamendment we adopted at the last conference call, we talked aboutseeking to maintain existing reserve conditions and not increasing therestraint. That comes closest to what we are really doing, assumingthat we continue with the $200 million borrowing assumption. If itwere our judgment that we wanted to press toward some more easing, weshould adopt something lower, say, $100 or $150 million. If we wantto defer that easing, okay, we can defer it. But it seems to me thatthe operation is best summed up either in the first sentence of theparagraph the way it is now or we could go back to the languageadopted in the amendment in the last conference call.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without numbers, you're saying?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have a very mixed feeling about thenumbers. I realize that we really can't drop the number for M2 andleave one in for Ml and M3 without confusing people; they'll think weare paying more attention to M1 and M3 than we are. So, I suppose wereally either have to drop them all or leave them in. But we have tomake clear that they will not govern and won't override what isbasically an intention to continue with the existing degree ofrestraint or, if the aggregates slow down sufficiently, to ease. So,even though I realize that the word "contemplated" that has been putin achieves in a certain sense what I'm talking about, I'm not surethat "contemplated" is quite the right verb. Perhaps "were expected"or [unintelligible] "experienced"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just put on the table analternate proposal for the first sentence and at least explore what wewant to do in substance. Suppose we just say "For the more immediatefuture, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of reserverestraint expecting that that will be consistent with some slowing ofthe aggregates." If we want to go further and consider what would bevery nice if it happens, "Lesser restraint would be acceptable in thecontext of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates." Itleaves open the question of how we quantify this or whether wequantify it at all in the directive. I think what that says is thatwe don't want to tighten up in this next seven-week period as we seeit now and we don't want to ease up unless the aggregates turn in afavorable direction. I would make that view fairly explicit. We canput in the numbers or not put in the numbers, I guess.MR. PARTEE. What was the alternative you suggested? Iunderstood the first thing and then you suggested something else thatI didn't quite understand.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other thing is not an alternative; itjust takes care of another possibility--a further [action] not fortoday. The first one says we will maintain the existing degree of2/8-9/83reserve restraint; the second one says lesser restraint would beacceptable in the context of appreciable slowing of growth in theaggregates. That would not be for today but if the aggregates came inlow in the next three or four weeks, we would ease.MR. PARTEE. Your first sentence was "[existing degree of]reserve restraint expecting that this will..."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Expecting; that's not promising, butexpecting. Just to be clear, I think the second part would reflect aview that right now we don't want to tighten, which is implied by theexisting language but is not quite as clear. If we're putting in bothsentences, it says we don't want to tighten right now but we docontemplate easing if the aggregates are noticeably, or quite visibly,soft.MR. ROBERTS. Is that soft relative to those earlier targets?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to decide whether to put inthe numbers.MR. PARTEE. What is soft?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is soft?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, M2 is bound to be slower.MR. PARTEE. It'll drop from 30 percent to some lower number.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible] flows, yes.MR. PARTEE. We certainly do want to be concerned about thepossibility of a relapse. That was mentioned a couple of timesyesterday, by Lyle and I think by you, Paul. And I agreed that it'sconceivable that after this goes on for a month or two there could bea relapse in the economy. And we want to guard against that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the probabilities are that we arebeginning a recovery. But I would not discount at all the [other]possibility; the atmosphere changed radically from the last time wemet. If something so simple as car sales were to come in at between5-1/2 to 6 million, the third consecutive month of decline, andsuddenly production schedules are no longer increased in theautomobile industry but decreased, and housing doesn't do much more inthe next month, people's moods will change rather sharply, I suspect.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would opt for the second sentencein addition to the first. I think it makes our intention clear. Andthen we leave open the degree of appreciable slowing and how weinterpret that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments? There must be somecomments. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I'm not sure I understand what you've doneto this language. If we retain the language consistent with thecurrent degree of restraint, that suggests that there isn't anyflexibility for easing and achieving a discount rate decrease, for-83-2/8-9/83example, because we would provide reserves in such a way as tomaintain the current interest rate levels unless we saw the aggregatescoming in much, much slower or at least slower than now. That seemsto me in the period ahead to be somewhat unlikely to any appreciableextent. I come out on the side of wanting to ensure recovery andthus, although [a discount rate action] is the Board's prerogative,wanting to see some additional downward movement in short-term ratesto ensure that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, look: I think the issue shouldbe clear. The alternative language that I propose says, I think, whatyou said it says. It says that we will maintain the existing degreeof restraint unless the aggregates come in lower in some sense than wenow expect. And that doesn't give room, probably, for a discount ratecut to the extent that that's [not] consistent. If I understand youcorrectly, you're saying this is a little tighter than you would liketo see it.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, indeed it is. I'd like to see languagethat would permit us, without regard to what the aggregates do, insome period ahead when a window comes open again to move rates to asomewhat lower level, whether it be 50 basis points--. It doesn'tsound like much, but it has a psychological impact.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say regardless of what the aggregatesdo. You are in effect saying, if I understand you correctly, thatwhat we ought to say in this first sentence is that we will easereserve pressures a bit right now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or leave open the possibility.MR. GUFFEY. Leave open the possibility; that's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leave it open on the basis of whatcriteria? How does it differ from doing it--MR. PARTEE. Well, we've left it open in Paul's language--that is, if we get weak aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we get weak aggregates, it is leftopen, but I think really what Roger is saying is do it now.MR. PARTEE. I would want to communicate my position as notagreeing with that.MR. GUFFEY. It seems the only thing that we can control atthe moment is interest rates. Our biggest objective, as far as I'mconcerned, is to ensure a recovery. And if we're all hung up onwaiting for the aggregates to show us some diminution in their growth,then we've given up the only thing we can do to aid the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a clear point of view.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then the implication, Roger, is thatyou wouldn't put in numbers.MR. GUFFEY. I think that's correct. And I'd maybe not putany language in that suggests that we'll continue this restraint until2/8-9/83we see the aggregates growing at some lower rate, because that alsowould--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, yes, I think you're forced to that.Just to be clear: I'm not arguing for or against it at this point. Ithink you have to put in some language that says we would seek toreduce--or I suppose you could live with this language if the discountrate is reduced, which isn't your decision.MR. BLACK. [Unintelligible] true, but it's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think technically in the firstsentence or two it could be maintain the reserve restraint but we'd doit with a lower discount rate. We would just go ahead and reduce thediscount rate on some bright day. I think that would satisfy Roger'sposition, as I understand it.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, I think that's right.MR. WALLICH. I think it would take a real collapse of thegrowth rate of the aggregates to justify reducing interest rates underpresent conditions. That could happen; we shouldn't preclude it. Butif the aggregates remain half-way strong and the economy expandsmoderately, I don't think that's the time to reduce interest rates.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I wouldn't go quite as far as Roger,myself. But what we might do is to say that lesser restraint would beappropriate if justified by monetary, credit, and other conditions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In fact, what we could say is that lesserrestraint would be acceptable in the context of appreciable slowing inthe growth of the aggregates or signs of more business weakness, orwords to that effect.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we have to be thatexplicitly honest. All we're trying to do is not lock ourselves in ornot close the door to the possibility that we might want to cut ratesin some way or other even if the monetary aggregates were notappreciably slowing.MR. GUFFEY. I would go one step further and suggest that wedo want to cut the rates without regard to the aggregates because wehave no control over those. Our focus should be on the economy andthe recovery. I, at least, would have cut the discount rate two tothree weeks ago. But the Board didn't.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The only thing I disagree with hereis that I think we can't make too sharp a break. If we get tooexplicit in disregarding the monetary aggregates, I think it's goingto cause adverse market reactions.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I understand that point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And, therefore, I think we ought tobe a little more generalized in our language.MR. GRAMLEY. I certainly agree with Roger's objective thatwe want to ensure a recovery. But I would argue that 50 basis points-85-2/8-9/83on short-term interest rates is not going to do the job. If we don'thave interest rates low enough now to provide reasonable assurance ofa recovery, then let's forget about 50 basis points on short-terminterest rates and knock them down 200 basis points; I would agreewith trying to go to a 50 basis point reduction only if that were afirst step in a substantial further easing of interest rates. Andfrankly, I don't think that's necessary. The best thing we can do nowis to provide some assurance that interest rates are not going torocket upward. To provide a signal that we're going to knock themdown now and then maybe knock them up again a week from now is goingto shake markets much worse than leaving them where they are.MR. BOEHNE. I have a lot of sympathy for what Roger issaying. I think the recovery is at a very fragile point. I don'tthink it's a fact yet, though we probably will have one. Butexpectations about what is going to happen are very important. Andwhile there may be some risks of a perverse reaction in long-term bondmarkets, I think the business community needs a bit of assurance, aray of hope, a signal, that interest rates certainly are not going togo higher. A little tilt downward at this point, including a discountrate [cut], would provide that signal. I don't think that necessarilymeans a commitment to go 200 basis points further. This recovery isat a very critical stage in terms of psychology in the businesscommunity, and the consumer community needs a little psychologicallift. I think a tilt toward ease would serve that need very nicely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me put the question more modestly thanthat, without disregarding that question. Do we want, in effect, toforeclose a tightening in the coming weeks?SEVERAL. Yes.MR. PARTEE. For the next seven weeks, yes, I would.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that the general feeling? If we knowthat much, we know quite a lot. If we want to do that, I'm inclinedto think some variant of this alternative language I suggested, whichsays that fairly plainly, is probably right. That leaves open thequestion of whether we want to go further, but it says that much atthe minimum. So, if I judge you correctly, that's agreed. Now wehave this Roger Guffey-Ed Boehne kind of approach. Let's have morediscussion.MR. ROBERTS. I think that's just dead wrong, Mr. Chairman,because if we just control interest rates without consideration of theaggregates, the markets will take over in terms of expectations--Ithink it's already happening in the long market--and raise interestrates and that will be self-defeating and abort the recovery. We'dget exactly the reverse of what we want. The Board could lower thediscount rate to zero, but if it has nothing to do with market rates,it doesn't mean anything.MR. PARTEE. Without being quite that strong, I would remindyou that we just had a chart show that gave us a reasonablyrespectable performance for the economy. I believe it was said thatalmost everybody here had [projected] growth rates somewhat above whatthe chart show indicated. January certainly is a strong month. Itdoesn't seem to me obvious at all that rates need to be lower to bring2/8-9/83on a recovery. It may be that they will have to be lower but itdoesn't seem obvious that they have to be. In the meantime, I agreewith Ted that the market is becoming pretty apprehensive about theseaggregates. And for us just to abandon them altogether I think willbe certainly a featured comment in the market and could give acounterproductive result.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I doubt it, but I'm confused. Just now Ithought I didn't hear any objection--I just heard one, Mr. Roberts--onnot tightening in this period.MR. FORD. Well, I disagree with that. But I think you'reright that the consensus is there. I thought you were asking "Is thatthe consensus?" And I think it is. But I personally disagree with itbecause I think we face the possibility of a very vigorous [economy].Suppose these events continue and all these things--the real thingsthat we lack such as housing starts and auto sales--start to take offcoupled with all the aggregates, however defined, continuing to growat scary rates. Then what would you do?MR. GUFFEY. But we're only talking about between now and theend of March.MR. FORD. That's quite a critical period. At the risk ofembarrassing John, who may want to refute what I'm going to say, hewas just showing me some research that he likes, which seems toindicate that the traditional problem the Fed has faced in the past isoverstaying ease because we're always talking about what is happeningin the economy today when the decisions we're making will impact witha lag--in the summer, the fall, and the end of the year. So, I don'tagree with the consensus, but I think you correctly identified it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make sure I correctly identifiedit. Let me have a show of hands of all those who as we sit here rightnow making the best judgment we can--we're not talking about [forever]because if something radically different happens we can always haveanother meeting--don't want to put in an automatic tightening. Well,I guess it is the consensus; let's stop talking about that aspect. Iunderstand there may be some opposition to that.MR. FORD. That's why I didn't bring it up.MR. BALLES. Just to make my own point clear, in response toBill's comments: I agree that that has been the strategic mistakewe've made in the past, but I don't agree that we have alreadyoverstayed ease. I think we need a little more ease; that's where ourjudgments differ.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Barring another meeting andreconsideration in the event things change from the way people now seethem, it looks like we're not going to tighten on reserves. So,presumably we say that. Now we still have the question: What do wesay beyond that, if anything? We can just say that.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I'd be worried about not puttingin the aggregates at all, although in some ways it's tempting not todo so. But in not putting in any short-term targets it seems to methe discontinuity between what we're saying for the year as a whole2/8-9/83and what we would say for the two months ahead would just be far toogreat. And I suspect the market would be very concerned, upset, andworried, speculating about what we were really up to unless in someloose way at least we continue to pay some attention to growth of theaggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've got to get to that. Let me just seewhether we can get to that faster if I am a little more explicit andsay I interpret the consensus that was just stated as being basicallythe first alternative sentence that I proposed: "For the moreimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof restraint, expecting that would be consistent with some slowing ofthe aggregates."MR. PARTEE. "Restraint in reserves."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, "restraint on reserve positions" or"reserve restraint." "Restraint on reserve positions" would probablybe more accurate.MR. PARTEE. I think that's better. Then "expecting thatwould be consistent with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --some slowing of the aggregates."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we may find that the slowing isonly in M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We may very well find the slowing isnot in all the aggregates.MR. MARTIN. But I think that language. Tony, would be wellreceived in the market. Just the mention of [maintaining] restraintand the [expectation of a] slowing [in monetary growth] I think willbe well received.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Now, if we have a sentence of thatsort, a question still remains in that it says nothing about anyeasing at all under any contingencies. The second sentence Isuggested says we might do that if the aggregates are slow enough. Wehave had some expression of opinion that we ought to be doing thatanyway.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Might.MR. PARTEE. See if there's agreement on that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just find it hard to see how to writethis unless we say we want to do it. I don't know what othercriteria--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The only other way of doing it issomething like I suggested earlier: that some easing might beacceptable or appropriate in the light of monetary, credit, andeconomic conditions. So, we would be leaving open what will triggerthat and yet we would not be ignoring the monetary aggregates.2/8-9/83MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, it seems as we sit here today thatthe obvious thing that would create the window to allow for moreeasing would be a substantial slowing in the aggregates. So, for thatreason, I support that wording. If something unusual were to happenin the next two months, then in fact a move on the discount rate could[be taken] into consideration in this period. But as we sit heretoday it seems to me that a slowing in the aggregates that wouldpermit--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me give you two alternatives. I thinkthe second sentence as I gave it to you does what you want to do.MS. HORN. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Lesser restraint would be acceptable inthe context of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates." Wecould just leave it there or add something after that, such as "in thecontext of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates, or furtherevidence of low velocity, or further evidence of unusual demands forliquidity, or evidence of unexpected weakness in the economy." Wecould put in any of those things.MR. BLACK. I'm with Karen, Mr. Chairman.MS. TEETERS. I would like to add "unexpected weakness in theeconomy" because it could be that the January numbers are a fluke. Ithink that's what we're basically aiming at anyway: to restart aneconomic recovery. And we need a window to do it with, if it turnsout that way.MR. GUFFEY. That doesn't really satisfy the objective that Ihave because we would have to wait for this evidence to come forth. Iagree with Lyle that 50 basis points isn't going to make a lot ofdifference except for the psychological impact that that 50 basispoints may have in the market. And we need it now, not at the end ofMarch.MR. MARTIN. It could have the same psychological impact wehad the last time we made that move.MR. GUFFEY. That's a risk. I'm just saying the risk is onthe up side.MR. BOEHNE. The last time it was done, it was done beforethe funds rate was dropped. I think we have to ease the funds ratedown to around 8 percent before a discount rate cut.MR. GUFFEY. And we can do that by our borrowing level.MR. FORD. How can we do that? We already have it down to$200 million.MR. GUFFEY. Go to less than $200 million.MR. FORD. Make it a minus?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me approach this in baby steps. Giventhe consensus we already have on the first sentence, would members of-89-2/8-9/83that consensus object to the first part of the second sentence? Thatpart, in other words, is that we ease if we were to get furtherappreciable weakening in the aggregates.MS. TEETERS. What do you mean by appreciable?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll get to that later.MR. PARTEE. That's a word we've used--appreciable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a word I have here at themoment anyway.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Which is more or less--substantial orappreciable?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will get to the discussion of what thenumbers are and whether to put them in here in a minute. Is the senseof that agreeable?MR. ROBERTS. Do you mean about weakness in the aggregates orunusual liquidity?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just talking purely about weakness inthe aggregates now. I'm going to get to the other question next, butI'm just asking: Is going that far desirable?MR. WALLICH. If we can find language to define theaggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. So, tentatively, we go thatfar. Now we take the next step. Do we put an "or" in there which maybe "high liquidity," "low velocity," or "unexpected weakness in theeconomy"? How many want that additional step? We're now gettingclose.MR. GRAMLEY. If after four or five weeks' evidence on thestate of the economy or the monetary aggregates they are too fastinstead of too slow and we decide we ought to change our policy, we'remaking decisions based on last week's numbers, not on a well-reasonedview of where the economy is going to go. So, I would stop with theslow growth of the monetary aggregates.MR. PARTEE. I just can't recall a directive that had areference to the economy directly in it. Steve, do you remember any?Peter?MR. AXILROD. I can't in the operating paragraph.MR. PARTEE. [I can't recall] in the operating paragraphwhere weakness in the economy would bring a change in policy.MR. AXILROD. We've had weakness in bank credit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We never did anything so sensible as that.-902/8-9/83MR. PARTEE. I must say the velocity reference strikes me asludicrous because we can't really say what velocity is until more timepasses.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Again, why can't we cover the samestuff in more general terms by saying "if monetary, credit, oreconomic conditions so justified."MR. PARTEE. That just sounds so wide open.MR. ROBERTS. Doesn't it just say that regardless of themovement of the aggregates, you're going to do what you want to do?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's true also of these otherformulations with liquidity or the weakness in the economy, etc. Ifthere is a consensus for that, all I'm saying is that it ought to beworded more generally. I don't like the phrase "weakness in theeconomy."MR. ROBERTS. It seems to me it's implicit. If we have aninternational crisis or liquidity crisis we're going to deal with itad hoc.MR. PARTEE. We certainly could always have a conferencecall.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just ask the voting members at thispoint, and I won't try to pin down the exact wording: Who wants to gobeyond what we've just tentatively agreed to--that if the aggregatesare weak enough we ease--and add another phrase referring to theeconomy or liquidity or something? Five. How many clearly do notwant to add any other phrase? Just to make sure, we'll see how manymugwumps there are on that side. Five. Five to five and one personwho didn't express an opinion apart from myself.MR. FORD. In doing this, you're still limiting it to thosein consensus with the whole thing, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess that's right.MR. PARTEE. But for somebody who is voting he asked for avote on whether you wanted that phrase in or not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I asked originally for those who are[members of the consensus].MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see, Paul.MR. FORD(?). Well, I'll go with the five if you need anothervote. I [don't] know who the other one is. Oh, it's you. I'll gowith the five who are concerned about easing for too long a period.Whichever direction that five is, that's mine. There you have it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're obviously rather evenly split onthat point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not sure, if I may say so, thatwe're really achieving what Roger intended at all.-91-2/8-9/83MR. GUFFEY. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not.MR. PARTEE. I'm actively opposed to it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even with the five who have expressedsome support for these other conditions--. I'm going to retract myview on this. The more I think about it, we can always have anothermeeting if there is a problem, and if we go further than saying thatthere will be less restraint if the monetary aggregates slow downappreciably, then without achieving very much on the other side we maybe inviting some risk of a market reaction.MR. MARTIN. I agree.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think I'll reverse my vote.MR. MARTIN. We appreciate your vote.MR. WALLICH. If the issue is posed "Do we look at theeconomy or do we not?" we have to say we look at the economy and notjust at these aggregates. So, that's why when that issue comes up Ican't vote any other way.MR. PARTEE. But not in the operating instructions to theDesk.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure it adds a lot toinclude it, knowing we can always meet again. I will tentativelyleave it off. Where we are is with the first sentence as I gave it toyou and the second sentence with the aggregates in there and nothingelse. That leaves us with the question of how and whether we quantifythis in the directive or how and whether we quantify it outside thedirective in explicit words. I think we can leave the numbers out ofthe directive, but it's a matter of choice. I don't know what numbersto put in here at this point with these very preliminary new numberswe got. We don't know whether they are going to show a different [M2]over the quarter but they show it lower in January and at this pointhigher in February, which changes the pattern anyway.MR. GRAMLEY. I appreciate the difficulties of putting in anynumbers at all given the prevailing uncertainties. But to put out anoperating paragraph which says, in effect, that we have some numbersand we're going to act in accordance with them but we're not going totell you what they are, doesn't seem like a reasonable way to proceed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't tell them until after the periodis over anyway.MS. TEETERS. I'm not sure, Lyle, that we even have anynumbers.MR. GRAMLEY. Then we ought to use different language.MR. PARTEE. Well, it says we expect [monetary growth] to belower. If it's appreciably lower, we might ease some.2/8-9/83MR. WALLICH. I would not put numbers in here because it's souncertain, but I would refer to the longer-term ranges and say if theactual numbers fall significantly below most of those and we have acollapse in the aggregates then, yes, [we would ease]. But if theyare just more or less in the ballpark, I would want easing precluded.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're expecting a minimum growth ofaround 15 percent in M2.MR. PARTEE. Yes, but you can't even do the M2 in relation tothe longer term because we're establishing the base for the longer-term in February and March.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One thing we could do is make that[relative to the] longer term, if it weren't for the distortion of M2.MR. PARTEE. We could do that; it makes sense.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but it doesn't make sense withM2, which is the key aggregate we're looking at. And even the 15percent may turn out to be an underestimate in view of the wayFebruary [seems to have] started off.MR. RICE. Is the problem with indicating numbers that M2 istoo high and you don't want to mention it? I don't think that's agood enough reason.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the trouble is that we haven't thevaguest idea, I guess, what M2 is going to be. It depends upon howfast these MMDAs continue their rise during--MS. TEETERS. If we take the attitude that we don't want anyincreased restraint in the period immediately ahead and have interestrates go up, it seems to me that the real decision is on the level ofborrowing because we don't know where the growth is going to go orwhat M2 is going to do. Now, whether we want to open that up in thedirective, I don't know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think maintaining the existing degree ofrestraint means that we keep the borrowings where they are now.MR. PARTEE. It's a question of under what conditions wouldwe ease.SPEAKER(?). I'm not sure.MR. MORRIS. That could be specified in terms of M3, I think,but I don't know about Ml or M2 for this period.MS. TEETERS. But M3 is being affected by the growth rate inM2 also.MR. MORRIS. But relatively little. We could pick--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We don't want to spell out a targetfor M3. That would be pretty--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the difficulty we're in.2/8-9/83MR. WALLICH. If we refer to the totality of our many targetsin a broad way so that M2 can be seen as being exempted if necessary,one gets a sense of what I think we ought to aim at amongst theaggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a great sense that theseaggregates are rising rapidly. M1 I think is. For M2 and M3 it isnot at all clear. There were very low numbers in December for both ofthose aggregates. They were very low. And liquidity was practicallynothing in December. I am just wondering whether we can get somelanguage along the lines that Henry has suggested here. But M2 is areal problem. "Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context ofappreciable slowing in the growth of the aggregates to or below thepaths implied by the longer-term ranges" or something like that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If I were reading that literally--MR. MORRIS. I think that's too [unintelligible]. What we'resaying is that we're not going to allow them, even for a short period,to fall below the long-term ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no. We can't prevent them fromfalling below. We'd be delighted if they fell below. What we'd sayis that we would ease in those circumstances.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but some people when they seeour long-term targets would read that as meaning that unless M2 getsall the way down to 7 to 10 percent or something like that, we're notgoing to be easing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so sure. But we can put ina sentence on M2 to describe that. If we literally took this language"to or below the paths [implied by the] long-term ranges," we wouldsay in the policy record that we don't expect M2 to revertimmediately, given all these things, to whatever we said up above--7to 10 percent. We'd say we know that M2 growth is going to be highfor a while.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, we'd have to say that.MR. MORRIS. I don't see how we can quantify this withoutcausing more trouble than we have already.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say, "taking account of thedistortion of new accounts." I'm not so sure that's so bad.MR. PARTEE. That does take care of it, technically. Thatwould take care of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Lesser restraint would be acceptable inthe context of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates to orbelow the paths implied by the long-term ranges, taking account of thedistortions related to the introduction of new accounts."MR. MORRIS. That sounds good.MR. FORD. What you really mean, don't you, is assuming thatthe real economy is going down at that time. It's possible that the-94-2/8-9/83nicest thing that could happen would be that that would happen whilethe economy is still going [up], meaning that velocity has turnedaround. And would you still want it in there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, all that it says is lesser restraintwould be acceptable. I can imagine circumstances in which we wouldn'twant to do it because the economy looks so strong. I agree with that.But I don't think this binds us to ease if suddenly the economy weretaking off and these aggregates came in low for a few weeks.MR. ROBERTS. Don't these sentences in lines 82 to 85 [of thedraft directive] take care of the qualification and make itunnecessary?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was just looking at that. If we tookthe sentence the way it's written here tentatively, I'm not sure we'dneed that. We don't need any of that bracketed material I see.MR. ROBERTS. We don't need them both: that's for sure.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think this is a substitute for thatproviso that we were talking about. I think the way you put it isacceptable, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that all right?MR. BALLES. Could you please read that again, sir?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll read the whole thing to you. "Forthe more immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain theexisting degree of restraint on reserve positions, expecting that willbe consistent with some slowing in the aggregates. Lesser restraintwould be acceptable in the context of appreciable slowing of growth inthe aggregates to or below the paths implied by the long-term ranges,taking account of the distortions related to the introduction of newaccounts."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you want to add at the end of thefirst sentence "slowing from their recent pace"?MR. AXILROD. That was meant to refer to December-to-January.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with "some slowing in theaggregates" is that when you look at all this through a microscopethat's certainly true of Ml, but it's not true of M2 or M3. M2adjusted and M3 raw, if you take December and January together forinstance, are already low.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But some people might not understandwhat "slowing in the aggregates" means.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm wondering whether I know what itmeans now that I look at it closely. Why do we need that part?MR. AXILROD. That only refers to January, because of theproblem you raised. So, if that isn't clear--2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have to put in January. It'sjust based upon one month there? As I look at it now, I wonderwhether we need that. "For the more immediate future the Committeeseeks to maintain the existing degree of restraint on reservepositions. Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context ofappreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates."MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we have tocompare that slower growth to something. If we don't, somebody mightconceivably think that we're referring to the last part of '82.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I think the second sentence conveyswhat appreciable slowing is: It's to or below the paths implied bythe long-term ranges.MR. BLACK. Oh, I thought you took that out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm taking it out of the firstsentence for the reason that you suggest. Now that I look at it,we're not really looking for any slowing, except in Ml, from December-January. We are obviously looking for slowing in M2. Because ofthat, I guess that doesn't add anything. So let me read the twosentences over again at this point. "For the more immediate future,the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of restraint onreserve positions. Lesser restraint would be acceptable in thecontext of appreciable slowing of growth in the aggregates..." Thatmay be ambiguous in itself, but once we add "to or below the pathsimplied by the long-term ranges," it tells someone what we're talkingabout, it seems to me. Then "taking account of the distortionsrelated to the introduction of new accounts." Maybe we should saythere "particularly in M2."MR. AXILROD. Well, as to the strength of Ml, Mr. Chairman,I'm not sure how much is Super NOWs at the moment. I don't have anyadded data. It might be desirable to leave it more general.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, I won't add that. Does thatcatch the flavor of what we're talking about?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Quite explicitly we're saying we'd be veryreluctant to tighten during these next seven weeks.MR. PARTEE. As a matter of fact, it says we won't tighten.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think as it stands it says we won't;that's right.MS. TEETERS. And if we have an opportunity, we'll ease.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. And not tightening means somethingaround $200 million [in borrowing].MR. BLACK. Does it leave open the possibility, Mr. Chairman,that if there is an unusual strengthening in the aggregates, we wouldconsult?-96-2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It leaves open the possibility ofconsulting just as, if the economy weakens or something, we'd consulton the other side. But clearly it says, barring any furtherdecisions, we will not tighten. Then I guess we leave out all thebracketed material. And then we have to fill in the blanks presumablyin that last sentence. We currently have 6 to 10 percent. Is thatwhere we want to leave it? I'm talking about the last sentence on thefederal funds rate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I see. It's hard to move itdown, I think. It's about 8-1/2 percent. If we made it 6 to 9percent, it shows that we [unintelligible] problems or we could have 7to 9 percent in an attempt to show that. It's consistent with thefirst sentence to move it down to 6 to 9 percent.MR. PARTEE. Yes it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be consistent with the firstsentence to move it to 7 to 9 percent or 7-1/2 to 9 percent orsomething.MR. GRAMLEY. Or 8-3/8 to 8-5/8 percent!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't care whether we leave italone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, unless somebody has a strongfeeling, we might as well just leave it where it was. Are there anyother comments? I guess it's clear in everybody's mind what we meanto convey by this. In fact it's pretty plain, I think, in the main.MR. PARTEE. It is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shall I read it again just to make sure?"For the more immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain theexisting degree of restraint on reserve positions. Lesser restraintwould be acceptable in the context of appreciable slowing of growth inthe aggregates to or below the paths implied by the long-term ranges,taking account of the distortions related to the introduction of newaccounts. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if itappears...federal funds rate...of 6 to 10 percent."MR. GRAMLEY. Is the word "introduction" the right word inthat phrase "introduction of new accounts"? Maybe it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is all part of the introductoryperiod.MR. PARTEE. When you refer to "aggregates" I would make that"monetary aggregates."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Monetary and credit aggregates"?MR. AXILROD. Well, the credit aggregates aren't slowing, Mr.Chairman.2/8-9/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leave them out. Okay. We understand. Wecan vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesPresident Ford NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we have nothing else to do. Isthat right, Mr. Secretary? [Secretary's note: Mr. Bernard replied ina whisper to the Chairman.] Oh my gosh, I forgot to do that earlier!We have our Managers down there [with their transactions] unconfirmed.MR. CROSS. We've been waiting patiently for two days.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight, proceed if possible.Somehow we made our decision before we heard from our Managers!MR. STERNLIGHT. Shall I proceed, then?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Proceed, please. You may say something soradical we may want to reverse all our decisions.MR. BLACK. We have to promise we're not going to!MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions?MR. GUFFEY. I just have a question for Peter: How will youinterpret the language we've just adopted here with respect to thecurrent level of restraint when borrowings have been at $110 to $150million in the last two weeks? Are we talking about a $200 millionborrowing level or are we talking about a $150 million borrowinglevel? Maybe it's a question to you, Mr. Chairman.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, $200 million is what we were aimingfor. As I mentioned, the last two full weeks have come out at about$150 million. This week so far it's at about $110 million, although Iwouldn't be surprised if it got up a little higher than that withWednesday's borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't been following this veryclosely, but I assumed we were aiming at around $200 million.MR. AXILROD. That's right.MR. STERNLIGHT. We were aiming [for that].2/8-9/83MR. AXILROD. Any time we've constructed a reserve path ithas been with $200 million of borrowing [consistently].MR. GUFFEY. But the current level of restraint is somethingless than that, as evidenced by the borrowing level.MR. AXILROD. I would say not, President Guffey. The fundsrate has averaged between 8-1/4 and 8-1/2 percent steadily, which iswhat one would expect aiming at $200 million of borrowing. There havebeen variations around it, but they haven't been accompanied by muchvariation in the overall constellation of money markets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they're really aiming for reserveprovision consistent with $200 million of borrowing if their excessreserve assumptions come out correctly. And it's the excess reserveassumption that has been a bit off in recent weeks. You can't expectto hit the borrowing on the nose because of that variation and becauseof other reasons. But if the excess reserves calculation itself hasbeen off what they had been expecting, there may have been errors inthe actual calculation of the factors too. I don't know how theycontributed, but--MR. AXILROD. What I meant, Mr. Chairman, is that unless tolddifferently we would construct a nonborrowed path based on therequired reserves that are evident that week, assuming that borrowingwill satisfy $200 million of the total of excess and required. Andthat's how it will be constructed until we're told differently.MR. CORRIGAN. Peter, do you have a sense from looking at thelast six weeks or so what the underlying growth in reserves is--inother words, extracting from the reserve impact of all the shifts indeposits and so on?MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure I'd know how to answer thatbecause the shifts have had a big impact, most recently slowing thegrowth of reserves quite a bit. With the shift out of the reservablebig time deposits into the MMDAs that are reservable and extractingfrom that, I'd say maybe you're looking for the underlying M2 growthor something, which--MR. CORRIGAN. A rough estimate.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the staff has been estimating fairlymoderate growth--in the 8 percent area.MR. AXILROD. It depends, as Peter said, on what you thoughtanything would have been doing otherwise. Our rough estimate wassomething like 10 percentage points in January. It had been reducedby that amount because of the CD drop--MR. CORRIGAN. Right.MR. AXILROD. --and the 1 percent out of the saving deposits.But that has some rough assumption of what it would be otherwise.MR. PARTEE. The actual figures on reserves are showing verylittle expansion.-99-2/8-9/83MR. AXILROD. Yes, largely because of this sharp drop inrequired reserves because of shifting into the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actual reserves figures are showing adecline in January, as I remember.MR. AXILROD. I'd have to look it up, but I think it'sFebruary where we are going to have a decline.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions?MR. BALLES. Yes. Just so we'll all know, Mr. Chairman, hasthe date of your testimony been set yet?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. February 16th.MR. AXILROD. We have a total reserve growth of 1-1/2 percentroughly at this point for January. A sharp drop is projected forFebruary.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other questions, Mr.Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we proceed, I am reminded that Iforgot to request ratification of the domestic transactions.MS. TEETERS. So moved.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection the domestic actions arecompleted. Now we will go to the international [intermeetingtransactions].MS. TEETERS. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we have to ratify anything we have todo on those proposed [swap] renewals if they prove necessary, as theyare likely to be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So moved.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No objection. We will do that. I mightsay that the Mexican commercial bank loan has been delayed beyond allconscience I guess, partly by the hassling over the precise terms ofthe loan agreement, which runs to 175 pages. There are somesubstantive questions and the banks are trying to get all they can outof this agreement. Of the $5 billion of commitments that they wereseeking, the last I heard was that they had $4.8 billionapproximately, which is close enough, I think, to close the gap. Itmay not be closed in the ordinary course but somehow it'll be closed.I don't think that's essentially what is holding it up. It's gettingthe agreement on the loan agreement. It's running more than a monthafter it should have been done and I [unintelligible]. The remaining-100-2/8-9/83repayment on the swap has to be out of that money, which is why thathas been delayed.MR. FORD. Any doubt that it will jell?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's always a doubt when it'sdelayed and, of course, the new uncertainty put in the situation iswhat happens to Mexico if there is a real oil price decrease. That isa question to which I do not know an answer. If it's small, I guesswe can paper it over a little more and get a little more moneysomeplace. If it's large, I don't know what we would do.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In the view of the key people who arenegotiating all this, of the four remaining substantive areas beingnegotiated there is only one really difficult one. And that is thequestion of what foreign exchange assurances the central bank willgive in regard to the ultimate repayment of what will be therescheduled private debt, [unintelligible] debt. The other three areresolvable. I was surprised to find that the people who are runningthis operation feel that the $4.8 billion in commitments they have aresolid even if there were, let's say, further erosion in oil prices.Even if there were further concerns, they seem to think that they candepend on that. In the meantime, they have agreed to try to speed uptheir discussions as much as possible. But the Mexicans also sharesome of the blame in not getting the rate [unintelligible] up thereregarding this foreign exchange position.MR. KEEHN. Tony, are they going after the other $200 millionor are the participants about where they're going to end up?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that their formal posture hasto be that they're going to continue pursuing this until they get fullpari passu $5 billion. But I agree with Paul that there may be waysof handling this so that we can still go ahead and still appear tohave gotten the full $5 billion while we're still striving to get it.We're probably not going to get very much more money but I think theleading banks would probably help make up a part of that $200 milliondebt. So, there are different ways of handling it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Carefully. I think the Open MarketCommittee meeting is over unless somebody else has anything. Thereare a couple of other things I want to mention. But we're finishedwith the meeting with the date set for the next meeting, [March 29th].Let me say what is obvious. I see no excuse for any leaks whatsoeverfrom this meeting. And I see no need for anybody to talk with anybodyin the press between now and February 16th, period.MR. FORD. Do you mean about monetary management?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm looking at all parts of the room. Ithink you can just avoid any confusion by deferring any discussionwith the press until a time not very far off, a week from now.We have these [individual] GNP forecasts. I would hope youwould get in any revisions that you want to make on those forecasts inthe light of any additional information, including this meeting, bythe close of business tomorrow so we can incorporate that in my-101-2/8-9/83-102-report. I presume that we will pick out some central tendency, ormode, or something, in presenting those forecasts.END OF MEETING