Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 4, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 4, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco and Richmond, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Prell,Scheld, Siegman,l/ and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting after the action to approve the minutes of theAugust 23, 1983, meeting.10/4/83Mr. Coyne,l/ Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Deputy Staff Director, Office of StaffDirector for Monetary and Financial Policy,Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Forrestal, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of AtlantaMessrs. J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Mullineaux, and Stern,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofCleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta, Philadelphia,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Broaddus, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofRichmondMr. Pearce, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of DallasMs. Lovett, Manager, Securities Department, Federal ReserveBank of New York1/ Entered the meeting after the action to ratify transactions in the SystemOpen Market Account.-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 4, 1983[Secretary's note: The meeting began with the approval ofthe minutes of the previous meeting.]MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.][Secretary's note: The Committee ratified the transactionsof the Desk.]MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. BOEHNE. I wish I had a story that was different, justfor the sake of excitement, but I really don't. It seems to me thatJim has pretty well captured what is going on. We find that in ourDistrict things generally are improving. Even an area like Johnstown,Pennsylvania, which does not qualify as a garden spot, seems to befeeling pretty good. The unemployment rate has dropped from 25 to 20percent, so they think the recession is indeed over! Single-familyconstruction, however, is an exception. Philadelphia has either beenhit earlier or some special factors are going on there; there has beena really major drop in the last 30 days in housing construction. Someof it probably reflects the running out of the pent up demand thatexisted. But I think the mortgage interest rate is in an area wherethere is a great deal of sensitivity toward new mortgage activity.This weakness is largely in single-family construction, however, andis not in the multifamily area; that seems to be holding up.Just one point on business fixed investment: Normally inthis part of the recovery, one would expect to see a bigger pickup insteel activity. While there has been some, it's not as much as onewould expect. One of the reasons--at least an explanation that thesteel people give--is that with business fixed investment beinglargely concentrated in equipment, particularly office equipment, thatjust doesn't have the same steel content as other parts of thatcategory traditionally have had and, therefore, there hasn't been theincrease in steel orders. On inventories, for businessmen to say thatthey are building inventories I find is almost like saying they arefor inefficiency because they have been trained so much to cutinventories. But I do detect an increase in inventories as theconfidence level has increased. On the price side, we are picking upindications and stories of some price pressures in industries such aschemicals and paper and apparel. But the pressures seem to be veryspotty and bottlenecks seem to be very localized. One story I heardabout in the aluminum business is that, with the tandem trailers nowbeing legal, aluminum production has increased and there is a shortagein what are called aluminum logs that [are used to construct] thesides of those tandems because of the increase in demand. So, thereare some localized price pressures, but I certainly can see nothingin my area that would be of a generalized nature.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think there is muchdifference of opinion in the financial community about the currentsituation and the near-term prospects for economic growth. What Ifound interesting, though, was a private discussion I had the other10/4/83day with on the one hand and one I had with and[unintelligible]. The views varied sharply. and[unintelligible] believed that capital spending would continue in 1984along typical recovery [trends]; therefore, [for that reason], alongwith other factors, they concluded that interest rates will rise atleast 100 to 150 basis points over the next year. sees noevidence that capital spending will be that strong and he doesn'tbelieve that the inventory replenishment will continue beyond thespring. He says he doesn't believe it is going to return to astatistically normal ratio because he thinks it is ridiculously lownow and can't reflect completely the reality. And unless he is wrongabout inventory replacement, he believes that the recovery will peterout sometime toward the end of the first half of next year. I wouldsay that the view is probably a minority view in thefinancial community. There would be more people reflecting the formerview. And then there is a monetarist view, reflected by an Englishmanwith whom I had a conversation,He's saying that inflation in this country by the fourthquarter of next year will be between 8 and 10 percent and that theinflation rate in Germany also will be very high, based on hisapproach to analysis. So, in some ways, the question of 1984prospects and the so-called crowding out effect of the budget deficitis much more interesting than the current situation. But I don't haveany real difference of view from that which Jim expressed with regardto the current situation. I would add one comment on the currentsituation, which is that aside from the distorting effect of high realinterest rates on different sectors in the economy, there is also thedistorting effect of the exchange rate, which is making thecomposition of what look like normal overall figures somewhatdifferent than we've had before, with certain sectors still being verybadly impacted.MS. HORN. We in Cleveland agree for the most part with thestaff's forecast. To the extent we see risks in it, we see the riskson the down side--that is, growth not coming through in '84 asstrongly as forecast for a variety of reasons. One reason, of course,is the outlook for investment--capital goods and heavy industry--whichis exacerbated by the budget. I just have a couple of comments tomake on that industry. I'm really focusing now on the components ofthat industry that we have in the Fourth District--steel, machinetools, heavy trucks, and mining related to metal production. Therehas been some turnaround but it has been modest. And I think thecontinued slowness in those industries is leading the managers to cometo some pretty hard decisions. Some are coming to the decision thatrecovery won't answer their problem--that their problem is deeper thanwill be dealt with by economic recovery. Those who haven't quite cometo that point yet at least feel that the recovery might be too slow tobe very helpful to them or that perhaps they are going to be crowdedout in this case. I think that's bringing them to some short-termsolutions; I don't think we see the examples yet of the long-termsolutions such as trying to get competitive in world markets and soforth. I suppose the worst of the short-term solutions, which we haveseen for some time, is a call for protectionism. But there are otherkinds of solutions as well. I suppose my remarks are inspired todayin part by the LTV steel situation--the merger between J&L andRepublic--which does seek to deal with problems in the short run byreducing capacity and by dealing with the overhead problem. Now, inthe long run maybe they aren't going to deal with labor contracts and10/4/83maybe they aren't going to deal with capital investment and a numberof the other tougher problems. I'm not sure what kind of financialstrength they're going to end up with after this merger, but I thinkit is at least one indication of an attempt that is going in the rightdirection toward finding short-run solutions to problems. We seeother less dramatic examples in the Fourth Federal Reserve District,too, of attempts to get their hands around the short-term problems--inmachine tools, for example. I just thought I would bring up thosecomments relative to capital goods and the outlook for heavy industrytoday.MR. MARTIN. Is concessionary [wage] bargaining a part of theso-called short-run solution? You didn't mention it.MS. HORN. I didn't mention it, and it certainly has beenhappening over a period of time in the Fourth Federal ReserveDistrict. I guess it's a mixed bag. There are some real concessions;some of the heavy companies, for example, have gotten escalatorclauses out of their [labor] contracts. But there is the problem thatthe union people who come to vote in the elections are the people whostill have the jobs and they can have a short-run attitude. We find,for example, that the Chrysler contract that recently was voted for 2to 1 across the country was voted 1 to 2 in the Fourth District theother way. So, I think it's a very mixed bag in terms of the laborconcessions. I don't read it as really being [in one] direction.MR. RICE. In announcing the LTV merger did they say theyintended to reduce capacity in the industry?MS. HORN. Yes. Well, [I'm not sure if] there was a publicstatement by the company or not. They certainly have been very clearin discussions that they are going to cut heavily into the capacity,particularly at Republic Steel but at J&L as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two-thirds of the Chrysler workers in Ohiovoted against the 12 percent [wage] increase?MR. PARTEE. What, they wanted more?MS. HORN. That's right.MR. PARTEE. I didn't figure they wanted less! [Laughter]MR. GRAMLEY. But looking at the wage picture generally, theastonishing thing is the extent to which we're still getting give-backs and freezes. The Board staff's latest memorandum on wageconcessions says that concession bargaining was extensive again in thethird quarter; at least 150,000 workers agreed to wage freezes or paycuts just in that quarter. And the latest wage concessions bring thecumulative number of workers who have acceded to give-backs so farthis year to around a million compared with two million in 1982. Ithink we still are getting indications of very, very substantialmoderation in wage rates.MR. PARTEE. And the aggregate wage figures are not goinganywhere.10/4/83MR. GRAMLEY. That's right. Wage rate figures for the thirdquarter confirm what is going on in the union sector.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can look at that somewhatdifferently. There isn't any question that they are still gettingconcessions, but what is holding up the average? What are theygetting in areas where there aren't concessions?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'm not sure the average is holding up.We don't have an employment cost index for the third quarter and theaverage hourly earning figures are a little difficult to read nowbecause the latest employment situation report has a big strike figurein it. I don't know what the August numbers will look like once thestrike effects are taken out, but indications for the third quarter sofar are for a slower rise in average hourly earnings this quarter thanin the previous one.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't it still close to 7 percentfor the country as a whole?MR. GRAMLEY. Hours? For the wages it's more like 4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 4 percent but a lot of industries,such as the utilities industry, [are higher]. I'm just looking atsome figures here that somebody gave me on collective bargainingagreements and they are all more than 6 percent; many of them are 8percent. That's down 1 or 2 percentage points from the peak levels inan industry that isn't under exceptional pressure. They can alwayspass it on to the customer.MR. GRAMLEY. We're going to get that in industries where the[competitive] pressures are not there. But they are surely beingcounterbalanced.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you remember what happens when thesepressures go away. The next report could have an expansion. Wagescould settle down.MR. BOEHNE. There are more industries where that restraintis not present than where it is. Just look across the board. In theheavily unionized heavy industry types of companies you find that.You don't find it much in the financial sector; you don't find it inthe service sector generally.MR. WALLICH. I think there is an enormous catch-up demand inall these areas where concessions have been made. It's natural thatthey regard that as a temporary calamity and will try to catch upagain. Chrysler showed that.MR. MARTIN. There is an institutional element in this toothat is coming up, particularly next year, and that is the turnover inunion leadership. In more and more cases the senior captains of thoseunions are retiring and new faces are appearing. And there's going tobe a certain amount of motivation among those folks to make the recordshow that those old boys, and old women in some cases, had gottentired. I think that's a factor that we have to watch in 1984.-4-10/4/83MR, FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, we don't have any esoterictales either to report from the Sixth District. We would generallyagree with Jim Kichline's estimate. I think the Southeast pretty muchmirrors what is going on in the rest of the country. The economycontinues to expand, although there are a few sectors that are showingsome signs of slowing. Consumer spending remains pretty strong,although the drought and the unseasonably hot weather affected notonly farm prices but consumer spending as well because there were notthe usual back-to-school purchases. Industrial employment iscontinuing to rise. We're looking at some reversals, particularly inthe forest industry. [That experienced by] Georgia Pacific, whichrecently moved to Atlanta, is very much apparent to us in thatparticular industry. Higher mortgage rates have reduced sales of newhomes from the levels that were attained earlier this summer. Itseems to me that 13-1/2 to 14 percent rates are about the choke pointfor most people for new homes as well as existing homes.In the financial sector we've had pretty good deposit andloan growth, although it has been weaker than in June. It's going tobe interesting to see what the results of the deregulation move onOctober 1 will be. I believe that somewhere in the Bluebook orGreenbook there was an indication from the staff that there was notgoing to be as much hype in advertising for these new instruments asthere was before. We don't expect it to be very extensive in Atlantaor in the Southeast, but we do think that it's going to take off tosome extent--that there is going to be more advertising and moreattempts to draw funds through these instruments into the banks andthe S&Ls. Tourism is showing some signs of ebbing particularly incentral Florida, and in the Miami area the tourist industry is adisaster. They are doing very badly and that's true not only in MiamiBeach and Miami but in Dade County generally.If we had some concerns to express--where we would differfrom the staff estimate--it would be on the up side. We think thatperhaps there has been some underestimation of the strength of theeconomy. That is certainly true in our area; we get people talkingabout this quite a lot in our section of the country. After all,throughout this third-quarter period we did have some strikes, such asthe AT&T strike, which I think had an effect on the economy. We hadthe hurricane in some parts of the country. I think we have to takethat into account. So, we would be a little concerned that the third-quarter number is perhaps on the low side and might be revised upward.There is considerable concern in our District, as I'm sure there is inother Districts, about the [federal budget] deficit, and there's agreat deal of concern in the export-related industries about thestrength of the dollar. Interestingly, inflation in two of our majorcities, Atlanta and Miami, is running about 1.3 to 1.4 percentagepoint above the national average, so that's a concern. Because ofalready existing inflation in those cities and the threat of increasedfood prices as a result of the drought, we see some pressure onprices.One other thing I might mention is related to industrialproduction and capital expansion. Some of the contacts we've had withindustrial development agencies around the District indicate to usthat a lot of the capital expansion is being designed to improveexisting productivity rather than to meet additional product demand.And finally, Mr. Chairman, there is a good deal of concern in Atlanta10/4/83and Miami about the Eastern [Airlines] situation. Governor Martin'sremark about concessionary bargaining certainly bears on this. Thisis a good example of the union leaders not being supported by theirown people. I'm not sure they're in the old man/old lady category butthe flight attendants, for example, are now coming forward andindicating that perhaps they would rather have wage concessions thanhave Eastern go under. In other words, they are tending to believemanagement rather than their own union.MR. PARTEE. I thought the indication was that that was non-union people.MR, FORRESTAL. No, the flight attendants are unionized. Andthey have been mounting a petition in both those cities, Atlanta andMiami, to accept some form of wage concession. They are saying FrankBowman ought to be believed that the losses are going to be extensive,and it's better to have a 15 percent pay cut than no job. Where thepilots and the others in that company are, I'm not sure. Obviously,the effect of anything happening to Eastern would be devastating inour part of the country because Eastern and Delta account for about 90percent of all traffic out of Atlanta's airport. So, we're watchingthat situation pretty carefully.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I've been looking for somesigns of crowding out in the staff projections; I don't see anythrough 1984. Presumably, if nothing is done on the budget deficit,we will reach a point where the total demand for credit is going torequire some reduction in housing, but apparently that is not going totake place in 1984. I assume it's because the corporate financinggap, which is projected to be negative this year, is very small nextyear. Have you attempted to calculate when this day of reckoning isgoing to be if it's not in 1984?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me interject a question or a comment.I don't understand this "either/or" crowding out theory. It seems tome that interest rates are relatively high and that the deficit isrelatively high and there's already crowding out in some sense[unintelligible] more investment and more housing.MR. MORRIS. Well, what I meant is the level of crowding outthat would require a substantial reduction in housing from the currentlevel.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Their projection shows a reduction inhousing.MR. MORRIS. They show 1.8 million starts in the last quarterof '84.MR. KICHLINE. Well, we don't have a good answer to yourquestion. I would say that, from our point of view, interest ratesare significantly higher now than they would be in the absence of a$200 billion average deficit on the part of the government. So, inthat sense, clearly there is some degree of crowding out. You'requite correct in noting that what holds this forecast together in notseeing really bad things materializing early on in 1984 is a very10/4/83strong business picture. That is, internal funds generation in theforecast is very strong; profits growth is very high. And investment,while growing, simply doesn't match what we're seeing on the businessside. So, the combination really of the foreign sector--foreigninflows--plus business savings has been able to offset what would bemore apparent crowding-out effects. You're right that in the forecastwe don't see at this point a collapse in housing. [Housing demand]clearly is not growing much and it's lower than one might haveexpected otherwise. Consumer borrowing, I might note, is very strongin this forecast. Looking at this now, one of the problems, it seemsto me, is that while we have reduced business borrowing--the negativefinancing gap--we have very strong consumer spending and consumerborrowing in this forecast.MR. BOEHNE. Isn't part of the answer that when we thinkabout crowding out we have a mind set that goes back to the days ofRegulation Q? And now, with interest rates largely deregulated, thereisn't an abrupt point where funds just simply aren't available; it's amore gradual situation. I don't think we're going to see a fellowjump out of a box and say: I'm Mr. Crowding Out. It seems to me it'sgoing to be much more gradual. Interest rates will be higher thanthey otherwise would be and there will be distortions in the mix ofGNP; I think we have some of that right now.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to add to what Ed justsaid. I think there are some signs on the horizon already of thiscrowding out. It's true that housing starts nationally continued togo up in August, but in the state of Oregon, for example, there was noincreased production of lumber even in the face of that. Sales weremade out of fairly high levels of inventory at the plant level and atthe retail level, and that's because they expect the corner to beturned in the near future. They look at such things as what is goingon in the sales of new single-family homes, and in that area therewere declines two months in a row--in July and August. The lumberindustry feels that that becomes a harbinger of what is going tohappen in the near future to housing starts. Once a housing start isunder way, of course, [the builder] has to complete that house. So,even though the demand may be weakening in terms of ultimatepurchases, housing starts continue to look solid for a while. But Ithink this indication that sales of new single-family homes arealready starting to decline, down two months in a row, is a concretesign that the squeeze is being put on that industry by high interestrates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What has happened to lumber prices in thelast few weeks?MR. KICHLINE. They've been coming down.MR. MORRIS. The answer is that they haven't looked into '85far enough. Pretty clearly, the problem is going to come when thecorporate financing gap starts to grow, and that means a counter-balancing decline in housing to permit that financing to take place.And the question is: When does that process start?MR. RICE. Also, partly in support of Frank, over the nextyear we're projecting a slight decline in long-term interest rates.That would argue against any buildup of crowding out.10/4/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you speaking of long-term--?MR. RICE. We're projecting a decline in long-term interestrates of about 1/2 percentage point.MR. PARTEE. We vary quite a bit from Wojnilower and Kaufman.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask whether the staff has gonethrough a hypothetical scenario that I tried to go through, veryinconclusively. That is, next year we're probably going to be runninga trade deficit of about $110 billion and a current account deficit of$70 or $80 billion. What happens if, notwithstanding the high levelof interest rates, expectations regarding exchange rates changeradically and we see the exchange rate falling substantially? Thathas implications of a reversal--a major reduction or a completecessation--of net capital inflows. Now, what's the effect on interestrates? As we analyze it, there probably would be some upwardmovement, but there would be an improved differential in the dollarmarket against the Eurodollar market and there would be reflows fromthe Eurodollar market brought in by the banks. The composition of thecapital movements would change substantially. The interest rateeffect probably would be not too significant here at home and/or wewould have a dramatic change in the exchange rate. But I want to besure of this kind of analysis. If anybody on the staff wants tocomment on what they think the impact, if any, would be from this ondomestic interest rates, I'd be interested in hearing.MR. TRUMAN. Well, you might want to separate the questionabout what will happen as a natural course of events as distinguishedfrom what might happen. I was, in fact, sitting here asking myself aslightly different question: What if the dollar declines more rapidlythan we now anticipate in the forecast? That would tend to have anexpansionary effect on the economy just because aggregate demand goesup. Once you get the impact of that larger decline on the currentaccount, you are going to get an increase in aggregate demand in theeconomy. And through that mechanism alone, leaving aside the directeffect on prices, you're going to have some inflationary push. Youmight argue from that standpoint that there would be an inducedincrease in the average level of interest rates coming from the higherlevel of nominal income. Now, there is always the timing problem:The dollar initially falls and there's not going to be any change inthe short run in the current account. So, whatever the net capitalinflow is going to be, for a period the lags that most economiststhink are there will continue to be there. It might have somecompositional effects. Whether it would take the form of flowsthrough banks or inflows through the flow of funds, I'm not quitesure. Whether the intervention and purchase of government securitiesin itself through different channels will affect the general level ofinterest rates is a more difficult question to answer.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Can you see any clear effects on themonetary aggregates resulting from the changes in the composition ofthe flows?MR. TRUMAN. Whenever we're asked the question from Congresswe tend to say no. I guess what you're saying is that there is atendency for some magnitudes to rise more rapidly than others. Mostof the research would suggest, at least for the United States, that10/4/83the exchange rate is not an argument in the demand for money equation,so you have trouble getting it into there. Now, whether you get aneffect from the nature of the flow, I think Mr. Axilrod might say thatit would tend to be washed out by the operations of the Desk.MR. AXILROD. The only thing I would add is that to thedegree foreign private investors are less anxious to be in dollars andtheir dollar holdings that are in the money supply, like overnightEurodollars, are replaced by foreign government purchases of U.S.Treasury securities--if that's the form of the capital inflow--then,of course, we get minor effects on M2 and M3. But they would berelatively minor, I would think. And they might be replaced by banksgetting that money from domestic [sources].MR. PARTEE. But again, Steve, I want to emphasize Ted'spoint about nominal income. I think there could be a very markedeffect on nominal income mostly through higher prices, and interestrates could move quite a bit if we have a 30 percent drop, say, in thevalue of the dollar. I think it is a hazard, but it's more indirectthan it is verifiable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District we areseeing the economy very much the way Jim outlined it. If there is asurprise, it is that [economic activity is] coming back a littlestronger and probably a little faster than we had originallyanticipated. In housing, of course, single-family housing is verystrong, particularly in the Dallas/Fort Worth area and that's expectedto continue; in multifamily housing, we're probably getting into adangerously overbuilt situation. Our consumer sales are running alongpretty well. In energy there seems to be a turnaround. In Texas, wehad a 22 percent increase in rig count last month and in New Mexico a20 percent increase. Of course, that was from very, very low levels;but there is activity in the oil patch again. In terms of [drilling]permits, in July we had about 2500 permits in Texas and in August wehad 10,000. We attribute that to the fact that starting September 1there was a $100 permit fee to drill a well versus $25, and apparentlythe people who drill oil wells worry about $75. I'd find it a bitsurprising if that would really account for that large an increase.In agriculture, of course, the drought has been mentioned. It's amixed situation; on balance in agriculture we still might have afairly good year down our way. I guess it depends on whether you'reeast of the Pecos or west of the Pecos. Those west of the Pecos,particularly the cattlemen, are having some very, very severedifficulties. I was talking toand he told me he was taking a thousand head of cattle to market thisweek because he just didn't feel he could afford to feed them. Hesaid he expected to get about $300 a head and what really upsets himis that when he goes back to restock next year he figures he will bepaying $600 a head. I sympathize with him, but then he has 2,000 headeast of the Pecos that he thinks he can try to get through the winter.As they say down there in the South: Some people lose a thousand headand the big boys really get hurt. So, we'll see how that turns out.In talking of the crowding out and whether we are lookingpast 1984 to 1985, I have a couple of comments I picked up last week:The conversation among home builders, particularly in Texas, is that10/4/83they are going to be doing all they can for the rest of this yearbecause 1985 is going to be a disaster in home building. That's thetype of terminology they were using. Then, I was talking to thepresident of an electronics firm and he said [business] this year isbetter than anticipated. Their plans call for a very good 1984, butthey don't know how to plan for 1985. They are very, very concerned.So, the overall sentiment seems to be that things are going alongwell, the economy is coming back, and this will continue through 1984.But the very real question mark seems to be what 1985 is going to be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I want to add that I think a recurring theme oncapital goods--certainly in the fundamental heavy capital goodsindustry--in the Middle West is that the situation seems to be veryslow. I think the decline is beginning to level out somewhat but at avery, very low level. At this point, there is no discernibleimprovement. Some of the people who are directly involved in thesecompanies are beginning to think the recovery may pass them byaltogether. As people see increasing comments about a recession in'85 and '86, I think there is some concern that they won't actuallyexperience a pickup in the heavy capital goods side. As aconsequence, they are beginning to focus on interest rates. NancyTeeters was in Milwaukee a week or so ago and we heard a lot aboutinterest rates there. I think they really do feel that if we can getrates down, we could sustain a recovery that would bring someimprovement on the capital goods side. But that continues to be veryslow to move up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not suggesting that we call that"crowding out."MR. KEEHN. Not quite yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, in terms of the economicsituation and the commentary that one picks up, at least as you moveaway from Wall Street and Constitution Avenue, the thing that hasstruck me most of all in the past month or two is the extent to whichthe overall international situation has crept into Main Street. Someof that grows out of the LDC debt problem situation and the IMFlegislation. It's truly incredible to me how much attention thesubject of the IMF legislation gets in places where I would not haveexpected it. It's quite astonishing. But I think beneath it whatperhaps is really going on is the extent to which our trade account,our exports and imports both, really is having a perceptible impact onpeople in ways that are quite new to them. At our last meeting one ofour directors told a story that I think in some way captures thisbest.It was quite obvious as he was talking that they have hadan informal policy to buy American for a long time. I think he saidthat they historically have bought everything by way of equipment thatthey use from an outfit down in your District. They had to replace asingle piece of machinery that he described as a $900,000 piece ofequipment. They put it out for bid and got the bid back from theircustomary supplier for $900,000. But they got a bid from a Germanfirm for $500,000. Obviously, the difference between $500,000 and-10-10/4/83$900,000 had crossed the threshold point where this outfit could livewith their informal buy American policy. If I am reading the tealeaves right, I don't think that situation, while it's obviously justone anecdotal case in point, is unrepresentative of what is going on.Indeed, when you talk about the capital goods industry in the fourthquarter in the Seventh District, I just wonder to what extent thisphenomenon at the margin may be making a very, very big difference interms of what they are seeing versus what they might normally expectto see. And certainly this is also true in the agricultural sector,both in terms of exports of agricultural goods and in terms of importsof agricultural machinery; it's hitting on both sides. I don't knowwhat it means but Karen Horn mentioned it: I do think that it beginsto get the smell of a very perceptible but creeping element ofprotectionism that is now out there in a way that I have not seen it.I don't know what it means beyond that, but it is something clearlydifferent in terms of attitudes and commentary about the economy andthe financial system.On inflation and concessions and all that, I am inclined tothe view, at least for the moment, that bankruptcies even when they'requite removed from a particular situation--whether they're in theairline industry or piano manufacturers who have decided to get intothe financial business--are still having an effect on wage behaviorthat's fairly pervasive. But I am not at all sanguine that the wagesituation couldn't turn around very quickly in the context of thesesubstantial cash flows and profits that are being generated by thebusiness sector in general. On agricultural prices, the fellows inour Bank who look at that agree with Mr. Kichline that we're lookingat [increases of] 7 or 8 percent. Some of our directors who areinvolved in the agriculture business are on the low side of that. Thecommentary we get from them rather forcefully suggests that most ofthe official forecasts, including the Agriculture Department's ownforecast, have not adequately taken into account the manner and way inwhich the PIK program is going to free up very substantial quantitiesof inventory that have to go into the marketplace. By and large ourdirectors who are involved in agriculture have a more optimisticoutlook in terms of the inflation in agricultural prices, although insome cases it may be more pessimistic from their own self interestpoint of view. Abstracting from this overall international thing, myown view continues to be that in the near term--and by that I meanout, say, to the middle of 1984 anyway--the risks or dangers orwhatever you want to call them are on the up side. What that reallymeans in the context of Frank Morris' question--I think he wasquestioning when crowding out really will become a problem as opposedto the kind of problem it is now--is that it is probably going to besooner rather than later. And, that's about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. The press has been devoting a great deal ofattention to discussing the possible slowdown occurring in theeconomy. But as we've gone around the table here, I think JimKichline and others have captured this very well with regard to thestraws in the wind, which leads me to think that this a pretty normal,healthy sort of recovery and one that still doesn't need an undue[effort] on our part to prop it up. It looks as if the recovery ismoving into a more mature stage now, and even abstracting from theshortage in automobile inventories and the elimination of some of the-11-10/4/83sales rebates, I think consumer spending has slowed some and housinghas clearly slowed a great deal and probably will slow more. But nowwe are moving into the stage where I would think that inventoryrebuilding and some expansion in capital expenditures would begin toassume part of that role. Really, the only weak thing of anysignificance that I see in the economy is the export sector. Eventhat looks a little better in that we have more signs of a pickupabroad now than we had maybe a month or so ago. I think we are inpretty good shape. I do agree with Jerry that there is a growth inprotectionism in places we never expected to see, and I share his fearthat these wage pressures are going to mount before we expect them to,although they do look darn good at the present time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. I don't want to repeat what has been said. I'dlike to associate our District viewpoint with the staff view except tosay that we think the '84 prospects are probably for a little lessreal growth and a little more price pressure. I have a couple ofcomments from our District that might be of interest to you: Autoproduction is going up very well. Chrysler has added [unintelligible]employees in the last two weeks. Chrysler, Ford, and General Motorsare all in the expansion phase of their production in the District.They seem to be very optimistic about future sales potential,particularly for large cars, which is where they have shortages thatare affecting their sales at the moment. GM has put an enormousamount of money into a new plant in Wentzville, west of St. Louis, andhas yet to produce a car. These are front wheel drive cars and GM ishaving some difficulty with their quality but they are expected tocome on line soon. head of a majorindependent oil company that he'sreasonably sanguine about the outlook for energy prices, even in theface of a probable disruption of supplies from the Middle East,because of the large amount of indicated shut-in production. He saidthat for the first time there's enough shut-in production outside theGulf states to offset essentially anything that could happen in theway of reduced supplies from [the Middle East].I had the principal homebuilders in our area in for lunchrecently and they classified themselves as a hardy group of survivors.They certainly were guarded in their optimism and made comments aboutthe distortions in the national figures on home building that reallyshould be related to areas such as Dallas and conceal more difficultmarketing problems in mature areas such as St. Louis. But they thenwent on individually, almost without exception, to speak of theirrecent land purchases and their plans for expanded building over thebalance of this year and next year. They said home prices are upabout 6 to 8 percent from a year ago and that, admittedly, there hadbeen some pressures on them a year ago but not a whole lot. Theydidn't sell much but when they sold something the price hadn't beendown. There is concern about rising materials costs, notwithstandingthe indicated drop in the cost of lumber; several of them mentionedthat the sharply higher cost of lumber was affecting them. Overall,I'd say the expansion continues in our District, but we are getting afew more downs than ups for a while, and the agricultural area remainsseverely depressed from the effects of the drought.-12-10/4/83MR. RICE. Could I just ask why you expect increased pressureon prices?MR. ROBERTS. Well, I suppose we are concerned about thebuildup in liquidity in the economy and the lag effect we expect to beassociated with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, there are two things that worryme about the staff forecast. One is that it is so similar to a widevariety of forecasts that exist in the private sector. The staffprovided us with the usual summary of forecasts that they follow--Chase, Wharton, DRI and Merrill Lynch--and it's amazing how closeeverybody is. Real growth next year ranges from 4.2 to 4.7 percent;inflation rates measured by the deflator are somewhat higher than thestaff's forecast but are very uniform at a little over 5 percent;everybody expects the unemployment rate to drop to somewhere around8-1/4 percent by the end of 1984; and interest rates are expected tostay about where they are or maybe go up a little, but certainly notvery much by the standards we've seen in recent years. You know, wheneverybody forecasts the same thing, something is bound to be wrong.There has to be something coming along that we have not foreseen.The second thing that worries me is that the outlook seemsjust too good to be true. And if I could lay out the way I want it orwhat can reasonably be hoped for in terms of a course of economic andfinancial development next year, what I would hope for is a growthrate that slows down to the range of 4 to 5 percent--enough to makefurther progress on unemployment and not so rapid a growth rate togenerate any unusual inflationary pressures. I'd want a combinationof developments that keeps interest rates about where they are orgoing down a little, pushing off any serious crowding out problemuntil 1985 and beyond. I've listened to the comments around the tableas to which way the risks go, and the sentiment tends to be that therisks may be on the up side. I've asked myself [that question] and Iwould assess the risks as fairly well balanced. But I would agreethat the thing we ought to worry about most from the standpoint ofpolicy is not that we will get a weaker economy but that we will get astronger one with more inflation. If we get a weaker economy, myfeeling would be that we have enough pent up demand for housing andfor consumer durable goods that, with a moderate decline in interestrates which certainly would not be unwelcome, we could keep therecovery going. But if we got a considerably stronger recovery andmore inflation and began to get significant pressures in creditmarkets with money growing very rapidly, we would have to resist.Then we would have significant problems. So, really, I hope thingswork just the way the staff forecasts. But what I worry about most isthat the recovery might be stronger with more inflation later on.MS. TEETERS. I want to go back to Frank Morris' questionbecause I think we are beginning to see some evidence of crowding outand I think we see it in interest rates. The table on page 5 of the[Greenbook] supplement shows that the federal funds rate has gone up56 basis points since its recent low in May, and the longer-termTreasury securities--the 3-year, 10-year, and 30-year Treasuries--havegone up 2 to 3 times the change in the short-term rates. Then we seethe decline of 37 basis points in the fed funds rate since the last-13-10/4/83FOMC meeting and almost no decline at all in the rates on longer-termsecurities. So, I think we're seeing the crowding out in terms of theincrease in long-term rates. And those longer-term rates may becrucial to getting the type of recovery that the staff forecasts.That hits housing and it hits capital goods. And it may be thatthat's what will show up as the crowding out. You also remember thatin the July/August refunding the Treasury had quite a bit of troubleselling longer-term issues, and the rates had to go up in order [forthe market] to digest those issues. So, I think we're seeing a newform [of crowding out]--one that hasn't been recognized before.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The report in theTenth District is not unlike others that have been given around thetable. That is, retail sales have remained fairly vigorous; theagricultural sector is under some pressure although I would note thatin our District it involves only the corn and soybean crops whereaswheat has not been affected since it was harvested before the droughtreally hit. On the other hand, the PIK program has maintainedliquidity within the financial system that finances the agriculturalsector. Perhaps the greatest impact would be on those suppliers tothe agricultural sector--I'm talking about farm machinery and othermanufacturers who are doing no business now and do not expect to intothe next year. Energy, mining, and housing, of course, are very muchas has been described in other Districts.I was interested in Governor Gramley's comments because Iagree that [the forecast] is almost too good to be true. I disagreeonly with his last comment in that I think the risks may be on thedown side instead of the up side. I too would hate to see a lot ofvigor show up in 1984 because it would present the problem that hedescribed. By the same token this forecast seems to me to be largelybased upon two or three assumptions: that consumer spending willremain very vigorous; that capital spending will come on very early in1984; and, lastly, that the dollar will decline and thus improvesomewhat the export market and our balance of trade problem. We haveseen the saving rate return to the 5 percent level; if that were tocontinue or go up to some level closer to historical experience, thenI assume that consumer retail purchases would be muted somewhat.Similarly, fixed investment may not come on. It appears that theremay be a change in the way companies plan their fixed investment.That is, if I understand it correctly, it used to be that we would seefixed capital investment coming on [stream] at a utilization rate inthe area of 80 to 85 percent. It seems to me that [businessexecutives] are much more cautious now, having come out of a three-year recessionary experience, and are not going to be as quick to makethose capital commitments. Lastly, as to the dollar, the staff--and Ithink everybody--has been expecting a dollar decline over the lastyear, and it really hasn't happened. I just note that part of theforecast is based upon agricultural export levels that our peoplejudge will not be achieved either in 1983 or 1984. They are lookingat an annual export level of about $36-$37 billion in 1983 and I thinkthe USDA just announced a figure of roughly $34-1/2 billion. Now,that [difference] is not big in magnitude but for 1984 I think thestaff is projecting an agricultural export number of about $40 billionand our people think that it likely would be in the $35 billion rangeor thereabouts. And it is going in the wrong direction, which is onepoint that I want to make. I like what I see but I would suggest thatthe risks may be on the down side rather than the up side. I don't-14-10/4/83think that suggests anything in terms of action by the Federal OpenMarket Committee at this meeting, but I'm not sure that all is as goodas it may appear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, things do seem to be going very welloverall. And yet in the spirit in which Lyle Gramley raised thequestion, I wonder: Is Murphy's law--Murphy's law being that ifsomething can go wrong, it will--going to operate? I travelled around5 Pacific Basin countries in the last month and one of the questionsthat kept recurring very frequently--to which, admittedly, I didn'tknow the answer--was: Are we going to get through this next 12 to 18months without some sort of a major financial backlash or crisis as aresult of the LDC international debt problem? And for those of us whoweren't around at the IMF meeting I just wonder, Mr. Chairman, if youor someone else can fill us in on what seems to be the picture withregard especially to the manageability of the international debtposition of particular countries south of the border.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't I defer that until we getthrough this go-around on the business situation, and I'll be glad toaddress it.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to make a commenton the international value of the dollar. I was rather startledyesterday to learn that the forecast has a 15 percent depreciation inthe value of the dollar and that depreciation only stabilizes thedeficit.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we do get a bigger impact in1985. It's probably a difference of about $6 billion in 1984, whichwould be relatively modest. If you make an assumption of asubstantially--MS. TEETERS. What do you mean by "substantially," Tony, 30percent?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, let's say 25 to 30 percent asagainst 15 percent. I think it would give you only about a $6 billionimprovement in 1984 but the improvement is much, much larger in 1985.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. TRUMAN. Well, as we said yesterday, Governor Teeters, itdepends a lot on what you assume as you go out [in time] about howgrowth is proceeding here and abroad. If we continue with growth hereat or above the average rate abroad, which is consistent with manyforecasts, then you have to catch up with that. That's basically thereason why that 15 percent depreciation doesn't give us much more thanstabilization as we go out. But if we return to a more normal--whatone might perceive to be more normal--cyclical position, it wouldinvolve probably having faster growth in foreign countries than here.Then we would need less of a further depreciation in order to bringthe current account deficit down substantially.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.-15-10/4/83MR. WALLICH. It's hard to make a coherent case one way orthe other that differs from the staff position. I would say that thestaff forecast differs [from other forecasts] in one significantrespect: namely, that it has lower inflation. If it has lowerinflation, then given interest rates that are somewhat similar to whatother forecasters have, we would have a higher real interest rate. Idon't know to what extent that in turn enters into the projection ofinvestment spending. But as for the present level of investmentspending, as has been pointed out, it's very bad in the heavy capitalgoods area. I think overall we can't say that the business fixedinvestment is bad. On the contrary, it seems to be a little largerthan it has been in other expansions. Evidently, there's a greatshift in the nature of the investment away from the smoke-stack typegoods that one observes in the middle of the country to hightechnology-type equipment. But secondly, and this was veryinteresting, maybe the heavy equipment area is additionally hit by thelarge current account deficit--that is, the weakness in our tradebalance which, of course, takes the form of imports of things fromabroad that we didn't usually import previously. I think the netexport area is really the greatest [source of] weakness in theeconomy. If we didn't have that, we would have a much strongerexpansion. I'm concerned in the same area as Nancy is but maybe aboutthe opposite things. Suppose that the dollar does not go down asprojected and as has been projected many times by now. In that case,of course, that gap in the trade balance becomes worse. Now, I agreethat we're subject to the possibility of shocks from the developingcountries or from wage developments, perhaps incited by large profits.These things are unpredictable. We're getting into the area whereprofessional economists tend to see a lack of demand over the horizon.As far as one can see, things are not too bad. Beyond that, one can'ttell what is going to keep the economy going. I would say that thisis probably an economic recovery cyclically like all others. If itlasts two years, it would have been short; if it lasts over threeyears, it would have been very good. And if we cannot see it clearlylasting longer than three years, that would not be a great surprise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with the staff forecast. I thinkit's very plausible. I usually have something to point out but nowthat they have the saving rate up some I don't have any complaint atall with it. And it has even occurred to me that the forecast couldbe right, Lyle. I really don't see anything in the domestic economythat would be terribly upsetting. Possibly something could come outof this Eastern [Airlines] situation and we could get a lot of labordistress and a lot of stoppages in transportation. But that's a longreach. The really different thing about this projection compared toearlier ones is the big trade deficit. I would take it that the tradedeficit is our maximum contribution to increasing the prosperity ofthe world economy because we're importing a lot and not exportingmuch. And I guess that's what we would want if we see a very weakgrowth economy. And we certainly do seem to see one. I've beenamazed as I read both the New York reports and our own on countrydevelopments that there really hasn't been a strengthening around theworld as I thought there would be as the summer went on. Indeed, [theworld economy] is beginning to look a little weaker.-16-10/4/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's a disproportionatelyfavorable impact on our trade from our large imports from Canada andJapan. There's a relatively small impact on Europe and--MR. PARTEE. Well, Japan doesn't look particularly strong.And, of course, Canada still has 12-1/2 percent unemployment. So, Ijust don't see too much there. But I think if something is wrong withthe forecast, it's in that area--some result of the very, very unusualtrade deficit and the very unusual potential for a drop in the dollar.And that's going to upset the apple cart. I can't say what it is, butthat's the area I would refer to as the most problematic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you see these signs of slowing downabroad over the summer?MR. TRUMAN. We just got a revision in the German industrialproduction figure, which was adjusted in July. It went down not 0.9but 2.8 percent. That's a--MR. PARTEE. Italy, France, and England are often mentioned.MR. TRUMAN. In the United Kingdom, the action yesterday todrop interest rates by about 1/2 percentage point when their monetaryaggregates are above target is interpreted as meaning that they, too,were seeing things weaker than they had hoped. And France and Italyhave adjustment problems. So, there's not much over there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, I've been sitting at meetingswith these fellows and they told me for a week how good things wereand that they were getting better.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the line they've been taking.The Chancellor of the Exchequer told me that he thought [the UKeconomy] was going to be even better in the second half than in thefirst half, which most people are saying is not so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A big increase in the GNP in Germany inthe second quarter--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, the best one can project, Iwould assume, would be 2 percent real growth in 1984 for the Europeancommunity. And it may fall short of that. I think the biggestthreat--and I know we'll get into that later--is not the exportproblem that we're having in our current account deficit but somethingprobably happening in the LDC indebtedness situation that will triggersome major ripple effects around the world.MR. MARTIN. I'd certainly like to join in that [assessment],Tony. When you look at country after country and what they haveagreed to under IMF constraints, in each case one can make the pointthat they have to solve their own problems--the deficit has to comedown, and the subsidies, etc., etc. When one looks across the wholeless developed world one wonders how they can increase their exportsand how they can slash their imports--not just reduce them but cutthem to the bone--and what happens after they cut them to bone. Wehave this whole section of the planet continuing to operate andjointly [trying to] solve their problems, and it seems to me thatinevitably there are going to be great difficulties. And this-17-10/4/83Argentina thing is a very political action in appearance but there aregreat, great possibilities for disturbances arising out of that sideof it.MR. PARTEE. Maybe we need a larger trade deficit.MR. MARTIN. Maybe we do.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. From that point of view we need aneasier monetary policy.MS. TEETERS. That's right. The best thing we can do forthem is lower the interest rates.MR. BALLES. I agree, Pres, and that's why I raised thatissue for some discussion here.MR. MARTIN. When you look at the [projected] increase in ourexports from the second quarter to the fourth quarter of 1984, given a15 percent change [in the value of the dollar] and stipulating allthese matters, but assuming that the IMF pattern will work, that wewill get the [increase in IMF] quotas, and that we will get the $6billion and another $7 billion in credits--. The assumptions arecumulative. They simply in my mind do not add up to a world recovery.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a pretty strong statement. Iwas about to say that I was struck by everybody's optimism around thetable. Now you tell me there's no world recovery. It seems to methat the business news has been quite mixed recently and everybody isperfectly willing--maybe with your exception--to look through this andsay [the economy] is really very good or reasonably good and is goingto continue. All the economists who can't see over the horizon areperfectly willing to see out to the next 18 months anyway--at leastthose around this table--and say that things are going to be fine, ororderly, or whatever. Now, I do think that has a bearing on ourcurrent policy decision. I'm not sure that the news is all thatuniformly good statistically, but I hear a lot of optimism around thetable on balance. And it may be right. I'm not arguing that it'swrong. That's just the conclusion I take from the discussion aroundthe table: Ignore all these soft figures. People are feeling prettygood.But looking out into the future and questioning what can gowrong, I think a lot of things can go wrong, none of which can beeasily incorporated into a forecast of the kind that the staff has tomake. I would put this debt problem at the top of the list, and letme return to that. But let me just make a comment about the oilsituation, just on the other side of Mr. Roberts' comment. If wereally had a disturbance in the Middle East, which people worry aboutnow in terms of the Iraq/Iran war getting more aggressive andinvolving an impairment of the oil flow from the Gulf area, I think itis true that, looking at the United States position alone, we importrelatively little [from Iraq and Iran]. And one could say that ifthat supply were almost cut off, we could probably make up that gaprelatively easily. I don't remember the exact figures but the MiddleEast still supplies 35 percent of the world's oil or something likethat in exports.-18-10/4/83MR. TRUMAN. It's a little more than that, probably.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There would be tremendous shortageselsewhere in the world.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And our price--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Activating shut-in capacity or whatever inthe United States wouldn't make a dent in that situation and the priceimpact could be very large if it really happened in a major way. Ithink this is a completely unpredictable kind of event, but I don'tthink that we can consider ourselves [unintelligible].MR. ROBERTS. Paul, I think Bob Sweeney's projection wentlike this: If Iran and Iraq had no production at all, [thedifference] from the decreased levels at which they now operate couldbe offset by shut-in production. He assumed that the Saudi productionwould be protected by the United States. That's the big differencehere.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that may be if just Iran and Iraqwent. That's a big assumption--whether it can be confined to them. Istill think there might be a bit of a problem, but you're talkingabout a more manageable [situation]--not U.S. production, I don'tthink, but Mexican, Venezuelan, and Nigerian might get through--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the fighting would spread intothe Gulf and straight to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they ever reach peace there, we'dprobably have a surplus. I guess that's something one can't evaluate.This exchange rate problem and our export problem are all mixedtogether. As many people have said, it's a new ingredient. I don'tknow whether to worry more about the exchange rate remaining high ordeclining precipitously. I think either would give us very realproblems. This wage situation is very uncertain in my mind; itdepends upon psychology and expectations. I get ultimately buoyed upwhen I see some figures and ultimately discouraged when I analyze some[other] figures and the lack of any big adjustment, as I suggestedearlier, in industries that have not been severely impacted by therecession--the financial industry and the utilities industry to nametwo. All of these things don't tell me very clearly what policyshould be.But let me return to the debt issue for a moment. The brightspot there, of course, continues to be Mexico. Even there it has tobe looked at with some degree of realism, I suppose. Their externalfinancial condition is substantially better. They have a certainamount of cash; they haven't drawn upon all the bank loans they candraw upon. They will be in a position to go back to ask the banks forsignificantly less money next year, even assuming their imports rise.And they probably will get lower rates in the process. If everythingelse goes smoothly there, it will probably be a simpler process thanit was last year. But at the same time, even looking at Mexico alone,there aren't many signs apparently of an increase in economic activitythere. They're still at the bottom in terms of their own domesticbusiness picture and they've had a more severe contraction than theprogram planned in the first place. It's not unlikely, I suppose,-19-10/4/83when you begin making a vigorous adjustment that it will go a littlefurther than you estimated. That's part of the reason why they lookso much better--fairly dramatically--externally. They have even fewerimports than they were assuming when they took the contractionarymeasures. Of course, we're feeling the other side of that in ourtrade picture. But still, I think one could say that they are in aposition to [have] some expansion consistent with financial stabilityif nothing else goes wrong among their neighbors or elsewhere in theworld. That prospect isn't exactly safe; we have had Brazilstruggling for months and months. And partly because they have beenstruggling for so many months, I think the political support for astrong adjustment program has deteriorated within Brazil. They had apolitical setback a few weeks ago when the Congress reared up andrejected a wage law. That is of no substantive significance initself, but the opposition demonstrated that it could reject the wagelaw and by implication that they intended to reject the wage law thatis the centerpiece of the Brazilian program. Now, that--MS. TEETERS. How much longer does that have to run?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has a month-and-a-half or so torun at the maximum. They might do it by avoiding a vote. There maybe some maneuvering to have a vote and try to get it passed, but it'sa very tenuous situation. Mainly because of that situation, I thinkthe prospect of getting any short-term financing into Brazil hasevaporated, and their arrears are getting bigger and bigger; and theyhave arrears of the kind that will produce nonperforming loans overthe third quarter. I don't know if that's any disaster, but it willbe an interesting psychological test of the market when banks have toreport nonperforming Brazilian loans in some magnitude. On the otherhand, we did manage to put together in principle a basic financingprogram for Brazil if they carry through on their adjustment program.That money wouldn't be available before the end of the year, but inprinciple the outlines of that--a combination of bank money and publicmoney--are set to go forward. It will not go forward unless theycarry through on the adjustment program, and that is very much inquestion. As I suggested, it may not go forward anyway because westill have a big problem of getting all the banks to join in. Thelead banks have agreed in principle; they haven't gotten all the otherbanks to agree yet. But it's going to remain a quite tenuoussituation. Argentina is in a particularly political period before anelection. It has been mentioned that they already have taken actionsthat are inconsistent with their IMF program and it's a question as tohow long they can be said to be in compliance with it. The actualspecific tests of that program have not yet been violated, lookingback, but it's virtually certain that they will be, looking forward.The [situation] has heated up internally in terms of negotiations withthe banks to the point that they put the central bank governor in jailyesterday.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That ought to be an IMF compliancestandard!MR. PARTEE. That's an unusual hazard.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's indicative of the hazards that theyrun. I don't know [the details]; all I read was a newspaper report-20-10/4/83that he's too friendly with the foreign banks. But it is someindication of the difficulty of managing these programs.MS. TEETERS. Didn't a judge down there overturn one of therestructurings?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he made a constitutional rulingagainst one of the provisions; it had to do with a waiver ofsovereignty as I understand. It says Argentina can't do that, andthat's a point the banks have insisted upon in these arrangements.And apparently some more particular political incentives are operatingon that judge as well. But, it is illustrative of the enormousproblems that are both real in the terms that Governor Martin wastalking about and political and organizational in terms of the numberof people that have to get involved. This, for instance, was a judgein the southern part of Argentina. I don't think it was any greatplot, but I think he is in opposition and is a radical fellow whoapparently just acted on his own.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Also, Gonzalez del Solar told me that[the judge] acted under the influence of the Argentine Air Force whoare very powerful in the Terra del Fuego region where he is located.They are very militantly nationalistic and angry at the United Statesand Great Britain. Now on the other hand, [unintelligible] told delSolar before he got arrested that they seem to feel that the[unintelligible] Sandinista candidate as well as the radical candidateare both going to play this debt issue very moderately. That was theview as of a week ago. And he certainly didn't get arrested by thosegroups; he got arrested by--MR. MARTIN. But look at the risks involved, as we discussedthem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are not the only countries involved.Some of the medium size countries in Latin America are not in good,though not in terrible shape. Chile, Peru, Equador--none of them isin good shape, but they maintain their equilibrium. Venezuela hasbeen taken care of and an election is coming up, so it should beeasier; but there are still very tense political pressures. And thereare countries elsewhere in the world, notably the Philippines andNigeria, that are on the verge of real problems. The Philippinessituation is obviously complicated by their political problems on alarge scale, quite apart from their economic problems. That makes itvery difficult to deal with the economic problems.The risks [in this country] are at least as large as theyhave been and in my judgment may be larger. I don't know what thedefinition of crowding out is, but the only way I can see reallyimportant short-term relief--by short term I'm talking about a year orso--would be to have interest rates decidedly lower. The chances ofhaving interest rates decidedly lower with the budget deficits of themagnitude that we are running do not seem self evident to me. Growthobviously is terribly important, but growth acts over a period ofyears. To get real leverage on their external flows in the short run,interest rates would act over a period of a year if we had a decidedreduction in them. Because their debts are so big, Latin America Isuppose would get $4 to $5 billion of debt relief if we had a couplepercentage points reduction in interest rates. We would not get-21-10/4/83anything like that from the growth side in that kind of time period.Yet, it is hard to be optimistic that that is going to come about. Isee nothing there but their continuing to hang on by their fingernailsfor the indefinite future. As for these special IMF programs,Governor Martin, I think it is worth saying--IMF or not--that theconstraint is the shortage of finance. And if we didn't have an IMF,I suspect they would be involved in even more contractionary programssimply by force of circumstances if they were unable to raise themoney abroad. So, it's a risky picture from that side.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is the view in the world--I'mnot sure it would be so at this table--that if a major internationalfinancial problem is triggered, let's say, by Brazil or Argentina orsomething, that the Federal Reserve is basically the lender of lastresort in the world. So much of the debt is dollar-denominated that alarge part of the world, including France, would look to the Fed toease monetary policy immediately and very drastically. I'll leave itat that, but I hear that.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I've heard it too. The foreign--MR. ROBERTS. Me too. It's very disturbing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In fact, one very distinguishedmember of the financial community told me that if Brazil were toannounce a standstill or default, whatever you want to call it, thatinterest rates would immediately fall in the market in New Yorkbecause everyone would expect that the Fed would have absolutely noalternative but to ease policy.MR. WALLICH. If countries defaulted on interest, since theinterest is more than what they've been borrowing, they would actuallybe able to import more, assuming that nothing else intervened. Ourbanks would not get their income and the consequences would betremendous. But just in terms of what the picture is for them, theyfeel that they could import more if they stopped borrowing and payingthe interest.MR. MARTIN. From whom?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but that assumes that they canstill get IMF help.MR. WALLICH. Do you think we'd deny them imports?MR. MARTIN. I'm asking--MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know. How would they get bridgefinancing for it? And if they move the cash to the United States,wouldn't the banks take it? It would be a very difficult period.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, sure. And the trade creditswould stop and a lot of other things would stop. So, I think they'dhave a real crisis on the import side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think these countries have assumed thatit would not be very easy or they wouldn't be trying as hard as theyare. Brazil's vulnerability is clearly oil imports. If the oil-22-10/4/83imports dry up for two weeks, they're out of oil. That's notliterally true in the sense that there is a little more stock thanthat. But considering what has to be kept in the pipeline and soforth, they'd be in real trouble.MR. MARTIN. And [there would be problems in] the flow offoodstuff and spare parts after a period in which the inflow offoodstuff and spare parts has been down. They already have cut theirimports. Add on to that a difficulty of importing--GOVERNOR WALLICH. I tell them that too because I have tomake a case. I just want to say to you that the case is not veryconvincing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not very convincing to whom?MR. WALLICH. It's not very convincing to them that theywould not in some sense be better off if they defaulted. They willhave tremendous difficulties. They'd be sued; they'd be taken tocourt; planes and ships would be attached. Whether it would reallybecome impossible to import, I don't know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know either. But so far, theyhave not been willing to take the chance. That's what you can say.So far as the rest of the IMF meeting is concerned, let me say thatthere has been a lot of stuff in the newspapers. The tone, from whereI saw it--and maybe I didn't see it all--was reasonably good. TheUnited States took what was considered to be a very tough linespecifically on some of these IMF issues. A lot of the rest of theworld didn't like it much and certainly some of the developingcountries didn't like it much. But there was a tendency to say thatwe had to do that because of the IMF legislation, so we got excusedfor a lot of things we ordinarily wouldn't be excused for, I suspect.There was a feeling, which I don't think is entirely true, that it waspolitically necessary in the United States. The people were quitehappy that the President very strongly supported the IMF legislationin a very uncompromising way publicly--more strongly than he hadbefore in a public statement of this sort. That was accepted at facevalue and thought to be very, very encouraging. There was a greatdeal of worry about whether we will in fact vote for the IMF packagein the end and a lot of concern as to what would happen if that fails.MS. TEETERS. But he hasn't signed the letter?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He's presumably negotiating that letter.I don't know whether he will send it or not.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Send this to the--MS. TEETERS. Seventy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Seventy?MS. TEETERS. Seventy times.Axilrod?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How long are you going to talk, Mr.-23-10/4/83MR. AXILROD. 15 to 20 minutes on this special presentation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll let you talk for 15 to 20 minutesand then we'll have coffee.MR. AXILROD. There's a package of material--charts onvelocity, in which chart 1 is the Ml velocity--and I'll be referringto those charts. I'll be giving a special presentation on velocitywithout necessarily any implications for current policy. Mr.Chairman, I have no more than a very few comments on current policy,but I would delay making them if I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what order you're going in.You're going to talk about velocity first and then current policysecond?MR. AXILROD. Yes, on velocity for around 15 to 20 minutes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. PARTEE. Satisfied?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a question. These velocities onchart 8 look a little different--maybe it's a difference in scale--than those on chart 1. Are they computed differently?MR. AXILROD. No, I do have a lag in the middle panel onchart 1 and there is a scaling difference and they start in 1969.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Chart 1 isn't lagged, is it?MR. AXILROD. No, I don't have the lags in chart 1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it's on a four-quarter basis?MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Four quarters on--MR. AXILROD. No, they're both quarterly. They should beexactly the same except that it's lagged on one chart andcontemporaneous on the other and I shortened the time period and putM2 and M3 down for reference.MR. BLACK. The scales are a lot different.MR. AXILROD. There is a difference in scale but there shouldbe no difference in the numbers.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have a great respect for Steve'sanalysis. In fact, his report was so interesting that I wish to askhim if he would provide us with a copy of it so that we can study anddigest it. Until I've had a chance to do that, I wouldn't want tomake any immediate response or rejoinder other than to say that hisconclusions leave us with a considerable dilemma. The bottom line onhis conclusion--that it's premature to place much more weight on Ml at-24-10/4/83this time--is somewhat contrary to the paper that I distributedfollowing our last FOMC meeting. The dilemma that I see is that theBoard staff's response to our paper, which has not been circulated tothe rest of you yet, pretty much agreed with the second majorproposition in the paper that I distributed. Here's a quote from apaper from Steve that was prepared [by Board staff] and had to do withthe fact that there is no discernible relationship in recent yearsbetween M2 and M3 on the one hand and future income on the other:"Indeed, there does not appear to be any significant statisticalrelationship between M2 and nominal GNP." So, perhaps it'sappropriate to be cautious about saying that we can restore faith inM1 or put it up higher in priority in terms of our goals. But at thesame time, let's not overlook the fact that we've been dealing withtwo other intermediate targets, M2 and M3, and putting more weight onthose for quite a few months now. And I think all of us knew, orshould have known, that there was darn little relationship betweenthose two particular intermediate targets and the rest of the economy.So, M1 may be far from perfect but the alternatives are even worse.And that's the dilemma. Pending the chance to really cogitate andthink about Steve's paper, I'd prefer to defer any other comments orrejoinder until I've had a chance to do that. But I congratulate himon the excellent work that he's done here.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, may I make a comment? PresidentBalles did refer to a staff paper which actually had been sent, ofcourse, to your staff in the spirit of professional economicdiscussion. The bulk of it was the technical analysis of theeconometric methods used in the estimating procedures. There was asmall part of it in which the people went on to provide some testsabout whether M1 or M2 would be better. I would not read thoseresults--and I'm not sure that that paper would be circulated inexactly this way to the FOMC--as indicating in any way that Ml wasgood over the last year and a half. The part that you were referringto was a set of theoretical, not empirical, estimates of various kindsof elasticities and what one would have to have for Ml relative to M2for M2 to be better. I think the econometric evidence that I referredto here does show that the prediction values of M2 and M3 were nobetter than M1 in predicting GNP in 1982. In 1983, from someperspectives perhaps it was a little better; it turned out quite well,maybe by accident, because on average M2 and M3 don't do as well asMl. But M2 didn't miss the first-quarter and second-quarterpredictions by [much]; on average, it was less than 1 percent at anannual rate. The [predictions] went far off in the third quarterbecause of the first-quarter distortion in M2. So, I think it's quiteright that M2 and M3 didn't become better as Ml got worse, but theydidn't get nearly as bad as Ml relative to their past experience inthis particular period. This is a transition period.MR. BALLES. Well, if I may: I think we probably both agree,Steve--if you don't, say so--that the main reason for the precipitousdrop in Ml velocity in '82 and the first part of '83 was a paralleldecline that took place in both inflation and hence in interest rates.And bottom line, our expectation is--and admittedly this is a forecastand not yet a fact--that the slight improvement that we've seen in Mlvelocity in the second and third quarters is about to become more thanslight as we go into the fourth quarter. In fact, our forecast for M1velocity in the fourth quarter is about a 4 percent increase. Ifwe're right, and time will tell, we are really on the verge of Ml-25-10/4/83bouncing back to a point where it can be used and would be superior toM2 and M3. But, as I say, that remains to be seen.MR. WALLICH. I find it difficult to rely on velocity as ameasure of the usefulness of an aggregate because if velocity isvariable but determined by factors that can be measured in relation toit, principally interest rates, then the demand function for thataggregate will be stable even though velocity is not. And it seems tome that we have to factor that in before we judge the aggregates. Thedemand function I guess is pretty standard in the profession but haslately been buried among researchers. And I think efforts should bedirected toward getting a better grip on what is the right moneydemand function than on the stability of velocity.MR. BALLES. I would agree with that, Governor Wallich. Infact, one of the main thrusts of the paper that I distributed wasthat, in our view at least, demand for M1 has not been unstable inrecent times--that what we witnessed in '82 and in the first part of'83 was not a shift in the demand for money but a movement along agiven demand function as interest rates came down and people wantedmore money. That's not the same as a shift in the demand for money;that's moving along a demand function. And therein, I guess, lies oneof the differences in analysis between us and Steve.MR. AXILROD. Well, I think Ml demand may be highly interestsensitive at this point. The alternative estimating methods can giveyou somewhat different results over the long run than obtained in yourexcellent staff paper. I wouldn't doubt that in this transitionperiod Ml elasticity is a lot bigger because I think the NOW accountshave introduced that because of the ceiling rates and the relatedmovement of market rates and ceiling rates. So, it appears we havethat. The main point I was trying to make for the Committee was thatif indeed it is true that the Ml demand is highly interest elastic--and I don't think it is over the long run though I think it may benow--to the degree that's true the value of Ml as a target, even ifyou can predict the demand, is reduced. It is not such a good targetfor you any more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. AXILROD. Then, when interest rates go down, because theeconomy is weaker than you have projected, you have to let money growa lot faster than your target. So, it isn't serving the function of afixed target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're back to targeting interest rates?MR. AXILROD. Right. Intuitively, if there was no interestelasticity to money demand and income was weak, then you could holdthis fixed target and income would be dragged back up. There would bea lot of interest rate variation. That gets to be the problem ifmoney is as highly interest elastic as your paper makes out.MR. BALLES. Well, one of the things that I found fascinatingabout the technical paper that was distributed was that the Board'sstaff found fault with the way we had computed interest elasticitygoing back to the mid-1960s, but there seemed to be no disagreement inthe two methods that your staff used leading toward a conclusion that-26-10/4/83interest elasticity had shown virtually no change. The interestelasticity of M1 has shown virtually no change following theintroduction of NOW accounts in January of '81 and Super NOW accountsin January of '83. I was quite impressed by those flat lines. Thatwas one of the things that we had concluded: that the introduction ofNOWs changed interest elasticity.MR. AXILROD. I think there are some technical disputes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you have some disagreement there.Do you have 2 minutes on current policy, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, it's very brief since theaggregates are so comfortably within their ranges. We really had ahard time thinking of alternatives for the Committee to consider.Alternative B, of course, was based on current reserve conditions,which we've interpreted as borrowing centered around $650 million, andan associated funds rate probably around 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent.Alternatives A and C are somewhat easier and somewhat tighter,respectively. But even so, the degree of ease and tightening aspresented there is not so much as to push the aggregates outside theirlong-run ranges; Ml, M2, and M3 remain within the ranges from now tothe end of the year. The logic of presenting alternatives within ourusual structure--where aiming at a higher money growth leads to lowerinterest rates and a lower money growth to higher interest rates--tomy mind yields somewhat anomalous results under current circumstancesunless there are vast differences in opinion about the staff outlookfor the economy or about the demand for money. For instance, giventhe economic outlook, there is no apparent need to force money up ordown in the ranges by significant changes--at least premeditated orfore-ordained changes--in reserve restraint or reserve paths. Thequestion would seem to be more whether if money were moving up in therange, or even above it, the Committee would wish to tighten. And ifmoney were moving down, would the Committee wish to ease and to whatextent? It's somewhat opposite from the way the specs are presentedand the logic of it. Given as much uncertainty as still prevailsabout the meaning of the aggregates that are the focus of policy, itseems to me that the answer to the policy question still involves anassessment of the economy and emerging financial conditions. Thus,the directive as structured at the last two meetings, with a sentencethat in effect serves as a proviso--permitting reserve adjustments tofaster or slower money growth depending on the economic outlook andfinancial conditions--seems appropriate assuming that whatever optionis adopted is an option that keeps money growth comfortably within therange.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that I think we ought to have adoughnut.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You all heard Mr. Axilrod's opinion thatthe real question is what to do if these various aggregates begingoing off track. The implication is that there isn't much to do atthe moment. Although he didn't say it explicitly, I suppose thatsuggests some version of alternative B, which he interprets as nochange for the moment, assuming nothing goes off track. I will raise-27-10/4/83that question anyway, as to whether that's a reasonable startingpoint.MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I think that's a very goodstarting point and I would recommend that we pursue that path. Myonly concern would be that we not let the growth of the aggregatesdiminish from these suggested rates in October through December, whichare well above where we've been recently.MR. PARTEE. I think that's probably the question isn't it,Paul--whether they are going to snap back in the way projected?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we know. That's whatSteve was saying: We have to get some guidance on what happens ifindeed [monetary] growth either snaps back and goes above or goesbelow. Presumably, there would be some implication for moving and therate of speed at which to move. How aggressively to move is a nicequestion. If we start where we are, which is at this peculiar $650million borrowing level that we talk about but which has never been inexistence--MR. AXILROD. In the past three weeks.MR. PARTEE. The fundamental borrowing level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is going on in the market today, bythe way?MR. STERNLIGHT. The funds rate is firm at 9-1/2 or 9-5/8percent--a slight improvement.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're on track with $650 million now?MR. STERNLIGHT. Borrowings have been running closer to $1billion this week. Banks may want more excess reserves than we'reallowing for. Our projection has us slightly above the [reserve]path, which is staying put, and getting some RP withdrawal that willput us closer back to the path.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we had $647 million one week; andthat was the week before we went to a $650 million [objective].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the week before we went?MR. BLACK. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't want to speed you alongfaster than you want to go, but are we starting roughly where we are?MR. BOEHNE. May I ask a question about where we are? Iunderstand the $650 million; I think I understand why we shoot at $650million but don't hit it. But are we talking in terms of a federalfunds rate of 9-1/4 percent as being what we think is roughlyconsistent with $650 million of borrowing or are we thinking of 9-1/2percent as being consistent with it, or what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 9-1/4 percent is what Mr. Axilrodsays, but I don't consider that a vital part of the decision. I don't-28-10/4/83know exactly what [funds rate] is consistent with it down to the lastquarter point.MR. AXILROD. Borrowing since the last Committee meeting, aswe said, varied between $650 million and $1.6 billion. And forpractically all of that time the funds rate on a weekly average basiswas within 5 or 6 basis points of 9-1/2 percent. Then one week itdropped to a little over 9 percent. So, the relationship has beenquite loose.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the best answer I could give toyour question is that $650 million implemented over a period of time,with a reasonable excess reserve figure, would probably give you afederal funds rate averaging less than it has been averaging.MR. PARTEE. A little less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somewhat less; how much less I don't know.MR. BLACK. I liked your starting position better than theone you moved to subsequently, Mr. Chairman.MR. RICE. Did it change?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not aware that it changed.MR. BLACK. I thought it did--just a tad, it seemed to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about $650 million borrowingand using the specifications of alternative B.MR. PARTEE. That sounds fine to me.MR. RICE. Me too.MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that the risks are probably moreon the side of continued undershoots just because, looking back overthis, if we get a string of undershoots we usually get them in a row;and if we get overshoots, we get overshoots in a row. It seems to methat we're more in the midst of a string of undershoots so, for nointellectual reason at all, my gut tells me that we probably have alittle more chance for continued undershoots than we do overshoots.MR. PARTEE. The trouble with that is the undershoots endsometime.MR. BOEHNE. They do end sometime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have no particular feeling on thatone way or the other. But I do feel we have to discuss how we willreact to either undershoots or overshoots. I'm only in stage one.MR. BOEHNE. My sense is that if we continue to get weakness,we ought to probe down with the borrowing. I don't have a problemwith that. I would have a problem, however, if we suddenly got a lotof strength; I would not automatically want to probe up.-29-10/4/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're just a little ahead of thegame. Let me come back to you and ask my original question: Do wewant to deal with those questions that you're dealing with against thestarting point of basically $650 million of borrowing?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's the only thing to do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that seems to represent the generalfeeling. Okay, Mr. Boehne, go ahead. Did you say if monetary growthfalls short [of expectations], you want to react pretty quickly and ifit goes above, you want to react more slowly?MR. BOEHNE. That's basically right.MR. PARTEE. I don't agree with that. I would be evenhandedand I would react to an appreciable change in the aggregates in eitherdirection.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'd want to be evenhanded but I wouldwant to try and interpret [the aggregates] in light of what washappening in the economy. If I saw a weak money number for Octoberprospectively and a very strong set of September employmentstatistics, then I'd relax and let that happen. If, on the otherhand, the money growth were strong in October and the Septemberemployment statistics came in very weak, then I'd want to go in theother direction. But I'd want to have a lot of input from thinking ofwhere the economy is going.MR. MARTIN. I think the fragility of the world debtsituation is such that probing downward makes sense. I think that isthe major risk to our recovery on a three-year basis; it's a majorrisk to the world's recovery; and it's a major risk to the financialinstitutions, particularly the commercial banking institutions in thiscountry in terms of write-offs and their possible contraction ofcredit in a different sense than we use that term. Therefore, I wouldbe very cautious in probing upward and quite willing to probe down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just mention a descriptive pointthat bothers me a little, but it's going to be dealt with in thepolicy record. If we do begin as we just said--that we remainbasically unchanged--presumably the directive will say we remainunchanged. The last directive said we remained unchanged. In theory,we have eased a shade since the last meeting but both directives saythings are unchanged.MS. TEETERS. But we haven't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It all would be clear enough if theborrowings actually had been lower recently, but in fact they weren't.So we're saying we are remaining unchanged in a somewhat easierposture that isn't evident--MR. PARTEE. And may become so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --to anybody who is not inside our heads.How do we explain this in the policy record?-30-10/4/83MR. BOEHNE. Well, we have to do the borrowings. We couldsay something like "taking into account the somewhat lower reserveconditions." We would say about where that level is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What level? The trouble is the lastfigures right up to this meeting are higher in terms of borrowing.MS. TEETERS. We average them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we say reserve conditions. I don'tpresent this as a major substantive point; it's just a littlesomething that has to be cleared up, and it's a little difficultbecause they--SPEAKER(?) How about "maintain the somewhat easier tone."MR. RICE. But it's within the tolerance limits of unchanged.That's [conveying] the point that we can still say unchanged eventhough there has been substantial--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying there is a substantiveproblem but I think there is a completeness-of-the-record problem. Wehave gone from--it wasn't much of a change--$800 million or somethingin borrowings in our minds to $650 million and it's all labeled asunchanged. And, in fact, the statistics went from $800 million to $1billion in the last--MR. BALLES. Weren't there a lot of quarter-end pressures inthat?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know why it happened. All I'm saying isthat some clever writing--not clever in the pejorative sense--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. John Berry's article in TheWashington Post, I think, goes in that direction. He quotes from thedirective and says that the flexibility of how the Desk interprets"maintaining the existing degree of restraint" is becoming enormouslywide.MR. PARTEE. He neglected the fact that the Desk checks withthe Chairman.MS. TEETERS. No, he didn't.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, it came through pretty clearly.MS. TEETERS. But can we use the words "decrease slightly"?If we got to $650 million, we would be down almost $300 million in theborrowing average for the month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say that, but that's a littlemisleading too in terms of our--MR. PARTEE. How about "maintain a slightly easier posturewith respect..."-31-10/4/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The nice thing to say would be "seeks tomaintain the slightly easier posture implemented over recent weeks,"but it wasn't implemented.MR. BALLES. How about "intended for recent weeks"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's exactly what it is: maintain theslightly easier posture intended but not implemented.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we're quibbling about words now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't--MR. GRAMLEY. I understand. In terms of the way this shouldhit the public later on, I think we'd be much better off if we saidunchanged and then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just raised this because I thinkit needs some description in the policy record. It would not be inthe directive itself unless somebody can think of very clever wordingfor the directive.But I diverted us from this other discussion. What I haveare some views that if things come in weaker, we ease a little, ifit's quite natural on the aggregates. And if things come in tighterwe would be either reluctant or we'd be symmetrical, all dependingupon the business situation.MR. MARTIN. And the international situation.MS. TEETERS. Well, I happen to be depressed about theinternational situation; I think it has gotten increasingly fragile inthe past couple of months. And the best thing we can do for them isto get lower interest rates. If we have the opportunity to lowerthem, I think we should do it. So, I would probe downward as much aspossible and be reluctant to raise the rates.MR. KEEHN. We do have a meeting next month and one wonderswhether anything is going to happen between now and then that we haveto worry too much about.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if we continue operating as wedid here, there is a certain degree to which the Chairman and the Deskand Steve are exercising a bit of discretion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this is simple enough unless thebusiness news diverges from the monetary aggregates news. If we havethe kind of thing Lyle was talking about, all the [business] numberswould be coming in quite buoyantly but the monetary numbers couldremain low for another month and we might be quite happy about thatand not want to do anything. If the business news is mixed or weakand the aggregates are low, it's quite clear what we do; and viceversa, it's quite clear what we do. If we get these mixed signalsfrom the two sides, it's a little more difficult.MR. MORRIS. Then you could handle that in a conference call.We could make a directive based on an existing understanding that ifwe get the kind of---32-10/4/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't deal with every possiblecontingency here. We can have a call, but we can get some feel forthe situation anyway.MR. GUFFEY. It's not meaningful, I think, for this shortintermeeting period but how would the markets read this directive ifwe say "maintain the existing degree of restraint" and have theaccompanying language for [moving] up and down [from that], when theysee after the next meeting that the quarterly targets at least for M2and M3 were raised at this particular meeting and [we say] nothinghappened.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have they?MR. GUFFEY. Well, they won't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The numbers we would put in here, Isuppose--. Oh, the 1/2 percentage point [difference]. Supposeinstead of saying 8-1/2 and 8-3/4 percent, we just say 8-1/2 percent[for M2 and M3] and 7 percent [for Ml].MR. GUFFEY. Well, to be sure, the two have gone up only 1/2percentage point from the third quarter to the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're up 1/2 percentage point.MR. GUFFEY. But it [represents] some ease. My question, andmaybe somebody can answer it, is: How would the market interpret that30 days from now?MR. AXILROD. The October 1st deregulation is enough almostto explain a 1/2 point, I would think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think they would pay any attentionto a 1/2 point [difference].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What they will pay more attention tois if they see the fed funds rate decline to below 9 percent in thisperiod and then they see the release of a record that says "maintainthe existing degree of reserve restraint." Then they would besurprised, possibly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, if the money supply were low, I thinkthey would say: Okay, you said if the money supply came in low, you'dease a little.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if the money supply were stillwithin the target but in the upper half, then I'm not sure they wouldunderstand that we were not being a little more secretive in easing.But I don't think it's a major point.MR. PARTEE. Well, the staff projects pretty strong growth inthe money supply; I wouldn't think it likely that the funds rate woulddrop by much. In both the market and the net borrowings, it seems tome to--MS. TEETERS. Well, it depends on velocity.-33-10/4/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If the real economy were showingsigns of weakening, even though the money supply was still in theupper half but within the range, it might still be a situation wherewe would do some easing. That's a mixed case.MR. PARTEE. That's even another combination--high money anda low economy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's not likely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The more I look at that first sentence themore it bothers me in terms of being misleading. I'm afraid the moreaccurate thing to say would be "The Committee seeks in the short runto decrease slightly the degree of reserve restraint evident in themarket in recent weeks."MS. TEETERS. Yes, that's the record.MR. MORRIS. Why not?MR. GRAMLEY. Right. When you say "reserve restraint" areyou talking about the funds rate or are you talking about net borrowedreserves or borrowings?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Net borrowed reserves or the borrowings.MR. GRAMLEY. It seems to me if we put out a directive--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We did have one whole week where netborrowed reserves came in less.MS. TEETERS. The month averages out as $450 million.MR. STERNLIGHT. There were three recent weeks when theborrowing was about $700 million.MR. AXILROD. The lowest week was way back on September 9thwhen we had virtually--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me look at these figures. Maybeit's not as bad as I thought it was. What are they? Read off therecent borrowings and the net borrowed figures.MR. AXILROD. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing for theAugust 24th week, which was the week of the meeting, was $1.1 billion;August 31st it was $1.2 billion. Then it was $757 million, $647million, $1,589 million or $1.6 billion, and then this past week $739million. And this week they're probably going to be somewhere around$800 or $850 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Now, what was [net borrowed]?MR. AXILROD. The net borrowings, doing quick subtraction inmy head, would be: $600 million August 24th; around $700 millionAugust 31st; then close to zero; around $220 million; $1.3 billion;and last week $317 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And this week it should be what?-34-10/4/83MR. AXILROD. Now, the market takes out the seasonal though.This week?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $300 million or so.MR. AXILROD. This week we're aiming at $200 million. Yes,it's $450 million and $650 million, so probably we're very close to$200 million. We may hit it with higher borrowing or higher excess.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe that's not so bad. If youtake out that one figure and give weight to net borrowed reserves, wehave been distinctly lower than we were. I don't know when we were--MS. TEETERS. But take the monthly nets. It was +10 in May;-200 in June; -370 in July; -609 in August; and about -450 inSeptember.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's one month. But I guess wecould almost say "The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain theslightly lesser degree of reserve restraint achieved in recent weeks"if [the numbers] come out [as expected] this week. We had two weeks,then, of a low net borrowed figure.MR. AXILROD. The other fact, Mr. Chairman, is that in Julynonborrowed reserves dropped about 0.3 percent and dropped 9 percent[in August]. In September, based on the data as of the end of lastweek, they will rise around 4 percent because there's a small drop inborrowing. So, the nonborrowed is turning up in September afterdropping.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it's "sought in recent weeks."MR. GUFFEY. I think that's right. Can we use the word"sought" in recent weeks instead of "achieved"? That's exactly right;everything else would--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe we just say that and explainit in the [policy record].MR. STERNLIGHT. The policy record can refer to thedifficulties with the Treasury balances.MR. AXILROD. Well, you could say "the slight easing inreserve positions" and point to the nonborrowed going up as wasreflected mainly in drops in short rates other than the funds rate,which was affected by all these other things. Because the other shortrates are down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, except right now as we're meetingthe funds rate is quite high.MR. AXILROD. No, I mean it was reflected in other shortrates apart from the funds rates.MR. MARTIN. Now we're talking about rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we say we're aiming at those rates?-35-10/4/83MR. AXILROD. No, I meant the easing in reserve conditionswas reflected--MR. GRAMLEY. I can't imagine that market participants wouldlook at numbers like net borrowed reserves, borrowings, and the fundsrate and decide that what we've been trying to do is to hit a targetfor net borrowed reserves. The numbers are all over the map, as arethe borrowing figures. They saw the funds rate average 9.4, 9.4, 9.5,9.5, 9.5, and 9.0 percent [in recent weeks]. And to say that marketparticipants are going to look at what we say and then compare it withthe borrowing numbers seems to me a little strange.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Really, I'm not sure what you're saying.That one week screwed it up. Otherwise the borrowing number and thenet borrowed both are distinctly lower than they were earlier.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, but they're all over the map. The rangeruns from $647 million to $1.6 billion on borrowings. And for netborrowed reserves it's from 0 to $1.3 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that one week--MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it isn't just one week. Throw out thatone week and now the range on borrowings goes from $647 million to$1.2 billion and on net borrowed reserves from 0 to $700 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The $1.2 billion goes back to the earlierperiod; that's before we moved. In the last five weeks there's onlyone week that's way out of line.MS. TEETERS. Well, the net borrowed on a monthly basisreflects what we've done, if you average out the weeks.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could we put it this way? Could wesay: "The Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of reserverestraint, compatible with the slight easing in market conditions inrecent weeks."MR. MARTIN. That "compatible with" sounds like ratetargeting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Because we have seen some easing inmarket conditions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I think the problem--MR. PARTEE. I like the word "maintain" and I like the words"slightly easier." Any connective that makes it possible--MR. RICE. Anything that makes those reconcilable is allright with him!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we have written down here at themoment is: "The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain theslightly lesser degree of reserve restraint sought in recent weeks."MR. BLACK. Should I put that down or will you change it?-36-10/4/83MR. WALLICH. Then we have to explain how we came to seek adifferent one than we said in the previous directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what we've done is distinctlycompatible with the previous directive, but I--MR. PARTEE. Yes, because it's consistent with weakaggregates in the light of business conditions.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, should we heed the Biblicalpassage "Seek and ye shall find"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eventually. [This wording] isn't perfect,but then--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible] other interest ratesin the markets generally, so why can't someone try to explain why--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think by implication you're saying weare aiming at interest rates.MR. MARTIN. Mention rates and they think we're targetingrates. Mention M1 rebasing and they think we're targeting Ml.MS. TEETERS. Well, we've mentioned enough different thingsin that length of time.MR. BLACK. They might think it means the discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything we put in there is going torequire some explanation.MR. GUFFEY. But the policy record can explain that.MR. PARTEE. Sure.MR. GUFFEY. Really, it's not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless there's strong objection--I don'tthink we're talking about any substance in what we're trying to dohere--I'll put in this language: "The Committee seeks in the shortrun to maintain the slightly lesser degree of reserve restraint soughtin recent weeks." We'll explain in the policy record that we hadproblems with Treasury balances and the market was a little easier.MR. GUFFEY. That's also consistent with what we would havedone because of the way the aggregates came in from the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I don't think there's any trouble inrationalizing it with the previous directive.MR. AXILROD. There will be indicators of somewhat lesserreserve pressures on the net borrowed--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is except for that one week.MR. AXILROD. Yes, if we look at September and August onaverage, net borrowed is a little less than---37-10/4/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Who can add some enlightenment asto how we should react to contingencies?MR. BLACK. I'll just say symmetrically, Mr. Chairman.MR. BALLES. Paul, I'd like to support the proposition madeby Governor Martin a little while ago that if we have a chance toprobe toward a little lower rates, we should do so for the reasons heset forth, which I find not only cogent but very worrisome.MR. CORRIGAN. There's a Catch-22 here, though. My concern,as I said before, is that, if anything, the economy may be strongerthan the forecast and then inflation might be greater than theforecast. I think that way because in some ways the focus now shouldbe 1984 rather than just the fourth quarter of 1983. Personally, Iwould be happier if we came out someplace closer to between "C" and"B" rather than "B." I think the Catch-22 is very important becauseif the economy is stronger and inflationary pressures are greater,then we get Frank Morris' collision sooner rather than later. And ifthat happens, we will not have helped the LDC problems; as a matter offact, it works the other way. I get troubled by this whole argumentthat says that the solution to the LDC debt problem is [for us] toease monetary policy. The real solution is beyond our control: It'sa tighter fiscal policy. But I think there is some danger inoverplaying that and ending up with just the results that we're tryingto avoid.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that to the extent that if weget too aggressive--and we're talking in a limited range here, Iunderstand--and take too many risks of having the aggregates and theeconomy moving up on us, it may help to bring a little glimmer of hopeto the LDCs for three weeks, but then we will put an arrow throughtheir hearts.MR. PARTEE. You know, Paul, I think this language in thenext sentence is just perfect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think the language covers it allright.MR. PARTEE. The language, you notice, does not qualify lessrestraint but it does qualify more restraint by saying "somewhat" morerestraint. And I think maybe that's a reasonable compromise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any trouble with thelanguage. I agree that the language in its general way covers whatwe're talking about. But it doesn't mention the internationalsituation explicitly. I don't know whether that's wise anyway.MR. PARTEE. I don't either.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, this dialogue here--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is the phrase "other factors bearingon the business and inflation outlook."MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, in terms of whether we probe oneway or another, it is at least my sense that we would be probing-38-10/4/83toward a little lower rates only on the condition that the Ms come insomewhere outside the range shown in alternative B. If anyone wasmaking a different proposal than that, I didn't understand it.MR. PARTEE. That was my understanding too.MR. BALLES. So, we aren't talking about making major overtmoves to accelerate the rate of monetary growth, which I agree wouldbe untoward. We'll never get to 1984 if we have a big LDC debt crisisin the fourth quarter of 1983. I think we have to deal with thesethings one at a time. I'm not talking about any extreme measures, buta shading in favor of easing a bit in the immediate future if we can,given the behavior of the aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is October [Ml] starting from interms of the September level?MR. AXILROD. The latest figure published for the 21st isjust barely above the August level. On September 28th a furtherincrease is what we would forecast and, for what it's worth, a ratherstrong increase on October 5th. There's some doubt about all that.But that would give you an October level well above--by about $5billion--the September average level, which would suggest a strongOctober growth of a little over 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Over 10 percent.MR. AXILROD. But we're not projecting that.MR. PARTEE. You had 6-1/2 percent.MR. AXILROD. Most of the forecasters don't believe it andthe rest of the projections assume a drop after the October 5th week.But if that [unintelligible]--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me give you a calculation, which youdon't have. Given an assumption that the 28th is a little higher thanthe 21st, if you increased it by $1-1/2 billion a week in October,would it be over 7 percent?MR. ROBERTS. Yes, because $2.8 billion is 6-1/2 percent.MR. AXILROD. I think $1 billion a week--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the average.MR. AXILROD. Yes, I'm sure it would be. I'd have to work itout.MR. CORRIGAN. That would be almost 10 percent.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that would be very high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon where you start.The average--MR. AXILROD. We'll just make the calculation.-39-10/4/83MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, if I may: There are an awfullot of uncertainties out there. And it would seem to me that thecontingencies that might arise--for example, the LDC crisis orsomething like that--can be dealt with on a conference call and aspecial meeting of the Committee. But I really have two concerns.One is the strength of the economy. As I said before, we tend to seethe economy growing more rapidly than perhaps other forecasters. Theforecast for the second quarter was certainly not very accurate. Itcame in at 9.7 percent, appreciably above what people thought. So,that's a worry that I think we ought to have. The other concern to meis that [we ought not just] look at the growth of the monetaryaggregates over the last couple of months alone but back up and lookat what has been happening to monetary growth since August of 1982.In the period from August '82 to June '83 we had very rapid monetarygrowth. So, it seems to me when we're deliberating about a specificpolicy option, we have to take into account those two periods of time.Because the aggregates in the short term--and I guess even in the longterm--are within the targets, there doesn't seem to be any particularneed to have a more restrictive policy at this time. On the otherhand, since we have had some accommodation--some ease in the monetaryaggregates and some base drift, I might add, in rebasing--I think itwould be premature to ease at this time. So, I would opt for a targetsomewhere between "B" and "C." If we did that, we would be able tocome in somewhere near the middle of the range for Ml. If my numbersare right and if that kind of policy were followed, it seems to methat Ml growth would still not be restrictive over the long term. Mlcould grow at a little over 6 percent from September to December andstill reach the midpoint of the target range. That still would implyfourth quarter-to-fourth quarter growth of about 10.4 percent, so sucha policy is still not restrictive in any sense. What it comes down toin my mind is that we ought to opt for a steady-as-you-go policy andnot change policy at this time. And as I say, the contingencies thatmight arise can be dealt with specifically.MR. ROBERTS. But "B" already has the fourth quarter down to5.6 percent, dependent upon December being at an 8 percent growthrate. I'd go the other way and say the risk is that it's going to betoo tight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have decided on the $650million, generally interpreted as $600 to $700 million.MR. GUFFEY. What does that mean, Mr. Chairman? Why set arange for borrowing at all?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, sometimes strange things go on withexcess reserves or otherwise.MR. GUFFEY. It has no meaning. It's not a constraint up ordown. We merely build the path on $650 million; I don't understandthe range for the borrowing that we incorporated last time. To meit's meaningless. The policy that--MR. STERNLIGHT. We use the range.MR. GUFFEY. Well, you start out at the midpoint of the rangeand that's the only thing you really use until there's someconsultation that suggests that the aggregates are coming in-40-10/4/83differently [than expected] and then you drop the borrowing. The lasttime we set the range at $700 to $900 million and then we went to $650million. And that wasn't a policy decision of this Committee; it wasdone in consultation with the Chairman. Why set a range?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's be clear; there may be someconfusion about it. My interpretation is that this directive says weease if things are coming in low or we tighten if they're coming inhigh. I don't interpret that as staying within the range that wasset, which is an operating--MR. GUFFEY. No, and that's my point. If it doesn't have anyimplication for staying within the range, why set a range?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's not a big point to me. Itdoesn't make much difference, but sometimes we get in there and weask: Shall we stick explicitly at $650 million this week when thingsare very tight and excess reserves are going to be high, or do weallow for a little higher excess reserves this week because that lookslike what's going to happen? A little more borrowing or a little lessis just fiddling around from week-to-week. I don't know whether itadds much; it's not a big deal one way or the other.MR. PARTEE. It gives you a little movement around the mean.I might remind you that we're talking about a number that is not evenin the directive. So what difference does it make whether it's apoint or if we think of it as being a range of $100 million?MR. WALLICH. Well, would the path then also have a range of$100 million?MR. STERNLIGHT. If we use the individual weekly paths, theyhave a specific value over time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a distinction in my mind between atechnical reaction to the patterns that are developing during theweek, which has no real significance in terms of what we're aimingfor, and whether we're really making a [policy] move, however small,because the aggregates are high or low. And it is meant to conveythat. I don't care--we've operated both ways--whether we use a numberor [a range]. It doesn't make much difference.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As I understand it, part of thattechnical problem--the reason for that modest shift in the borrowingassumption--can be that the System suspects there's a miss in theprojection because of some peculiar movement in the fed funds ratewhich doesn't seem to be explained, unless there is some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll do it anyway because we're alwayssitting there saying: Well, which way are we going to miss? Whichway are we likely to miss this week and which way are we going to bemost misleading if we miss? So, we lean a little one way or the othersometimes. And we do that whether we put down $650 million or whetherwe put down $600 to $700 million. That kind of gives the range forthat, but it's not a big deal.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, in answer to your question: Ifwe were so unfortunate as to have those $1-1/2 billion [weekly]-41-10/4/83increases--you remember $1 billion is to the top of the range, 9percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It clearly goes higher than the range,depending on where you start.MR. AXILROD. On the assumption that there's a furtherincrease in the week of the 28th, it would get you 14 percent growthif it steadily grew $1-1/2 billion through the course of that month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sounds as if even if it were $1billion, the growth would be pretty high.MR. ROBERTS. Oh yes. The latest week is right on theSeptember average.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The latest week is on it, so if the nextweek is up--.MR. ROBERTS. So if it's up, we're already above.MR. AXILROD. We're not assuming that. You might say thefourth quarter we have there is consistent with what our local moneymarket model would be projecting and roughly, not very far off, whatthe quarterly model would suggest. We've allowed for a bit of shiftout of NOW accounts or demand deposits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What about the broader aggregates? Arethey starting low or high?MR. AXILROD. I'd have to find that nonexistent sheet. I'dhave to go through the same exercise. M2 has moved up steadily overthe course of September, so that would be starting on the high side ofthe average. And similarly for M3. Roughly, the early October levelthat we're estimating is [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're telling me the chances arethat we're going to be starting a little on the high side on all theseaggregates, which makes it sound to me as though the chances are thatOctober may come in a little high rather than the opposite.MR. AXILROD. We put M2 and M3 a little high, again justallowing for the brief effect of this deregulation. But our modelssuggest growth in nontransactions balances in the 9 to 10 percentarea--not really exceptional on a monthly average basis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does this figure that you have in allthese alternatives allow anything for deregulation?MR. AXILROD. Well, as I was trying to say, in October we'veallowed a little. We started allowing nothing and then after seeingsome of the newspapers where there has been some advertising, in NewYork and other places like that, we've allowed some.MR. GUFFEY. But only for M2 and M3?-42-10/4/83MR. AXILROD. Well, we pushed down Ml a bit in [October], notmuch more than roughly 1/2 to 1 percentage point on our estimate ineither case. It's a very small effect, but some effect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could get pretty good growth in M2 andM3 in October. I guess that ought to be mentioned in the record as aminor effect. Well, I don't know whether we need to go any further.Unless somebody wants to change his or her mind, we're interpretingthis in any event at around $650 million [in borrowing]. I don't muchcare whether we call it $600 to $700 million or around $650 million.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, you did ask one question about howwe would treat overshoots and undershoots and I said symmetrically. Iwonder if everybody agreed that we ought to react as quickly to anundershoot as to an overshoot or vice versa.MR. PARTEE. I don't think they did.MR. BLACK. I don't think they did either. There was a rangeof [views].MR. MARTIN. I don't.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, there was a range of views.MR. PARTEE. But if you literally look at this language, Ithink it's not too bad.MR. BLACK. The language sounds fine but the--MR. PARTEE. Well, the language is more permissive on thedown side than on the up side.MR. BLACK. Well, I didn't read it that way. In that case,it doesn't sound fine.MR. MARTIN. Oh, yes.MR. PARTEE. Oh yes, there's a modifier "somewhat" on the upside.MR. GRAMLEY. "Somewhat" is all we ever do between these[meetings] anyway.MR. PARTEE. Well, it's just that little [nuance].MR. BOEHNE. Bob, have you learned--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's pretty subtle.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You could underline it.MR. GRAMLEY. I wouldn't wish to change the language, eventhough I believe in going much less symmetrically, to make itconsistent. I think everybody reads into these changes in languagemuch more than they ought to.-43-10/4/83MR. PARTEE. I said it originally in order to solicit Pres'ssupport but now I've said it to elicit your support on the other side.MR. BLACK. Well, I'm not voting, obviously.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only hesitancy I would have is that Iwould think we're more or less symmetrical but I would accept GovernorGramley's caveat that before we do anything we look and see whetherthe business picture tends to be consistent or inconsistent with theway the aggregates are going.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's clearly true.MS. TEETERS. Yes, that explains it.MR. BOEHNE. Also, we should look at incoming information onthe distortions that the deregulation might have on the aggregates.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's a new thought.MR. GRAMLEY. We don't really expect it to be enough tobother to put that in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are probably covered on that ifwe make some mention in the policy record that we expect a smalleffect in the next few weeks but we don't expect it to amount to much.If we decided it mattered a heck of a lot, we would take it intoaccount.MS. TEETERS. We were so accurate on the MMDAs!MR. GUFFEY. I would come out on the side of being a bitasymmetrical in the sense of not reacting to higher growth of theaggregates during this upcoming intermeeting period simply because theprojections indicate that we're going to be within the long-run rangesunless the aggregates just explode on us. Then I think we'd have aconference call and do something about it. The other point is that wedo have a federal funds target range of 6 to 10 percent and we're inthe upper part of that already. And as a result, that range would notlet us react to strong growth really as quickly as we could, it seemsto me, if the aggregates came in somewhat lower. So, I would notreact aggressively on the up side, if at all, but I would be moreinclined to react in this intermeeting period on the down side if wesaw the aggregates coming in a lot lower.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, a further technical clarificationon M2: That nonexistent kind of weekly M2 has not been rising as fastin the most recent weeks relative to a normative weekly growth as Ml.So, if after the week of the 28th it grew at a rate which if sustainedover time would give you 10 percent for a year, it would give you anOctober of around 9 percent. So, it's not biased as much toward anupward thrust in October.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we've gone as far as we can.I think we're verbally hitting the shadows. There is a slightimplication of asymmetry in the language and I don't think there'smuch more we can do. We shouldn't start tinkering with that, I think.I don't know what more we can do.-44-10/4/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether I can postulatethe median opinion as being a little less quick on the trigger on theup side than on the down side, all other things equal.MR. ROBERTS. Very little less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we can vote. We're voting for thespecifications of "B" rounded off to 8-1/2 percent, with a mention inthe policy record that 8-1/2 percent was shaded up a bit because ofderegulation but we don't expect the effect of deregulation to be verysignificant. In explaining that first sentence we would indicate inthe record that we had tended to ease a little. Otherwise, all thelanguage is the same with the substitution of 8-1/2 percent for 8percent and that new first sentence I read. There's a 7 percent whereit was 7 percent and borrowing is $650 million or thereabouts.MR. BALLES. Would you say that again please?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm saying you're voting on the directiveas it is with an 8-1/2 percent and a 7 percent number in there andwith a new first sentence as I read it before: "The Committee seeksin the short run to maintain the slightly lesser degree of reserverestraint sought in recent weeks."MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a tentative schedule for nextyear to which it is my understanding nobody has objected. And wethought we might begin on Monday next time even though it's in themiddle of the quarter and discuss the inflation outlook in a littlemore depth. Let's start the next meeting on Monday afternoon.MS. TEETERS. What's the date?MR. BERNARD. November 14th.MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I am giving a speech on Mondayafternoon at the ABA, but you're suggesting having an FOMC session onMonday afternoon.MS. TEETERS. What did you want to discuss in more depth?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Inflation and the outlook. Expect todiscuss inflation and come equipped to debate the issue, includingmaybe what we were intending to discuss, which is where we should goon inflation in a 5-year time perspective.-45-10/4/83MR. KICHLINE. Whatever you like.MR. PARTEE. To zero, I thought.MR. KICHLINE. We thought we were going to cover some ofthese issues in depth in the spirit of trying to look at alternativeviews of the determination of wages and prices, as well as some of theissues that are debated among folks here as well as outside theCommittee. For example, does the speed of activity matter indetermining inflation and a few other issues.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's all fine. And you're alsogoing to explain how we can get to a zero rate of inflation in thenext--I'll be modest and say the next 5 years.MR. BLACK. Be more symmetrical.MR. CORRIGAN. No, it's a matter of being less symmetrical.MR. BLACK. Yes, in the other direction.MR. MORRIS. How many recessions can we assume?MR. MARTIN. How much unemployment?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How many recessions do we need?MS. HORN. We did pretty well in the Eisenhower years.END OF MEETING-46-