Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 24, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 24, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Balles, Black, and Ford, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, 1/ General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Ettin, Prell,Scheld, Siegman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market transactions.5/24/83Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Divisionof International Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Burns, Koch, Parthemos, and Stern,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Dallas, Atlanta, Richmond, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMs. Arak, Messrs. Bisignano, Lang, and Soss,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofNew York, San Francisco, Philadelphia, andNew York, respectivelyMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, FederalReserve Bank of New YorkMr. Stevens, Economic Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank ofClevelandTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 24, 1983MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Open to questions.MR. BOEHNE. I have a broader question than just exchangerate conditions. I detect among bankers in my District a rising levelof nervousness about these [foreign] debt problems, with talk ofmoratorium and things like that. Is there anything you can share withus about that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what I could say that'svery meaningful. I agree with you. There is a rising sense ofnervousness underneath the surface and I think a lot of it is relatedto a perception that Brazil is not doing very well. That perceptionhas some foundation; I certainly [don't have] any confidence in theBrazilian situation. If they need more money, they are out ofcompliance with the [Fund requirements. They] must be able to make aFund drawing on May 31 and aren't going to be able to make it through[unintelligible] and the question is [unintelligible]. There is somefeeling that the Brazilians may not be the most avid people in theworld in following through on the strong program. I think that's alot of it. But it's also true that Venezuela is stumbling arounddoing nothing [about] their big problems. Other countries in LatinAmerica pretty generally have a problem. On the more positive side,Mexican payments are proceeding on schedule. One sees reports thatthey're going to need some more money. I don't see any indication ofthat, assuming that the oil price doesn't go down again. And while Ithink production is still declining in Mexico, there is a possibilitythat they have a little money in the bank and may begin to bring insome more and we may begin seeing some improvement before long. Thereseems to be a little more confidence in exchange markets in theMexican situation doing a little better.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think part of the better Mexicanperformance is due to the enormous disorganization. The agencies havenot been spending the money. In the second half of the year [FinanceMinister] Silva Herzog is expecting that they're going to be undermore pressure and it's going to be much harder for them to hit theFund targets on the public [sector and public expenditures].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we shall see. But at the moment ifthere is any room for confidence, it's in the Mexican situation; forthe rest of them the situation is deteriorating. Yugoslavia is notdoing all that well. And, obviously, the interest rate level in theUnited States [unintelligible] with all our debts is one factor[unintelligible] the situation. Brazil is the focus of concern at themoment.MR. PARTEE. Sam, I didn't quite follow on the swaps. Areyou talking about the special swaps with the extension to August 23?This is not our regular swap.MR. CROSS. No. This is a special swap, which is a part ofthe BIS-U.S. facility including [the Federal Reserve] and the U.S.Treasury.5/24/83MR. PARTEE. Our maturity date is supposed to be the 23rd ofAugust?MR. CROSS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The indications are that they can meetthat; they may need a little help in August because they do have tomake up each payment they didn't make in August. How big is [thepayment] in August?MR. CROSS. It's $1.85 billion less what they pay next week.It would be $1.5 billion.MR. TRUMAN. They have another drawing on the Fund at thattime too. It's about $1.2 billion over and above what they have[unintelligible] in the meantime.MR. MARTIN. Lloyds Bank had indicated a substantial cutbackin their overseas committing process. Is that shared by NationalWestminster or other British or European banks? That's a pretty bigbank.MR. TRUMAN. I wasn't sure how to interpret that report. Infact, I was told the report indicated that they were cutting back notin Latin America but in other parts of the world, including NorthAmerica. [Unintelligible] it's relatively small. A 25 percent cutisn't going [unintelligible]. It applies to new lending but I thinkthat includes rollovers, so it includes as new lending what would ineffect replace loans that have matured on the bank's books. Putagainst the context of the fact that new lending to developingcountries in 1982 meant [decreases] in lending--[loans to] developingcountries in 1982 dropped by 50 percent--that cut is a pretty modestcut. That comforts me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible]. Unless there is someobjection, we will roll over the [swaps] as needed in the context thatMr. Cross described. We haven't anything other than that, do we?SPEAKER(?). No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions?MR. WALLICH. You refer to variations in the level ofborrowing and in the demand for excess [reserves]. Can you say whatthe market tends to think is our present target? Do they think it isany part of the money supply or do they think it's the funds rate orthe level of borrowing or free reserves?MR. STERNLIGHT. I tend to believe that they think of it as afree reserve target, Governor Wallich. And they probably think of itas centering around zero or very slightly plus.MR. WALLICH. So they attach more importance, apparently, toexcess reserves than the FOMC technique seems to give them.5/24/83MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, in fact, they do. Yes.MR. BLACK. Peter, why don't they think it's a federal fundsrate target?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't think they regard it as afederal funds target in the sense of pre-October 1979. I think theywould feel, with some reason, that if we are aiming at free reservesor borrowing we are aiming at something that has a likely range ofvariation in the federal funds rate but not a federal funds target inthat very narrow sense where the Desk pin-pointed within 1/8 point orso a particular funds level and intervened every time that there wasever so little a variation from that.MR. BLACK. But, given the variation in the apparentborrowing target every time the federal funds rate threatened todeviate, I am beginning to think that we are putting more emphasis onthe federal funds rate than on anything else.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think they see it as a federal funds range[once removed] but not a tight target.MR. BLACK. Yes, I can see that distinction: that theywouldn't think it was as tight as it was before October 1979. I amrather surprised by the answer.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When is this debt ceiling [issue] supposedto be cleared up?MR. STERNLIGHT. The Senate should be taking it up in theFinance Committee today. I think the Treasury desperately needs themto finish and then Congress can finish action by the end of this week.They will literally run out of money early next week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we are going to get a whole bunch ofofferings.MR. STERNLIGHT. Then we could get a whole bunch, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other question?MS. TEETERS. I have just one minor question on the[repayment of] the German marks. Was that under the debt ceiling?MR. STERNLIGHT. The Carter bonds. Yes, I think they were.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to ratify the transactions.[Without objection.]MR. ZEISEL. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, Bill Ford and I both happen tohave the same question, we just found out. Jerry, you referred to thefixed weight deflator. The Board staff forecast officially, at leastin the version I see here, uses the implicit deflator. Just referringto the first quarter of the year, with that implicit deflator risingto a 5.8 percent annual rate and the CPI and the WPI either flat ordeclining, we are getting major different signals now on what is5/24/83really happening on the inflation front. So, our technical questionto the staff, Jerry, is: Which of these different indicators of pricemovements do you consider to be the more meaningful?MR. ZEISEL. Well, the lower one, always the lower one! Thedeflator for the first quarter was distorted by very sharp swings innet exports, particularly the importation of fuels, which was downsharply. We expect that figure to move back into line in the secondquarter. We think the CPI and the fixed weight price index are abetter measure of what was happening to fundamental price movements inthe first quarter. And those were quite good indeed; they were in the2 to 3 percent range.MR. FORD. What about military procurement prices?Procurement is picking up. Is that captured in any of the otherindexes or is this the only one that really captures what thegovernment is paying for all this defense [spending]?MR. ZEISEL. Theoretically, both capture it.MR. FORD. The WPI ought to capture some of it.MR. ZEISEL. Yes, it should. The attempt certainly is madeto capture the actual increases in prices. The deflator is a bit moresensitive to shifts in weights. The rising increases in theproportion of defense spending would affect that index somewhat more.But actually over the last half year or so defense spending haslagged. There has been no increase since the third quarter of lastyear, and we are rather expecting a surge in outlays because this wassupposed to be the big year for procurement.MR. FORD. What I'm hearing is that the government is reallypaying up for spare parts and things like that because capacity toproduce has been run down in a lot of specialized activities. Do youhear anything like that--that now's the time to be selling nuts andbolts to the government?MR. ZEISEL. It seems sad that when capacity is way up pricesrun up sharply and when capacity is down prices run up sharply. Itsounds like a Catch-22 situation. I hadn't heard that particularargument.MR. BOEHNE. I don't have any fundamental disagreement withJerry's forecast. He has done his usual good job; however, it doesseem to me that there has been at least a subtle shift in thedirection of how the errors might be. At the last meeting I wouldhave agreed with the Greenbook, but I was thinking that if theGreenbook were wrong, perhaps there would be less growth. But itseems to me now that the risks have shifted. I think the Greenbook isright but if it is wrong, then there will probably be more growth.There comes a particular point in a recovery where the dynamics of arecovery set in and it's somewhat greater than the individual sectorsof housing, consumption, etc. I get the sense that these dynamics arenow at work. One sign that I look for in a recovery is when businesspeople stop complaining about high [interest] rates and they startsaying: Why don't you just keep things the way they are? When theystart saying that, it means things are getting better and they don'twant anybody to rock the boat. And that has been the dominant theme5/24/83of what I've been hearing. I think we are in that period where thedynamics really are beginning to take hold.MR. RICE. Jerry, I think I heard you say that the expansionover the next year and a half through 1984 would be [at a rate] justbelow the median for previous expansions. Would you still say, inlight of the present data that we have, that the strength of therecovery so far is below the postwar average significantly?MR. ZEISEL. Yes. The first year is when we get a major kickin output and our projections fall short of the average for the firstyear of recovery; it's about 70 percent or so. Our projections makeit up in a sense in the second year when on average recoveries beginto lose some of their steam and we are maintaining the same rate ofincrease in the second year as in the first. We have increases of4-3/4 percent in both the first and second year of the recovery.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's through the year that you'retalking about. I thought we saw some pictures yesterday that said therecovery so far is about average.MR. ZEISEL. Well, we have [only] the first quarter; I'maddressing myself to our projections of the first year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose you address yourself to the firstsix months, recognizing your projections?MR. ZEISEL. The only thing we have to date, Mr. Chairman, isthe first quarter and that was a rather modest increase of 2-1/2percent, which is well below the typical rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have industrial production and youhave auto sales figures.MR. ZEISEL. Incorporating the first and second quarterstogether probably brings us fairly close to the average.MR. PARTEE. Those monthly figures, you remember Jerry, wereplotted against a shaded area. We were more or less in the middle.MR. ZEISEL. For industrial production and employment--thefigures for which we have monthly data--that's correct. They'rereally quite consistent with the average recovery at this point.MR. BLACK. Jerry, if you exclude the CCC payments from thefourth quarter and also from the first quarter so that you get finaldemand of roughly the same magnitude in both quarters and make someallowance for the point that John Balles made about the possibleoverstatement of that implicit price deflator, wouldn't it look a gooddeal stronger? It would look somewhat stronger than average if itlooked about average before you made those adjustments, wouldn't it?MR. ZEISEL. As I recall, excluding the CCC gets yousomething in the neighborhood of 3 to 3-1/2 percent for the lastcouple of quarters. I don't have GNP excluding CCC; I have the finalsales excluding CCC. That was 3.3 percent in the fourth quarter, 3percent in the first quarter, and we're [estimating] 2.7 percent inthe second quarter.5/24/83MR. BLACK. But if in fact the point that John raised hassome validity, as we're inclined to think it does, and you made thoseadjustments, I would think real final sales may well be higher in thefirst quarter than they were in the fourth quarter.MR. ZEISEL. Well, final sales certainly are stronger in thefirst quarter when one makes that adjustment and certainly weaker inthe fourth quarter because CCC outlays were enormously high in thefourth quarter. So, you get a somewhat more stable pattern. Finalsales trail off a bit in our projection in the second quarter largelybecause of the net export situation. Basically it's a situation,depending on what you take out, where we seem to get a pattern that'sreasonably stable, excluding CCC, at around 3 percent over the lastseveral quarters.MR. GUFFEY. Jerry, part of your forecast beyond the secondquarter is premised on the weakness of the dollar. What kind offactors are you taking into consideration to project that the dollarwill indeed weaken later in 1983 and 1984?MR. ZEISEL. I think I'll let Mr. Truman answer; it's hisforecast.MR. TRUMAN. I'd say right up front, Mr. Guffey, that thereis clearly room for some skepticism about that element of theforecast. We are forecasting for the year a current account deficitof $35 billion, which would be more than twice the rate we've ever hadbefore, and by the end of the year a current account deficit of $60billion, which would be four times the [highest] annual rate we'veever had before. And our sense is that the market will look atnumbers of that sort, which will start coming out in the latter partof the year, with trade deficits of over $70 billion per month at anannual rate, and say that that will be unsustainable and that therewill have to be some corrections. We do not predicate this on much,by the way, in terms of trade in the United States falling relative toabroad or otherwise. One can argue that these kinds of forecasts,while they are high relative to market forecasts and to conventionalforecasts, are not out of the range of what people talk about. TheAdministration has relatively similar forecasts and they have more orless made them public. Our sense in talking to people in the market,although they know that some economists are forecasting these numbers,is that they're not going to react to them until they in some sensesee them. And as Sam noted in his report, the fact that the currentaccount moved back not toward zero but something like $7 billion at anannual rate from something over $20 billion in the second half of1982, largely because of oil which in many respects is a spuriousfactor, is one reason why the dollar at least in the short run hasstayed quite strong. That factor has, if anything, moved in the otherdirection in the short run. I would make one other comment. Much ofthe change in net exports in the second quarter is the resumption ofoil imports and, in fact, the two surprising things about the firstquarter were the decline in oil imports, which we obviously did notfully anticipate, and the remarkable growth in non-oil imports. Ifyou look at those numbers, which are really big numbers--and [sparked]by oil, which dropped to $20 billion at an annual rate--if anything,the outlook that we have now is more pessimistic for the currentaccount than it was two months ago.5/24/83MR. MORRIS. I don't understand why the market is notanticipating this.MR. TRUMAN. Well, if you talk to traders, they say: "Ofcourse, our economists are forecasting X, Y, and Z (and those tend tobe numbers that are smaller than ours) but I never listen to oureconomists anyhow."MR. CORRIGAN. You have imports rising by $60 billion betweenthe first and fourth quarters of this year. How much of that is oil?MR. TRUMAN. Between the first quarter and the fourthquarter? Twenty-five billion or so. Of the increase from [$313] to[$373] billion, a little less than half of that is oil, which is arebound. The price is there. You just add them up, price-adjusted alittle lower than you would [otherwise] think in the second half. Butmost of it is a rebound in quantity as we had a mild winter and inaddition they were running down inventory, if you believe the APInumber that reports a rebounding already in April.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My question has been taken care of byRoger. I just have a lot of skepticism about that projected declinein the dollar, if one assumes interest rates stay in this range, giventhe enormous interests on the part of foreigners in our securitiesmarkets and less confidence in European securities. A lot of theEuropean bankers we spoke with talked in terms of a very highpercentage of their portfolios staying in U.S. securities. Combinedwith the interest rate spread outlook and the safety haven aspects, wemay very well see next year the same kind of disappointment withregard to the dollar value that we expected in the last year. Thebulk of the market had expected a decline in the dollar in the last 12months and it didn't materialize. Nobody can say for certain; it'sjust that I personally have some skepticism that we should count onany decline with any degree of certainty.MS. TEETERS. Tony, how much of that is flowing into Treasurysecurities?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not very much, because central bankshave not been adding to their holdings. And [private] foreignersdon't tend to hold a very large portion of U.S. Treasuries.MR. MARTIN. We've had some Middle Eastern sales.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, putting it all together, therewas some reduction in some of the central accounts. Some of the OPECcountries have a big reduction. Of course, in France's holding, thatfamous surplus, it is not very clear where it is anyway. As I thinkChairman Volcker said last week, our biggest trading partner is"errors and omissions."MR. MARTIN. I'd like to join Tony in that caveat by addingthe awareness I'm sure we all have of the continued interest inAmerican companies by European and other investors who feel thateither a stake in an American company or the acquisition itself hassome great advantages, particularly when they buy in below book or atreasonable multiples of earnings. That's another factor, despite thestrong dollar.5/24/83MR. TRUMAN. Foreign purchases of U.S. Treasury securities involume at present are quite small, although they have been larger thanusual recently. They were almost $6-1/2 billion net last year and infact they were about $3 billion net in the first quarter of this year.MR. PARTEE. It's really a question, isn't it, Ted, of howeasy it is to finance the deficit from abroad? There can't be muchquestion that there's going to be a large trade deficit and the longerthe dollar stays high the larger the trade deficit will be. But whatwe don't know is how forthcoming the funds from abroad will be tofinance this deficit. If they are very, very eager to come here,maybe we don't need a lower price.MR. TRUMAN. For the last year we had an $8 billion currentaccount deficit and that's a coincidence. But in the second half ofthe year when that turned into a $20 billion current account deficit,annual rate, we had some weakening of the dollar. I started out myanswer to President Guffey by saying that obviously there is room forskepticism on this point. The other side, though, as you saidGovernor Partee, is that if the dollar doesn't go down, theneverything else being equal [unintelligible] the growth forecast willbe considerably less ebullient than we have it now, by something onthe order of 1/2 percent, as Jerry said in his briefing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I might make a general comment thatsome of you will not agree with, I'm sure. I think that one of themost disruptive forces in this whole question of a world recovery isthe strength of the dollar. The LDCs are paying their interest ondollar-denominated debt in dollar interest rates while they earn inweaker currencies. It adds to their problem. For commodity prices,including oil, it's the same kind of situation. And I think it willcontinue to be a drag on our economy in terms of exports. It'scertainly a drag on the other industrialized countries. We tend to bevery asymmetrical in our view of monetary policy with regard to theexchange rate. We are perfectly willing to tighten monetary policywhen the exchange rate is down to a point that concerns us anddisturbs us. But for some reason, we have what I would perceive as alarge measure of indifference to using monetary policy to restrainwhat is clearly a very damaging rise in the level of the exchangerate. This is a view, of course, that is common abroad. And I findprobably a greater gulf in intellectual thinking between theforeigners and ourselves in this area than in almost any other area.MR. WALLICH. I think one needs to factor into the exchangerate situation the possibility at least of another boiling up of theinternational situation and the impact on the banks. As things aredeveloping, our banks are likely to be more vulnerable if somethinglike that were to happen, partly because of the heavy involvement inLatin America and partly because they seem to have made lesspreparation in provisioning against losses than some European banks.So there might be deposit withdrawals in such a case. Now, whetherthat means also withdrawals out of the dollar into another currency orjust a move into U.S. Treasury bills, that is what one has to try tothink through as one tries to anticipate the effects of such a crisis.MR. KEEHN. On the domestic side I can confirm that the goodnews is even arriving in the Middle West but with one caution. Thecapital goods side is still exceptionally weak. The people I talk to-8-5/24/83who are in the very heavy side of capital goods see no improvement nowand they really are very discouraged about the outlook, particularlywith low operating ratios. Some of the people who have never reallybeen concerned about exports before--never relied on those markets--see this as an opportunity. And because of the exchange rate, theyfeel that they are precluded from any relief on that side. So, thepeople in heavy capital goods are still pretty discouraged about theoutlook. But other than that, I think the general environment in theMiddle West is significantly better than the last time we met.MR. ROBERTS. I just wanted to ask a question about inventorychange. My understanding is that the first quarter still had asignificant drag from inventory liquidation. I see your numbers herechange dramatically from the first quarter of 1983 on to, say, thefourth quarter 1984--$64 billion. If we took out the inventoryreduction in the first quarter--to kind of pursue Bob Black'sanalysis--you'd have a still stronger picture there contrasting withthe fourth quarter. And in view of your forecasted elimination of theliquidation of inventories, that suggests a lot of strength. Is thata valid assumption? Are you fairly confident about the change ininventories that you are projecting?MR. ZEISEL. One can never be confident about a sector likeinventories because there is so much of the visceral in it. What is areasonable level of stock is very much in the eyes of the businessmanand his expectations about the outlook. We are assuming a reasonablyconservative inventory posture over the next year and a half, largelybecause we feel businessmen first of all have been badly burned intheir inventory policies recently, and secondly because the cost ofholding inventories remains relatively high given our assumptionsabout interest rates. Essentially, we're saying that inventoryinvestment is not going to be a big force for expansion. The behaviorof inventories recently, as typically, has been the major factorturning the economy around. We've had a rather typical decelerationof inventory liquidation, which gives us an increase in GNP. That wasa big factor in the first quarter. Excluding inventory liquidation--that is, looking at final sales--it was a 1.3 percent increase. Wenow are assuming that inventories will stabilize beyond the secondquarter and start rising but at a relatively moderate rate.MR. GUFFEY. I'd just like to complete a thought that led tothe question to Jerry with regard to the dollar. There is a potentialthat we will have just an inventory liquidation/consumer spendingrecovery without the capital expenditures coming on stream.Traditionally, I understand, those have been very short cycles. Withthe [possibility] that there isn't any strength that might come fromexports, I just want to raise a note of caution about all the euphoriaand the good numbers that have come out in the last 30 days. Thepotential for this being an inventory liquidation/consumer spendingrecovery that lasts only through the third or fourth quarter perhapsis a real potential. I don't think we should become all that euphoricyet that this is a sustainable recovery through 1984. I'm a littleconcerned and not as sanguine about the numbers that we've seen.MR. PARTEE. I would agree more with Ed Boehne than anybodyelse who has spoken up to now. On inventories, Ted, I think we can'tsay precisely what path the inventory change is going to followquarter-by-quarter, but it seems extremely likely that it's going to5/24/83move up from a large negative number to zero or a small plus, andthat's a big algebraic change in the GNP when it occurs. It mightoccur this quarter or it might occur next quarter; it's hard to knowwhat the pattern will be, but it's ahead of us for sure. And it seemsto me that consumer spending just has to be pretty strong, with theincrease in the value of financial assets that consumers hold--it'shundreds of billions of dollars in improvement there--with the changein sentiment, which is one of the biggest that we've seen in years inthe surveys, and with the tax cut coming on in another five weeks,which adds another $30 billion to the hopper. It seems to me all thathas to mean a pretty strong consumer sector. I'm surprised the retailsales data are as poor as they are. Indeed, when you read theRedbook, where almost all of [the Reserve Banks] commented on retailsales, things don't look anywhere near as weak as the nationalstatistics. That is, the year-over-year increases range from a low of6 percent, as I recall, to up in the 13 to 14 percent area. I don'tknow quite what's wrong, but in any event I think there's bound to bethat increase in consumer spending and the inventory improvement. Andwith those I think some capital spending will come along. That comeslate in cycles anyway, Roger; it isn't one of the things that appearsearly. And by the end of the year I think we may be looking at a muchimproved capital spending situation. Maybe it won't help the Midwestso much because it seems to be in high tech and automated equipmentand so forth. Nevertheless, if anything, I think our staff has beensurprised by the strength in capital spending this early on. But ithasn't been a [heavy capital] goods kind; it has been computers andthe like. So, I think the outlook is really quite good and I agreewith Ed that whereas I might have been inclined to say the risks wereon the low side of the staff forecast last time, I think they'reprobably now on the high side of the staff forecast.MR. GRAMLEY. I would agree with Chuck and Ed too. I thinkwhat we are getting now are some of the typical internal dynamics ofthe business cycle process, with dynamism in one sector revivingconfidence in another and the whole thing building up into a morecumulative cyclical process. And in this connection, I was interestedin Jerry's comment in speaking of 1984. I don't think I can quote himexactly but he said something like this: That present high levels ofreal interest rates, which are assumed to be a consequence of themonetary policy we're pursuing, will be a major restraint on privatedemand. Another way of stating the whole idea is that if we follow apolicy which keeps interest rates from rising during the course of thedynamic cyclical process and that's fed by additional fiscal stimulusas time goes on, we may well be fueling a much larger economicexpansion than anybody is forecasting now. Those are two differentstatements, looking at the same phenomenon in a different way. Noneof us knows for sure whether we ought to regard present real interestrates as a major restraint on private demand or as a level of interestrates that will accommodate a substantial increase in private demand.And I think as one looks at what has been going on in the past sixmonths one is inclined--or at least I'm inclined--to the latter viewrather than the former. We are getting a very, very dynamic response,particularly in those areas that are most credit sensitive likehousing. So, we may be seeing a revival here of the usual cyclicalprocess, which will give us a much bigger increase at present levelsof real interest rates over the next two years than we're nowforecasting.-10-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I share the view that the risks this time arefor excessive boominess to the economy. I just want to make a verysmall point. In the Redbook--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't heard that word for a while!MR. PARTEE. I didn't exactly say that.MR. WALLICH. Well, I interpret this as a getting into the 5,6, 7 percent range at some point and I would think that would beexcessive. Now, what I wanted to ask is: The Redbook contains aspecial exercise on the construction industry. To me it showed theenormous diversity of conditions and how much of an artificial number,essentially, the average of all these different local conditions is.I was wondering whether it had been of any use to the staff.MR. FORD. Don't push them!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't have to answer that question.MR. ZEISEL. I will. I think it was of use in the sense thatwhile a diversity of opinions was represented, one did get a centraltendency both about the residential construction activity and housingstarts. The forecasts that were quoted appeared to range very closelyto our own expectations for 1983 in terms of housing starts. And wegot some confirming indication about expectations for commercial andindustrial construction--that is, that they were turning down and thatexpectations were rather weak. We found them generally useful.MR. MARTIN. Henry, let me comment on that, if I may. If wehad gotten a different response from the disparate remarks District-by-District and metropolitan area-by-metropolitan area, we almostwould have had to reject the survey results because housing marketsnationally are a mosaic of little markets and submarkets. You mustget this kind of result or someone is not doing his homework. This isa typical analysis and response of varying markets around the countrywith varying backed-up demand, different migration patterns, anddifferent local economic base conditions. I found it quite a validsurvey.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I've been skeptical for some timethat this upturn was going to be as modest as I think most people wereassuming, for a couple of very basic reasons. One is that a sharpdownturn like we've had is typically followed by a pretty sharpupswing. And then we've added so much to the money supply that evenif one assumes a pretty significant increase in demand for money, itseems to me that there is enough liquidity out there to finance apretty good pickup. Chuck and Ed and Lyle and Henry touched on therecent burst of statistics, which lends further support to that. So,I am in agreement with them about the strength of the economy. Ithink the staff has made the revisions in the correct direction byraising the projections. Specifically, I think the second quarter mayeven be significantly higher than they're projecting. But the mainconcern that I would have is that if we're right in our supposition-11-5/24/83that this is a strong recovery, we may well find that thoseprojections of price increase in 1984 are unduly optimistic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm impressed at the breadthof the expansion that is underway. I'm not depressed about it, asHenry seems to be. I think we have plenty of room to get an awful lotof unused capacity on the scene; that decline in unused capacity is avery positive phenomenon. But in reference to capital goods, I thinkwe've overlooked the fact that in the months of March and Aprilmachinery orders exceeded the level of shipments, which I think israther unusual for this early in the cycle. As I read the numbers, Ithink the capital goods sector is doing better for this stage of thecycle than I would have expected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin. How is your capital spendingdoing down in the oil fields?MR. BOYKIN. In a general sense, we pretty well agree withthe Board staff's forecast. Also, I think the risk is that it mightbe slightly low. Attitudinally I'm hearing much of what Ed Boehnesaid. In general there's a better feeling, but we still have a bit ofa mixed picture. If you look at the middle corridor of our District--that is, through Dallas, Austin, and San Antonio--it looks prettygood. But if you get a little to the west or a little to the east,where you encounter the energy or energy-related activities, you stillsee the concerns on the coast in petrochemicals and refineries. Whilethere is some improvement, there still are a lot of expensive rigssitting there in the Sabine River. If you get out in the west Texasarea, I think they have some very significant special problems andthat is still going on. Of course, along the border of the RioGrande, it's still pretty depressed, with unemployment up 25 to 30percent and that sort of thing. But in spite of the special problems,I do feel that we are seeing a recovery. Part of our problem is thatwe find ourselves in a little different situation than we're used to.We're usually feeling good about everything. But I think energy istempering our judgment a little.MR. BLACK. I thought people always felt bad about westTexas!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. This discussion is so different from ourprevious one. It certainly is gratifying to hear what I think is awell founded positive outlook. I won't call it optimism because ithas some aspects to it that I don't think apply. So, let me be Dr.Doom here for a minute and remind everyone that Wachovia has raisedits prime rate, that Bankers Trust has raised its broker loan rate,and that while one must allow for a good deal of difficulty theTreasury is experiencing because of Congressional inaction--if that'sthe correct term--on the debt ceiling, nevertheless, over the last fewdays there has been some upward pressure in the markets. Maybe thisis very transitory as far as interest rates are concerned. But if welook at the LDC debt question vis-a-vis these firming rates and assumeanything like even a 75 or 80 or 90 basis point increase in thatburden, we are looking at countries with $90 billion or $84 billion or-12-5/24/83$40 billion or whatever projections you'd like to use by the end of1983. If we consider how much of that debt is nonsovereign debt butis private debt, how much of it is carried by our banks and how muchis carried on a variable rate basis, [we see the impact] of the driftin rates on additional funds being advanced in those giant workoutsituations.If we consider the vulnerability of those countries who areoil exporters--to shift my ground here a little--if prices decline onthe petroleum products substantially more, these countries are payingon a weighted average basis higher interest rates. Yes, thatcertainly is offset to some degree by our ability to absorb someimports in some cases. The IMF constraints, as the Chairman andothers commented earlier in this meeting, [impose] great difficultieson some of the countries--even those who are taking them seriously andattempting to comply. And then, of course, finally there are thepolitical implications of compliance and the political implications ofhigher rates on the variable portion of the debt. It comes out to bequite cumulative. So, while I share the positive outlook with regardto our own economy--I have some reservations still in the housing areabut share generally the outlook--I think we must inject into ourdiscussions here, and we already have, the extreme complications andextreme sensitivities and vulnerabilities on the international side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think there's a good deal inwhat Preston says. We are not expecting, even without a financialshock in the international area, boom conditions. Certainly thesecond quarter growth may run as much as 5 percent or more, but westill would look for something more in the neighborhood of 4-1/2percent growth over this year and well into the next year under thebest of circumstances. Even though we're not getting into monetarypolicy discussions now, I want to take issue with what Bob Black said.I don't see that the money supply has increased that much. M2 and M3are either in their cones or a little below. The credit aggregates,both narrow and broad, are in their target areas. The fact that M1 isbehaving in the screwy way that we all expected and that there seemsto be a permanent shift toward holding a large savings component in Mlbalances in NOWs and Super NOWs should not [lead us to] generalizethat there has been that big an increase in the money supply. I hadthe feeling that for good and rational and sufficient reasons wedeemphasized Ml. And now our psychology and our thinking as well asthat of the markets seems to be creeping back to a situation whereeverybody is paying attention to Ml and these weekly numbers. I wouldjust take exception to the generalization that, in terms of a stimulusto the economy, the money supply has increased that much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the near term,I'm inclined to the view that we'll probably do better than the staffforecast in terms of real growth and maybe even in terms of inflation.But I'm not nearly as sanguine about 1984, certainly. I think forsome of the reasons Mr. Martin and Mr. Solomon suggested on theinternational front, we're by no means out of the woods there. But inaddition to that, I must say in looking at the budget process and thebody language that it is associated with, it doesn't seem to me that-13-5/24/83any real progress has been made on the so-called structural deficit--maybe some, but certainly nothing to write home about. But on top ofthat I do think we have to recognize that there is a lot of pent uppressure out there to raise prices. I think we're going to be able toavoid a manifestation of that pressure, perhaps for a period of time,simply because the productivity/unit labor cost phenomenon is workingalmost perfectly right now. That's not going to last forever. So, asI say, the near term looks fine, but I'm just not sure about 1984.And, looking at the staff's implied forecast, it gets a little hardfor me to imagine out in 1984 how we really can keep those interestrates where they have them with underlying conditions what they are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. I think I'll wait for the monetary discussion.I want to respond to Tony. I disagree with him about 100 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else? Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. One more question, Mr. Chairman. I certainlyshare the feeling around the table here that the business outlook isclearly better this time than at the time of the last meeting. It'scertainly true in the West. I'm getting a little concerned, though,about the inflation outlook and whether it will be as favorable as thestaff forecast has it. I'd like to turn to you again, Jerry, on thatone. Our staff is not as optimistic as your people are. I hopeyou're right. I understand that your forecast for the deflator as weget out into the balance of this year is dependent on some improvementin productivity which seems to be fairly significant--about 3 percentgrowth, if I remember the figures correctly.MR. ZEISEL. About 3-1/2 percent.MR. BALLES. 3-1/2 percent. Also, if my recollection iscorrect, that's pretty high in the range of historical experience; ifnot, tell me so. I'd like to know what makes you so confident thatwe're going to get this good accomplishment in productivity; I hope wedo, but it's apparently essential to getting this good outcome on theinflation front that you people are predicting.MR. ZEISEL. The productivity performance over this year--Ithink it's 3.6 percent that we are forecasting--is really a cyclicalrebound in productivity that reflects the more efficient use of bothcapital and labor as output increases. And it's not an unusualperformance. The underlying trend productivity that we have is notreally much better than what we had been having recently. We'vejacked up our trend productivity just a bit. We've been using afigure of about 3/4 of a point--a very, very poor productivity trend--until fairly recently. The underlying figures seem to suggest alittle improvement. Now we're using something like one percent;that's really not very much better. And our forecast does not assumea large productivity increase in 1984. We get back down toward thetrend of about 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent toward 1984. So, we're reallynot leaning on any very significant improvement in our fundamentalproductivity trend to get our inflation forecast. It's really afunction more of the fact that we have a weak labor market, which weproject will continue through the entire forecast period. We have hadvery good price performance. Wage negotiations have a tendency to be-14-5/24/83backward-looking and they are now looking back at very small increasesin the cost of living. And we think that will be helping the overallperformance of wages and, therefore, labor costs and prices over thisperiod. In addition, of course, we have been and still are benefitingfrom the strength of the dollar and its implications for both importsand the competition of those imports with domestic producers. So, wehave had a lot of things going for us and they are still going for us.And we think the inflation outlook is really very good, at leastthrough this year, and we're assuming no deterioration in 1984 but nofurther improvement either. We stabilized our price projection at3-1/4 percent in 1984 as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you have a rather pessimisticproductivity increase for next year.MR. PARTEE. I think so too.MR. ZEISEL. It's back fairly close to the long-term trend,which is a relatively poor trend performance. I hope you're right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. I'll very quickly report on our region. We arefairly optimistic about the near term. I come out with an overallfeeling much like Jerry Corrigan's that the next two or three quarterslook fairly decent. Current performance is pretty positive all theway around on employment. Most people are starting to notice that weare really getting into a very heavy wholesale buying center role downin Atlanta. All the merchants for hundreds of miles around come downto our merchandise mart operation and buy, and one can really see whatis going to happen in the next few months. At least the sentiment ofthe buyers is up; the buying of clothing for fall and winter andspring is way up over last year. And our taxable retail sales [gains]are well up into the double digit range, contrary to the nationalfigures. As somebody said earlier, and I agree with it, the Redbookdoesn't seem to agree with the national figures at all. Our Districtcertainly doesn't. Two areas of great concern to us are the areathat's adjacent to Bob's territory, which until the oil bloom came offwas always one of our greatly optimistic areas and now that hasreversed. There the drilling came down and all the people in oil andenergy-related activities are very deeply concerned about the declineof drilling, defaults on the loans, etc. Relating to that is thebanking stability picture. Most of the concern expressed around thetable has been about the international concerns. We are stillexperiencing very severe difficulty. Governor Partee, I don't knowwhy you're smiling up there.MR. PARTEE. You have a couple of big ones coming up.MR. FORD. Yes. You should all be aware of the fact thatthere is to be more excitement in Tennessee in the next few days, asGovernor Partee and some of you may know, because the Tennesseebanking situation really is quite desperate. There is a substantialnumber of banks--even a few beyond the Butcher bank empire--that lookpretty shaky to us. And when you look at the national figures forbanking--! We've just finished looking at the FDIC summary of thewhole industry and I was amazed to see something like a 72 percentincrease in write-offs in 1982. Write-offs for the whole industry net-15-5/24/83of recoveries went up from under $4 billion to $6-1/2 or $7 billion.I don't know whether any of the staff people really follow thesenumbers but usually the huge increase is the year after the recession.So, I'm beginning to wonder what the poor bankers are going to have towrite off in 1983--if they had to go up from under $4 billion inwrite-offs to almost $7 billion in 1982--with the lags in recognition,if they are forced with all that's going on in the international areato put in bigger provisions for any of the Latin American and EasternEuropean [loans].MR. WALLICH. German banks wrote off $4 billion and that'sprobably not including Luxembourg. Now, that's a [banking] systemabout 1/4 the size of ours.MR. FORD. Yes. From the reports I've been hearing fromDresdner, Commerce, and so on, it sounds as if they feel that they'vetaken the heavy hit and really worked hard at cleaning up their books.MR. WALLICH. Most of that is for domestic [loans]; 1/5 isfor international and 4/5 for domestic.MR. FORD. So, I'm as concerned about the condition of someof our banks as the rest of you are concerned about the condition ofthe international banks. I'm not sure [about the latter]. In themacro picture I come out where Jerry does. The next few quarters lookpretty good to me. The big question is the one we were raising aboutwhether the staff will be right. I've never wanted to pray harderthat they're right. But I must say I share some of the skepticismthat has been voiced about whether we can continue to keep inflationdown as well as they say we will. I hope they're right, but thatforecast is hard to visualize against the monetary and fiscal backdropthat we have right now.May I ask one question? Someone was talking about countingon a $30 billion tax boost. Where is this fiscal [legislation]? Isthat tax reduction in the bag now or is somebody talking about tryingto recapture some of it?MR. ZEISEL. Well, that's the third stage of the--MR. FORD. I know what it is. The question is--MR. ZEISEL. Yes, the tax reduction. There have beendiscussions of capping it or removing it and so on. It seems ratherlate at this point to accomplish very much.MR. PARTEE. I assume the new withholding schedules have goneout to corporations.MR. STERNLIGHT. The new withholdings schedules went out afew days ago.MR. FORD. So it is in the bag.MR. ZEISEL. Well, I would say certainly 90 to 95 percent.MR. FORD. So, it's the indexing that's up for grabs now,the way you read it.-16-5/24/83MR. ZEISEL. That's certainly one fairly large source ofadditional funds that is up for discussion. I think there will besome attempt possibly to replace the withholding of interest anddividends with some other kind of increase in taxes and so--SPEAKER(?). Part of the banks--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have to move on here a little.Mr. Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I don't have any additional insightsto put on the table. I just want to say that I come out very much inthe middle of this discussion that we've had so far. I'm impressedwith the vitality that the economy has shown recently. And if thingsgo the way they should go, I would expect that the expansion willcontinue at a healthy clip for the reasons pointed out by Chuck andLyle and others around the table. It seems to me that that's the bestbet for the present time. But I think that we ought to be prepared tobe disappointed. The consumer it seems to me has every reason to beexpanding his expenditures, but the consumption sector may not performthe way we would expect at the present time. We've been disappointedby the consumer before--surprised on both the up side and the downside, as a matter of fact. And I think we should remember that theconsumer did not respond to last summer's tax cut the way we expected.Also, while I agree that it's too early to expect a big boom in thecapital goods sector, the outlook for the capital goods sector isworrisome to me. I recognize that the most recent figures for capitalequipment spending have been very encouraging, stronger than anybodyexpected. But we haven't seen any indication that capitalexpenditures for heavy equipment and so forth are going to perk up,and I'm just not convinced that they will. Also, we have to keep inmind the possibility that the dollar will not decline and that exportswill not expand--the scenario emphasized by Roger and Pres and Tony.So, in short, I think we have to be prepared for the downside outcome.But I have to say that I come out in the middle and, therefore, Iwould tend to go along pretty much with the staff's forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we can turn to Mr. Axilrod quicklyfor an interim review of the long-run objectives.MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really can be verybrief and give a short summary of where the evidence seems to lead.It's very hard to come to any conclusion that M1 is behaving moreconsistently with historical patterns than it has been in the past.We feel that it is very probable that the so-called interest rateresponsiveness of M1 has gone up, largely because of the increasingrole of NOW accounts, which have a savings component and probably abit more interest sensitivity in relation to that savings component.But we have not seen any sign of a usual cyclical increase in thevelocity of Ml; and in fact we are thinking, of course, that in thesecond quarter we are still seeing a decline in that velocity.Looking at the range itself, the odds seem to favor Ml not coming inwithin that range. I would suggest that it may be a little premature,if the Committee were inclined to change the range, to do so. Therewill be a full review in July and a lot may depend on where we happento come out in June--whether in fact we get a huge reversal of thisMay upsurge or whether it's beginning to tell us that we really are ona much higher track than we expect.-17-5/24/83With respect to M2, it seems to me that the assumptions thatthe Committee made when it established the February-March base haveheld up. The bulk of the shifts do seem to be well behind us, thoughthe increases in MMDAs recently have been running a little higher thanwe had assumed. But, of course, they are very far below the pace ofJanuary-February and even below the March pace. In some sense, theoddity in M2 now is the weakness of the non-transaction component.But assuming that does return to something closer to normal, therewould seem to be little problem at this point in the longer-term M2range. Thus, that too looks as if it is certainly sustainable pendingthe full-scale review that the Committee will be making in July.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You didn't say anything about M3 andcredit.MR. AXILROD. Well, it's hard to read that [unintelligible],Mr. Chairman, which pertains particularly to Ml and M2. So we hadinterpreted that as the Committee's main focus of attention. M3 andcredit are running well within the ranges. We wouldn't see anyparticular problems at this point with those ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would interpret your comments assaying that at least for technical reasons there is no need to reviewthe M2, M3, and credit aggregates. There may be some reason to reviewthe Ml aggregate but you're saying it's a little premature. I wouldsay implicit in our activity so far is that Ml is getting relativelyless emphasis; that does not mean no emphasis. I suppose we remainsomeplace in that vague area. That is what I am proposing. I see nostrong need to change it [unintelligible] being consistent with thatemphasis before the next meeting if you want. Maybe we can just leaveit at that--that we don't change anything--unless there's some strongfeeling otherwise. People are going to look at Ml and we're going tolook at it, but it doesn't get the same mechanical emphasis that ithad 6 months or 9 months ago or whenever it was.MR. RICE. I don't think we ought to make any commitments tolook at it even next time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will look at it automaticallynext time. And we don't need--MR. RICE. I know it's the midyear review, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean we'd necessarily change it.MR. RICE. But I don't think we need to look at it with a[predisposition] toward changing it at this time.MR. PARTEE. The comment has to do with both the range andthe weight.MR. MARTIN. We may not--MR. PARTEE. That is, there is no need to change the rangeright now and no need for a [predisposition] to change the weight.That's what you're saying. That seems to be the staff's view.-18-5/24/83MR. AXILROD. Yes. We have not seen any return to normalhistorical patterns yet, which is one of the Committee's criteria forgiving it more weight.MR. RICE. We're not likely to have any additionalinformation on which to base a change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. It will have to bejudged at the next meeting.MR. RICE. It's hard to [imagine] what new we could knowabout M1 between now and then.MR. BALLES. I don't really disagree with what has just beensaid, Paul, but I am a little concerned--and I'd like to hear yourview--about what the market's reaction is going to be if we in factcome in this month with a 24 percent increase in Ml, as the Bluebooksuggests. We're going to have a hard time convincing markets thatwe're not off to the races and an overexpansion of money. I think,Paul, that we will have to do something more than just sit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'm not prejudging what our short-rundecision will be. All I'm saying is that Ml does have the same weightthat it had before and that we not bother to change the range now. Itdoesn't mean no weight. We have to decide that after the coffeebreak. If there is no strong objection to that, maybe we can just goalong and [hear Mr. Axilrod's comments regarding our] immediatedecision and then we'll have the coffee break.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about the wording in thedirective; we can worry about that later. I would only add onecomment, for what it's worth. We had illustrated for us here theother day by some staff something that has been going on for sometime. With the exception of Japan, the experience in almost allleading foreign countries looks like ours: rapid growth in M1 for thelast 6 or 9 months, particularly rapid growth in currency for somereason or another, and relatively slow growth in broader aggregates.It's very strange. You could almost lay these sheets of paper on topof each other. Of course, other countries have had a different kindof business picture; it vaguely resembles ours, but they don't have astrong recovery.MR. FORD. These are countries that aren't having all thisderegulation business. So it's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, some of that is going on elsewheretoo, but I don't think at the rate of speed it's going on around here.MR. TRUMAN. That's primarily only in Canada.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a very strange picture. They alllook alike, although the figures aren't exactly alike.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you have a guess as to why?-19-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess any speculation one makes aboutthe United States can be pushed off on M2, the disinflation process,relatively higher real interest rates--MR. FORD. What do you make of it? I infer from what you'vesaid that except in Canada it's not due to deregulation, so that wouldmean that the staffs of other central banks can't be telling them whatours is telling us about it all being due to shifts and stockadjustments, etc.MR. PARTEE. The staff doesn't say that with regard to Ml.And Ml growth in Germany is 14.7 percent; in Switzerland it's 14.9percent; and in the United Kingdom it's 12-1/2 percent.MR. FORD. Yes, but my question is: How are they explainingit? We're explaining it away as shifts in demand.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can only say what [unintelligible] forthe future. If we don't have a great explosion of inflation in thenext year around the world, the monetarists had better run for cover.If we do,--MR. ROBERTS. If we do, there will be other people thenheading for cover.MR. PARTEE. At least nominal GNP ought to go up very sharplyaround the world.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there has been a substantialamount of intervention by central banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Germans--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Germans, EMS countries. And thatdoes tend, depending on how they--usually they don't sterilize--[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the Germans think that that's partof the reason, but I'm not sure you can explain it that way in Canadaor the United Kingdom or Switzerland. I don't know whether we havethe low countries in here.MR. AXILROD. One thought we had in reference to PresidentFord's question was that as you get into a noninflationary period oryou become convinced that inflation is down, cash in some sensebecomes more valuable. It's not going to lose its value as fast. Andin any event, interest rates come down and the opportunity cost ofholding it [declines]. And that would affect Ml. On the broaderaggregates, what I was trying to say here--and it may hold in Europe,though I haven't examined it closely--is that we could also begin tosee people moving into longer-term assets before their rates drop toorapidly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One of the really curious things aboutthis to me is why currency is going up around the world. That onelittle component has had a very strange experience here and [abroad].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's more anxiety.-20-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, currency could be explained partlyby anxiety about banks.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, isn't the interest return onM1-type accounts in most European countries still very low?MR. AXILROD. Oh yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They haven't changed the way we have.MR. AXILROD. I'm not sure, but I think that's right.MR. TRUMAN. Only in the United Kingdom is there an interestreturn on Ml. The other countries don't have that.MR. AXILROD. Ours is 5 percent or 5-1/4 percent on NOWaccounts. I was not assuming Super NOWs as a very important factor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a break.[Coffee break]MR. ROBERTS. [Unintelligible] discussion, I have a feelingthat it is time to do something about the excessive rate of growth inMl, which I happen to feel is still an important measure of what ishappening in the economy. I believe, based on the contacts I have inthe marketplace, which I am sure are not as extensive as others, thatthe market is quite conscious and sensitive to this excessive rate ofexpansion. As I look at the situation, we have M2 conveniently withina band only because we conveniently redefined the base. It might beinteresting to redefine the base for Ml and thereby get it in the bandand growing at about a moderate pace from here on out. That probablywould be appropriate in view of the strength of this economy that weall have commented on. I just think that if we have to face somemodest adjustment here in interest rates, we ought to face up to itearlier rather than later. We have an economy that is walking alongvery well through the so-called real interest rates that are believedto be too high; I don't think that some modest adjustment here wouldbe bad. And if it begins to contain some of the excessive rate ofexpansion in Ml, I think that probably would be productive as we lookahead for either holding the interest rates in the long term orleading us to some reduction, as against having to face up to this afew months later after short-term interest rates have already gone upwith the rise in the private sector and long-term rates have gone upperhaps because of changes in inflationary expectations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make one preliminary comment andthen ask you a question relative to others. I don't think thesenumbers on page 8 [in the Bluebook] mean a great deal, except as aforecast, in terms of the operative decision as to what we are goingto do in open market operations. It is now May 24th. Whatevernumbers come out, growth is pretty much in the bag now for May andJune. I think we ought to keep that in mind so that we don't putundue emphasis on a number a half percentage point higher or lowerthan another number used.MR. ROBERTS. June is projected at a very low rate; it maynot be in the bag.-21-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean that we know what it is. Ijust mean it is going to be what it is.MR. ROBERTS. We can't change it at this point. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean at all that we know what itis. I know that the staff has projected a low number in June. And Iwould just remind you, looking at the quarterly figures, that what weset forth the last time, reading down, was 9, 8, and 6 to 7 percent.We're below for M2 and M3 [and above for] Ml. Credit, as near as weknow is running around 9-1/2 percent; we didn't have a quarterlytarget for it but it's within the annual target as nearly as we knowanything about credit. Now, having said that, do you want to quantifyyour comment in whatever way you want to quantify it? As I say, Idon't attach much significance to a half percentage point differencein these numbers, but are you talking about some borrowing level or--MR. ROBERTS. I would like to see us raise the borrowinglevel from $250 million to something like $500 to $750 million, ifthat would be the amount that would curtail the rate of growth in bankreserves that's accommodating this big expansion in Ml. And if thatraised the fed funds rate to 9 percent, I don't think that would beanything that would prevent this economy from continuing to expand ata sustainable pace.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to inject a quick comment, I thinkthat probably would raise the federal funds rate just above 9 percent.At what point would you be happy, if I now ask you to quantify it theother way? If [growth] got below that in alternative C, would you notgo that strongly?MR. ROBERTS. Alternative C is about right, as I see it. Iam thinking in terms of about 6 or 7 percent incremental money growthfrom this point forward.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll make one other comment and then I'llgo to Mr. Morris. I am not sure that it is quite right to say weredefined the M2 base. Obviously, we did in a technical sense but Ithink that it's largely an element of judgment. If you put in theJanuary-February base for M2, with the kind of adjustments that thestaff took a stab at, you wouldn't get a much different trend for M2during January and February than you got in the surrounding periods.MR. AXILROD. It would be a little higher if you went fromthe fourth quarter. It would really be within a 6 to 9 percent range;I think it is somewhere around 8 or 8-1/2 percent. If you went fromQIV to May making those adjustments [rather than from] January-February, it would be a bit higher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, you may not find itsurprising that Mr. Roberts and I differ rather dramatically.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're establishing the outer limits!MR. MORRIS. I think the staff paper on the behavior of M1was very good in that it pointed out that not only is the velocity of-22-5/24/83M1 not currently predictable but we have no basis for assuming that itwill be predictable in the foreseeable future, because we have had achanged concept--one which blends transactions balances with savingsbalances in unknown proportions. And I think our current posture oftelling the market that we are not targeting Ml but are watching it iscreating instability in the marketplace, which is counterproductive toour objectives. I think we have seen responses in the marketplace toM1 numbers which, while they are not of the magnitude of earlieryears, are certainly not very productive. And it seems to me that thetime has come to tell the market that, at least for the foreseeablefuture, we don't have any basis for confidence that we can predict thevelocity of M1 and, therefore, we are abandoning Ml and are not goingto watch it. We will publish it weekly for historical interest only.It seems to me that the time is right. I thought it was right inFebruary to get rid of Ml but it seems to me that the evidence sinceFebruary should lend some weight to my case that we ought to startmoving away from consideration of Ml as a target or as something thatwe watch--whatever that means.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a difference of opinion.You say it's high, so abandon it; other people say it's high, so webetter give it some weight. What would you do operationally?MR. MORRIS. Operationally, we have target ranges for M2 andM3 and we can operate on those.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What would you do on borrowings?MR. MORRIS. At the last meeting I didn't have any confidencethat the current level of interest rates would support a broad-basedexpansion but I think the evidence of the last month or so is that, atleast for the time being, we can produce an expansion at the currentrates. I would design the instructions to the Manager to say maintainthe current level of interest rates. And if the $250 millionborrowing level is what the staff says [would do that], I would acceptthat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I think we have to distinguish between givingdifferent weights to the different aggregates and watching them. Ifwe give different weights, we say that each of them is potentiallymisleading. So we give more weight at the present time to M2 and M3,put a little weight on Ml and, therefore, are saying that we are notgoing to trust M2 and M3 and the debt variable fully either. They areall slightly wrong and the most likely right number seems to liesomewhere in the weighted average. This doesn't seem to me a verylogical procedure when you have specific reasons to distrust one ofthe aggregates such as we have, I think, to distrust Ml. There arereasons why people will hold more of their money [in Ml], whether indemand deposits and currency or even in NOW accounts, than they wouldat much higher rates of interest and higher rates of inflation. And Iwould be willing, while watching Ml and not ignoring it, neverthelessnot to give it any weight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a semantic distinction.-23-5/24/83MR. WALLICH. No. I think the time may come when theargument that now leads to ignoring Ml loses some of its strength; andthen if Ml still continues strong, one would have to say one had madea mistake and that there was something to it. But at the present timeI think that the more reasonable argument is that there is somethingamiss with Ml and that therefore, while watching it, one is not actingon its signals. The strongest reason for proceeding that way, itseems to me, is the high level of real interest rates. If Ml wereeffective in the usual way of generating expansion, it would be bydriving down interest rates. It hasn't done so. So I conclude thatthe usual transmission mechanism from Ml to aggregate demand somehowis not operative at this time. There is a further very minor point tobe made on that same side. The divisia aggregates, which computemoney on the basis of the moneyness of the aggregates rather than justadding up demand deposits and savings deposits and calling it allmoney, in the last few months universally seem to have shown a lowerrate of growth than the unadjusted regular aggregates. I have noparticular faith in this technique, but it is an interesting device inthat, since it seems to support what I think reasonable for otherreasons, it is something worth factoring into this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What would you do operationally?MR. WALLICH. At the present time I would follow Bill Poole'sold rule that when the aggregates are not very clear follow interestrates. That rule, of course, leaves open the question of whichinterest rate--the one that happens to prevail or a different one. Atthe present time I wouldn't change interest rates, so I would go withthe same borrowing assumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Horn.MS. HORN. I want to start with M2. M2 is growing quite inline with a number of our expectations and with my expectations, andif it is growing a bit slowly, I think that has to do with theprecautionary components [unintelligible]. So the signal that I readfrom M2 is a fairly good one for staying on the current course.However, I do read Ml, although I can't explain why it is doing whatit is, as giving a signal. [It influences] the direction of myuncertainties in dealing with policy matters so, because of the signalwe might be getting from Ml, I would like to see a little tighteningup from the current position. I suppose, although I am not willing toargue over $50 million, that takes me from $250 to $300 million [onborrowing]. But the point I want to make is more that that is thedirection in which I think we should be erring because of what Mlmight be telling us.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I come out somewhere near Karen, althoughI start at a different place. I don't know what in heaven's name tomake of these money supply numbers. I have read the staff documentwith great interest and I think it does point out an important reasonwhy we have had so much growth in M1 here--that is, we have a muchhigher interest elasticity of [money] demand, almost twice as high asthe model suggested for the period 1959 to 1974. So, I assume fromthat that we aren't anywhere near as expansive as the 9, 10, or 11percent growth rates in Ml would indicate over the past year or so.-24-5/24/83But I don't know how much expansion we have had on the basis of themoney numbers, so I tend to retreat to basics under uncertainty ofthis kind. I start with the proposition that if I could shape therecovery in any way that I would want to, I would like to haveeconomic growth come out just the way the staff thinks it's going to,at somewhere between 4 and 5 percent both this year and next. If weget that, we will have improvement on the employment front, we willreduce excess capacity, we will get an investment process started butwe will have, I think, continuing progress on inflation. My worry isthat we are going to get more than that for reasons I have alreadyindicated. And I add one more factor, and that is that I think fiscalpolicy is much more likely to be more stimulative than we are nowtalking about rather than less. I think we are not going to get abudget resolution; we are going to end up with lots of appropriationbills and they are not going to be easy to veto. But I am in ahorrible dilemma, in terms of deciding what we ought to do as regardspolicy. I think that the international debt situation argues very,very strongly for not letting interest rates rise. Unfortunately,that international debt situation is still going to be here a yearfrom now. And so, if I am right and at some point down the line wewill need to think about raising interest rates, I guess it would beeasier to raise them a little now, rather than to let the internaldynamics of the cycle begin to take hold and then raise them a lotmore later. So, in terms of operational procedures for the moment, Iwould be inclined to argue for something like "B minus"--I think "C"is much too tight--with initial borrowings at maybe $350 to $400million or somewhere around there. I don't care whether the federalfunds rate range is 6 to 10 percent or 7 to 11 percent. And I wouldcontinue to use M2 as our principal target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I would tend to go along with $250 million inborrowings, which presumably would keep the interest rate where it is.I have many of the [worries] that have been expressed, particularly inthe international scene. And I don't think we can get a sustainedrecovery with 8-1/2 percent rates of interest and 10-1/2 per cent inlong-term rates. I think rates should be lowered in order to sustainthe recovery; I can stay where we are at least until July, but mypresumption is that sometime over the next several months we are goingto have to lower the rates in order to keep the economy going. Theother thing that I think is probably going to happen is that with thereduction in the first-quarter GNP we are going to have a quarter--probably the second or third, as Chuck said--in which the inventorieswill go in the other direction, and we could get a very strong one-quarter [expansion]. If that happens, I hope that we won't panic andthen raise the rates in order to offset something which is a perfectlynatural development. If anything, I would like to see the borrowingsaround $200 million rather than $250 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, to give my conclusions first, I would leantoward snugging up a bit now. I also think that we are going to havea couple of good quarters in GNP; the dynamics are such that I don'tknow what might come from that in terms of later on and, therefore, Ithink a little precautionary snugging would be in order. I would alsopoint out that Ml is very much a fact, whether we want to look at it-25-5/24/83or not. The only way that we can really deal with this would be tostop publishing Ml--suppress the numbers on the basis that Ml has noinformation content--and I don't think anybody would propose doingthat. It is something that people look at. I am also impressed bythis world-wide increase in M1 that has occurred over the last sixmonths and it may be telling us something after all, as Ml was tellingus something three or four months ago about a recovery that wasstronger than almost anybody expected. Now, it didn't come inanything like as strong as normal relationships would have predicted,but in fact the economy acted more like Ml would have suggested thanmost judgmental forecasters would have expected three, four, or fivemonths ago. And this may be now a world-wide event.I also have a problem because I don't trust any of the otheraggregates. M2, I think, is very much affected by the IRA/Keoghaccounts, which are a direct substitution in the short run for tax-exempt savings balances. M3 reflects the pattern of demand on themarkets, and I think it is a simple reflection of the fact thatcorporations are trying to do some restructuring. I have always beenmore comfortable with total credit but what I am not comfortable withabout total credit is our estimates. Just a couple of months ago wewere told that, by golly, total credit is running very low--well belowthe lower end of our range. Now, somehow, in the last six weeks, welearn that no it isn't; it is 9-1/2 percent, which is up in the range.And by the time we get another iteration of that, when the Julynational income numbers come out, we may find that it is at the top ofthe range. It is a very unstable figure from the standpoint ofestimation even though it is a pretty stable figure from the point ofview of its relationship to the economy. So, I don't think we candisregard Ml and I don't think we can disregard the fact that theeconomy seems to be pretty strong under foot. Therefore, I would snugup without changing operating procedures--which I think is what TedRoberts was really proposing in taking Ml [into account] as a driveron providing reserves again. I'd snug up to maybe $300 million [onborrowings] and try to come in on the low side of alternative B on theaggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would keep the borrowing level at$250 million, for what it is worth. It isn't worth very much,obviously. I would use the M2 and M3 targets under alternative A; infact, if I had my druthers, I would round them on the up side and makethem 8 and 7 percent. We have a strange situation where we arerunning short of our March-to-June targets by about 2 points and wehave not been offered an alternative that comes closer to returning tothe original targets. For March to June we had put M2 and M3 at 9 and8 percent, [respectively].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're running lower.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I can't [bring] myself to pay thatmuch attention to M1, as I believe some of you do, when I contrastthat monetary aggregate, whose meaning we all seem to agree we don'tunderstand these days, with the reality of the international situationthat we're living with. I think it's just sheer irresponsibility onour part [to use] crystal ball wizardry to have our decisioninfluenced so significantly by what is happening to this famous Ml. I-26-5/24/83come out quite clearly for no tightening, no snugging up, and stayingwhere we are in terms of borrowing levels. I do not see any evidenceyet that a boom is going to materialize where we would have to say:Well, it's a question either of tightening now or tightening three orsix months from now. I don't see that the choice is between them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think we are getting ahead of ourselves on thecase for snugging up. It just seems to me that that is entirely toopremature. The only real argument for doing it is what we are seeingfor Ml and that does seem to me an awfully thin reed on which to basesnugging up. Our sentiments have changed about the economy. It doeslook better than six weeks ago, but there is considerable room for itto look better without our worrying that we have a boom. We stillhave lots of unused capacity even if one allows for all the structuralproblems; we are still in the very early phases of the recovery. Itis broader-based, but I don't see any evidence that it is running awayfrom us in any way that is going to prove to be a problem. Add tothat the international situation, which I think if anything argues forlower rates. Even though there may be a case down the road where wewould have to raise rates for domestic reasons, it seems to me that wewould want to be pressed to do that rather than anticipate it. If welook at the various measures of monetary policy that we have--realinterest rates, M2, M3, and credit--and add all those up, everythingis on the side it seems to me for at least staying where we are. Theonly thing that is on the other side, for snugging up, is Ml and thatjust isn't much to base it on. So, I come down for staying where weare. Operationally, I would keep borrowings at about $250 million; Iwould carry forward in about the way that we have been conductingpolicy in the last several weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A comment on the case for snugging up: Itprobably is [unintelligible] rest on Ml alone. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I started out where a lot ofpeople are. Internationally, the case is overwhelming that we wouldbe better off with lower interest rates and a lower exchange rate.But looking at this domestically, I must say that I do get some sensethat there may well be a case for some snugging up or whatever youwant to call it. I would lean in that direction not because of M1 asmuch as I would because of the economy. I do think that the risks areon the side of the economy being stronger rather than weaker than thestaff's forecast. And I am very much inclined to the view that a moremoderate and balanced recovery right now works in the direction ofmaking that recovery more durable and more sustainable, partly becauseI do think it works in the direction of minimizing the risks that someof those pent up pressures on prices, that I at least sense are there,could be unleashed. In some very practical ways the question that weface right now is: If we do snug up a bit, does that assist in[achieving] our longer-range objectives for the economy? In part Itry to answer that by asking myself the question: What will happen tobond rates if we do snug up a little, recognizing that they havealready increased 50 basis points in the last two weeks? On the otherhand, what would happen to bond rates if we didn't do anything? Insome ways I think that is the $64 question. My instinct is that inthe current circumstances a gentle move in the direction of snuggingmight well produce the result of helping to stabilize long-term-27-5/24/83interest rates; and we have had experience in the past to suggest thatsome increase in short-term interest rates early on in a businessrecovery can be reversed. I think that happened in the mid-1970s in away that did not inhibit the early phases of recovery. So, I wouldcome out in the direction of, say, putting borrowings around $400million in the expectation that the federal funds rate might move uptoward the 9 percent range--again, not because I'm paranoid about Mlbut because of the way I'm looking at the economy and the way thatover time I think that might help us rather than hurt us in terms ofour long-term objectives for the economy.MR. KEEHN. I would be in substantial agreement with whatJerry has said. It seems to me the last time we established thedirective based on a reasonably uncertain economic environment--thoughthe news looked good at the time--and since then it certainly hasgotten a lot better. I think we now have a reasonably broad-basedeconomic recovery in place, with certain cautions, and on top of thatwe have a highly stimulative fiscal policy that's going to get morestimulative as the year goes along. Certainly that will be the casenext year as we get closer to the election. And though all the papersI've read support the thought that Ml has changed, nonetheless,nothing persuades me that it is no longer useful in any way. I thinkwe have to begin to establish a framework in which we are focusingslightly more attention on that. I'd be in favor of some modestsnugging up, and alternative B or B+ in terms of the percentages wouldbe reasonable. But I would be inclined to establish a borrowing levelof, say, $400-$450 million as a way of establishing a higher level offocus on it and beginning to snug up a bit.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I take alternative B with a $250million borrowing level as being maintenance of the currentconditions. And although I recognize the concern of some about Ml, itseems clear, at least to me, that the informational content of Mlgives very little guidance for policy in the period ahead. That doesnot suggest that I want to join Frank Morris to bury Ml; rather, Ithink it will become an important guide sometime in the future, butcertainly not between now and July. Having said that, I still have aconcern about the sustainability of this recovery over the long hauland I think the international situation suggests somewhat lowerinterest rates. Neither of those [considerations] seems to me to bepersuasive enough to ease in the period ahead. Thus, I come out witha $250 million borrowing level from now until July and I hope that weget some more good news that we can react to in July. I'd like to saythat I have some real questions about what kind of directive we mayadopt, but I guess that's for later in this discussion.MR. RICE. Just operationally, Mr. Chairman, I agree witheverything that Roger just said. I would support alternative B and aborrowing level of $250 million, and I take that to be consistent withmaintaining the situation substantially as it is at the present. Iwould not want to take any action that would have the effect ofraising interest rates at the present time. I think it's too early tostart pushing up interest rates.MR. BALLES. I think the case for a touch of snugging up hasbeen pretty well set forth here already by, among others, Chuck andJerry. And I won't take the time to repeat those arguments. I dofear that if we let this upswing in the economy get too far ahead of-28-5/24/83us in terms of regenerating inflationary pressures or expectations, wewill live to regret it. I don't think we've ever made mistakes, ormany mistakes at least, in the past by being too easy duringrecessions. I think our mistake historically has been to hang on toease too long after the upturn is underway. I would be concernedabout just plain market reactions to the announcement of a 24 percentincrease in M1 in May; I think we might get a bigger case of bondyields rising than we did after that little flurry following lastFriday's announcement. We may not think that there is much content inM1 but I'm afraid the market may not be as convinced as we are.That's one of the psychological problems we're dealing with. And forthose who are hasty to condemn Ml as having no informational content,I would raise the same question about M2. It too is a differentanimal than we used to have and we'd be ill advised to forget that.Coming down to the bottom line, my snugging would be defined in termsof perhaps a borrowing assumption of $300 to $350 million, justleaning a bit in the direction of "B minus" but certainly doingnothing very drastic.MR. FORD. I'm with the group that wants to snug moderatelyfor one reason: I'll confess to paranoia about Ml, especially whenit's happening on a global scale and in countries which don't have theinstitutional problems that we have to explain it away. I do thinkthe worldwide expansion of money as conventionally measured is ofenough significance to warrant conservative action on the part of ourcentral bank. With regard to the timing, I think we have to rememberthe lags related to what we do now. If we wait until we can see thereal economy exploding in front of us, then we're doing what we alwaysdo--we're too late. What we do today basically affects what willhappen in the economy one year into the recovery. And that's why weshould do it now, not later. So, I'm for a slight snugging, withperhaps a borrowing requirement of somewhere around $400 million--enough to let short-term rates go up to give a signal to the marketthat we are not going to ignore completely all of what is going on inthe monetary area and in the real economy.MR. MARTIN. I would join those who would oppose abandoningMl. I don't believe the market makers will abandon that measure. Idon't think they'll take it off the tape in their offices because wesay we are abandoning it. Even it they were convinced we wereabandoning it, they may not abandon it. Some Wall Street types thinkthey are a good deal smarter than we are anyway. I don't think thecommentators will abandon discussion [of Ml] in the media. Once anewspaper reporter learns something--and they only learn a verylimited number of somethings--he or she will continue to work thatstory or alleged story of what will be seen as a conflict between themonetarists' analysis of markets and whatever analysis prevailedwithin these walls. I myself feel we should give Ml some weight asidefrom the media considerations. When it varies as much as it is now, Idon't think we can ignore it; a 24 percent growth rate in May ispretty hard to ignore.One comment I would like to make with regard to the recovery:I am just as encouraged as anyone else. I am a natural born optimist,but I did pick up on Jerry's comment that we are talking about apercentage increase and we started at a very low level. Thosebankruptcies that occurred in the recession--the four-year recessionor whatever it is being called--are rather permanent removals from the-29-5/24/83business population. If we seem to be forthcoming with regard torecognizing that a sustainable recovery requires lower long-term ratesand we continue to express our view with regard to irresponsiblefiscal policy, it seems to me that we can make a reasonable case foractions in the direction of less accommodation now, if these aremodest moves. The kind of move I would support is perhaps raisingborrowings to a $350 million level; I am a "B minus" type here. If weindicate that we recognize that long-term rates may be positivelyaffected thereby, if we admit our awareness that autos, housing, andconsumer credit are all vulnerable to high rates, knowing thatconsumer credit rates have been so sticky in coming down, and if wecouple that with public statements that our longer-run goal is toavoid overcreating credit or money, however measured, at this time, itseems to me that a modest move in this direction might be salutary interms of long-term rates and in terms of our credibility out there inthe market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I came to the meeting pretty wellconvinced that the policy should be steady as it goes. I will have toconfess that I have had a change in attitude in listening to thedebate. I think those who are arguing for some snugging or someleaning against what is happening probably make sense. And havingcome some distance, I would continue on that line and I would arguefor about $400 million on the borrowing assumption rather than $300million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I deliberately waited until BobBoykin had spoken before I made a statement, because not very long agohe made a glowing compliment about my statement by saying he wouldhave agreed with it all until he heard you speak. And that sort ofwiped me out, so I thought I would wait this time! I suppose it won'tcome as a real surprise to anyone that I think we ought to continue togive greater emphasis to Ml. One of the reasons we abandoned Ml isthat we felt MMDAs and Super NOW accounts would affect Ml; I thinkthat was proper. But the growth rate has fallen off pretty sharply inrecent weeks and the original reason for shifting away from Ml to M2seems to me to have largely dissipated. There remains the argumentthat the demand for Ml balances may have increased because the OCDsintroduced an element of elasticity in the demand and also an elementof savings. I think there is some substance to that, but we are notreally going to know the answer to that for many, many months down theroad. And there's a risk that it might not have changed thatsignificantly. In view of that, I think we have to weigh the risks indeciding what policy ought to do. To me there is some risk that if wedo not move somewhat now, we may have some unwinding of this goodeffect we have had on inflation. And I would be particularlyconcerned about the adverse effect on long-term debt markets. So, Iwould favor going back to the old procedure, of course, where weadjusted our borrowing target automatically as Ml varied off thetarget. But I know we are not going to get that. I would next fallback to "C," which I also know we are not going to get. So, if I werevoting, I guess you all would probably push me up to maybe "B minus."But I definitely think we ought to make some move now.-30-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we obviously have a difference ofopinion, but for the most part the difference of opinion is notnumerically huge. I am impressed, domestically, by the actual andpotential strength [of the economy]. It's moving pretty fast now,with inventory still negative in the last figures; I don't knowwhether they were negative in April or May, but we've had a lot ofinventory liquidation and some increase in final demand. We'll get ashift in inventories at some point and consumers are very confident,if one believes these surveys at all. Ordinarily, I don't give themmuch weight, but they surely are going through the roof right now witha tax cut of some size coming up in thirty-six or thirty-seven days.The conflict is quite clear in all the comments people havemade. I don't think there's much question about the short-termoutlook, which I take to be six months or so, for the economy.There's a question of its sustainability or certainly its balance.There are questions about investments and questions about exports,which are very real. And I think that's partly a reflection of thebudgetary problem. We have a straight-out conflict between thedomestic and international considerations. I don't know that we couldhave much more of a pronounced conflict there. That is clearly fed bythe budgetary situation. We cannot control the budgetary situation;therefore, we have no satisfactory policy by monetary policy alone.We have problems in the credit structure that have been mentioned andwould be eased by easier money, but that also creates a conflict. Iam left with no answer in monetary policy except a compromise in anunsatisfactory situation. I am not so bothered by this Ml; whether wecount it or not, I think we weigh it a little--more than a little. Idon't ignore it myself; I don't know that I'm pulled by it. But whenthe movement gets large enough, I don't see how we can totally ignoreit. It lends a little weight to whatever decision we make.I come out on the side of a little snugging up, which weshould be prepared to reverse if things come out satisfactorily interms of the aggregates or if there are any real signs that it isintolerably--that is a strong word--or even less than intolerablyaggravating the international situation, or the business situationlooks as if it has much less momentum than it appears to have at themoment. I don't know how to quantify that. But if we do anything, wehave to go to $350 million, I suppose; we've practically been thererecently by accident and $250 million is rather a minimal level ofborrowing. I think all we are talking about is putting some verymarginal pressure on the market. How the markets will react, I don'tknow. The danger is that they will overreact. Rather, that is adanger but there's a danger in the other direction, as Mr. Corriganmentioned. I would suggest that we just compromise somehow.MR. PARTEE. Peter, what kind of funds rate do you expect tobe associated with a persistent $350 million of borrowing--if theborrowings were put up to $350 million and kept there rather than justaccidentally being there?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as you said, we've been there but tobe aiming at it [is a distinction]. Whereas I felt aiming at $250million was associated with funds of 8-1/2 to 8-3/4 percent, I'dexpect to see funds trading more toward the 8-3/4 percent side andmaybe edging above that on occasion.-31-5/24/83MR. RICE. Funds have been up to 9 percent. I don't know ifyou directly associate it with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They were only up to 9 per cent, I think,during the statement period.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, for a weekly average, it only got upthere in the week in early April when there were those special end-of-quarter pressures. Other than that, I think the highest it recentlyreached was 8.80 percent.MR. RICE. And that was associated with the temporarymovement to $350 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the borrowing was all fouled upthere; it was much higher, wasn't it? We had the statement date andthe aftermath of the statement date.MR. AXILROD. The funds rate/borrowing relationships havebeen quite variable. One week in late April we had borrowing of $678million and the funds rate averaging 8.58 percent; the next week wehad lower borrowing, of $435 million, and the funds rate was averaging8.80 percent. And then last week we had $550 million borrowing and afunds rate averaging 8.59 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't realize the borrowing levels hadbeen quite that high.MR. RICE. It doesn't help to snug up.MR. AXILROD. Well, there have been lower weeks of borrowing.To make it a complete story, Mr. Chairman, we had $232 million ofborrowing with a funds rate of 8-3/4 percent and $252 million withfunds at 8.70 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A perfect inverse correlation!MS. TEETERS. What interest rate are you aiming for? If yousnug up, where do you want the rate to go?MR. MARTIN. Maximum 9-1/2 percent.MS. TEETERS. That's too much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it would be unlikely to go thathigh and stay that high with the kind of borrowing we're talkingabout. I wouldn't say it wouldn't touch there on occasion but I thinkwe're talking more 8-3/4 to 9 percent. But I don't have anyparticular objective in mind. I don't want to shock the market.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would object to a directive thatwould get the funds rate in the 9 percent range. I'd go to 8-3/4percent maybe--ranging above and below 8-3/4 percent. That's a prettysmall range, obviously. But when it touches 9 percent, there is somemagic to it, it seems to me, particularly if it touches 9 percent andremains there for any period of time.-32-5/24/83MR. FORD. Yes, the market might understand what you'retrying to do if it got to 9 percent! Seriously, isn't it slicing thebologna a little thin to say we're going to snug up 1/4 percentagepoint or less than 1/4 point if we average it?MR. GUFFEY. There was a time when we used to do it in 1/8point [increments], Bill, as you may remember.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there's going to be a strongmarket reaction if the fed funds rate gets to 9 percent. The primerate would definitely go up. There will be loud cries from abroad.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not so sure the prime rate would go upwith a funds rate of 9 percent.MR. ROBERTS. The prime rate may be going up anyway.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know that Wachovia--SEVERAL. [Unintelligible.]MR. BLACK. It was a half point lower?MS. TEETERS. I thought the $250 million was associated with8-3/4 percent. You're definitely pushing it over 8-3/4 percent, itseems to me.MR. FORD. You're back to adjusting by eighths, Mr. Volcker.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know exactly what it will be. Mr.Axilrod just gave you a swing of one half percentage point, whichseemed to be inversely correlated with the level of borrowing.MR. AXILROD. Well, borrowing in the week to date isaveraging $350 million and funds are trading at 8-5/8 to 8-3/4 percentgenerally. Who knows? The relationship to borrowings has been quitevariable, so I don't think one can really be extremely precise.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though the numbers are small, weshould not ignore the fact that there will be significant reaction, Ithink, in the dollar exchange market. There may or may not be somereaction in the bond or stock markets; I don't know about those. Onecan't be 100 percent certain, but the probabilities are that the primerate would go up if the funds rate is moved up as much as half apoint, and it just seems to me that we're going much too far.MR. BOEHNE. What are the expectations in the markets aboutwhat the Committee is going to do, Peter--snug up or stay the same?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think they're debating that verypoint with probably a majority thinking no change. But there would besome who would expect some snugging.MR. RICE. The market seems to be expecting no change at all.I think Tony put his finger on the main risk. When the market sensesthat we are snugging up, they will help us; they will conclude thatthat is what we want and will add impetus to it. We're going to getan upward bias, which I think is the wrong thing at the present time.-33-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think one can say the marketexpects no change. A straightforward reading of the market says theyalready anticipate it.MR. ROBERTS. And with respect to the exchange rate, it hasbeen going up while rates have been going down.MR. RICE. Henry Kaufman put out the word: No change.MR. BOEHNE. I would think that a prime rate increase thatcould be linked, rightly or wrongly, with a snugging up by the Fedwould have a definite detrimental effect on these expectations of goodthings to happen. I think things are sort of at an even keel and ifbusiness and mortgage markets thought that the low rates were over andthat rates not only were not going to stay about where they are butwere going to back up, that would have a major negative impact onpsychology.MR. ROBERTS. It doesn't follow that the prime wouldautomatically go up, though, because there has been a big swing awayfrom negotiable CDs to money market deposit accounts as a source ofmoney. The spread can change between the funds rate or the CD rateand the prime and in the meantime business loan demand is very soft.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the CD rate this morning?MR. AXILROD. It was at 8.80 percent yesterday. It's on thissheet; I'll give it to you in a second. It's 8-3/4 percent, roughly.MR. ROBERTS. Is that 9ish reserve adjusted?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. ROBERTS. So, it's [a spread of] 150 basis points.That's not uncommon.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, as a technical comment on marketreaction--and, of course, no one can assess market reaction with anyprecision--if $350 million were where the Committee wanted to putborrowing, I'm not sure that would be noticeable at all in the market.We've been running very close to it. We hit it exactly. The freereserves number that's implied after you take out seasonal borrowing,which the markets tend to do, is slightly positive. [Unintelligible.]The odds on missing it on the high side are somewhat lower than whenwe're working with a minimal number because with a minimal number it'shard to get below it and it's easier when we miss to be on the highside because banks' borrowing tends to be higher. So, technically,I'm not sure with $350 million that hardly anything would be noticed.MR. GUFFEY. Then what's the point in doing it?MR. CORRIGAN. That's why we should go to $400 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I doubt that we ought to be easing rightin the face of all this.MR. MORRIS. Well, the real issue is what level of the fundsrate we should be shooting for.-34-5/24/83SPEAKER(?). Sure.MR. MORRIS. Given the instability in the relationshipbetween the funds rate and borrowing, that's the issue. That's wherethe action is going to come from in the marketplace.MR. GUFFEY. I'd certainly hate to go to Williamsburg aftersnugging up!MR. GRAMLEY. They didn't invite you!MR. FORD. You don't have to go!MR. BALLES. I don't know, but there might be some who wouldview this snugging up as a way of either heading off further increasesin long-term rates or helping to bring them down. That has to be thekey thing. Let's not kid ourselves that the funds rate is going tomake or break the economy. What's going to make it or break it is thetrend of long-term rates.MR. ROBERTS. Which are going up now.SPEAKER(?). It depends on what you think--MR. BALLES. That affects foreign borrowing--the wholebusiness.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're going to be perceived as goingagainst the consensus view of all the governments, including our own,to encourage a worldwide recovery, because people judge that theinflationary problem is considerably reduced--that there's noimmediate prospect for that in the near-term future. We are alsogoing to be perceived as discouraging recovery because of the impacton the international debt burden. And I just think the symbolism ofthis is wrong. It's out of all proportion, I would admit, for a lousy$100 million difference in the borrowing level.MR. WALLICH. There's a certain inconsistency between sayingwe want to snug up because the economy is strong and then sayingmoreover that that's going to hold down the long-term rate or bring itdown. That isn't going to slow the economy that needs slowing.MR. BALLES. I don't view it as inconsistent, Henry, becauseI happen to believe that long-term rates are heavily influenced byexpectations of future inflation.MR. FORD. It could be perfectly consistent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm afraid Mr. Axilrod is correctthat if it's below $350 million, it will be perceived as an easing.MR. GRAMLEY. I would want my own prescription in that caseto be reinterpreted as pushing a level of initial borrowing that wouldget the funds rate up to somewhere in the 8-3/4 or 9 percent range.I'd like the market to notice it. I can certainly understand whypeople who look at the present unemployment rate, excess capacity, andso on are saying: No, this is not the time to do it. And I canunderstand Tony's concerns. But I think we're going to be faced with-35-5/24/83these same concerns a month from now, 3 months from now, and 6 monthsfrom now; and they're going to be worse then they are now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to write a directive. I'mnot crazy about the one that's in here.MR. PARTEE. I really think we ought to look at alternativeII, Paul. It has more promise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that but I don't likealternative II either. I wrote something here but I don't knowwhether people will like it: "The Committee seeks in the short run toincrease slightly the degree of reserve restraint, recognizing thatwhile M2 and M3 are expected to remain somewhat below the rates ofgrowth of 9 and 8 percent established for the quarter and within theirlong-run ranges, transactions balances have been increasingsubstantially more rapidly than desirable. The action was takenagainst the background of evidence of some acceleration in the rate ofbusiness recovery."MR. ROBERTS. Excellent statement, Mr. Chairman.MR. PARTEE. I like it.SPEAKER(?). I do too.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it has two serious problems.MR. GRAMLEY. [You think] the "increase" should be"decrease."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [It] puts more importance on the factthat we're giving attention to Ml.MR. PARTEE. Well, how could we fail to--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You go out of your way to comment ontransactions money. And you're making Ml respectable again.MR. ROBERTS. It's never been otherwise in the market, Tony.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Look, after Paul's initial Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, the market reaction was that they were paying aheck of a lot less attention to the Ml figures. That changed whenPaul made a couple of remarks that gave the impression that we werepaying more attention to M1 than the market thought. And thatattitude has now come back. It is completely controllable by whatChairman Volcker says and the way he articulates his view ontransactions money or Ml.MR. ROBERTS. That may or may not be true. The recentbehavior, the very large increases, may overwhelm comments.MR. GRAMLEY. But this won't get published for 45 days andmeanwhile he can bail us out.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think he's going in anotherdirection.-36-5/24/83MR. BLACK. I think it's reasonable to assume the elasticityof demand for Ml may have increased to some extent and the demand forM1 also may have increased. But it strains credibility, it seems tome, to assume that that can explain all the burst. It's just toolarge for me to think that it could be all of it.MR. MORRIS. I think the use of "transactions balances" asyou proposed is misleading in the sense that it assumes we can measuretransactions balances. Part of the problem with Ml is that it's now ablurring of transactions balances and savings accounts. And how do weknow transaction balances are up?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can refer to Ml.MR. MORRIS. Sure. Say that because that's what you mean.MR. WALLICH. I find it troublesome to chase a number that wecan't have confidence in. It seems to me the weight should be on realinterest rates. If the inflation continues to come down, real ratesare going up anyway at constant [nominal] interest rates. And to havea rise in interest rates at a time when the whole world hangs onwhether these rates can be kept down I think really incurs a verylarge international risk.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's no question that there's aninternational risk. The question is whether it's more now or later.We get more international risk if the economy gets a bit out of handon the up side.MR. PARTEE. Then we really will have to deal with it, whichwill mean significantly higher rates.MR. RICE. The risk that the economy is going to get out ofhand immediately is not--MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with Lyle when he says the problemwith Brazil, Mexico, and so forth is going to be with us a year fromnow just like it is now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but if we can get through 1983,there's going to be a big difference. I don't see why a slightlystronger recovery, if it's accompanied by continued low inflation, isgoing to cause us to raise interest rates later in the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's slightly stronger and accompaniedby continuing good news on inflation, it won't. Maybe interest rateswill come down.MS. TEETERS. I think you're pushing them up a quarter at atime.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're not going to come down if theFed is tightening.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're talking about what we're doingover the next three or four weeks.-37-5/24/83MR. RICE. We will not be lowering interest rates in the nextthree to six weeks no matter what happens.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we tighten now, I doubt if we'regoing to end up changing our position six weeks from now or wheneverthe next FOMC meeting is. We'd have to see some major change in theeconomy, a weakening, which we're not going to see.MR. RICE. Sure.MR. WALLICH. Insofar as the economy is influenced by theseincreases in interest rates or the absence thereof, it'll give alittle more stimulation to the rest of the world if we keep rateswhere they are, and to that extent the international situation iseased a little.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there will be a lot ofreaction. It will look as though we're trying to spoil the recoverybasically. It will be out of proportion to the modest amount of rise.If there's a clear perception that we are snugging up, people are justnot going to understand.MR. ROBERTS. The long rates already have started to risewithout our snugging. My guess would be that snugging would bepositively interpreted, particularly in the long markets, and that wewould more likely get a decline in rates than an increase.MS. TEETERS. I have never seen the short-term rates go upwithout the long-term rates going up. I've heard your argument manytimes around this table and it has never happened.MR. WALLICH. Well, for the short run, I think they movetogether. But then we see that after the short rate has beenestablished at some level, long rates may be drifting down; we've hadquite a bit of that.MS. TEETERS. If we want the long rate down at this point intime, we need to lower the federal funds rate, not increase it.MR. GUFFEY. It seems to me we may be taking a risk reactingto the May Ml figures. If we look at the pattern of April at minus 3percent and May at 24 percent and June projected--whether right orwrong--at only less than 5 percent, we're talking about snugging up inreaction to one month of very high Ml numbers. And we're not certainof what they mean.MR. BLACK. Roger, the staff says 24 percent for May but ifI'm not mistaken, that assumes no further growth in M1 during May.Doesn't it, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. BLACK. And if we have a reasonable amount of growth, itmight well be above 30 percent.MR. GUFFEY. Well, looking at the projection, I see [Mlgrowth of] 4.7 percent for June.-38-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think whether May is 24 or 30 percent isirrelevant.MR. PARTEE. I do too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fact is that it comes after six monthsof very high growth that we thought might be slowing down and there issome doubt that it's slowing down.MR. PARTEE. It makes April look like the aberration. Beforewe were thinking that maybe April was establishing a new course, andnow it doesn't look that way.MR. FORD. April was clearly the aberration. It's not 6months; it's 8 months. Since last August we've had double digitgrowth every month except January, which was 9.8 percent and Aprilwhich was -3.1 percent. So, the trend is clear for Ml. You can't say[May] is a one-month observation. You could say you don't believe inMl, but you can't say there has only been one month of abnormalgrowth. We've had essentially 9 months with one [exception]; ifanything, April is the freak month.MR. GUFFEY. But it is coming down.MR. CORRIGAN. I think the key thing, Roger, is how one readsthe economy rather than how one reads Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.MR. MORRIS. But I read the economic numbers and I waspleased. Apparently some of you were displeased. You have the ideathe economy is roaring ahead in such an uncontrolled--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a bit of an exaggeration.SPEAKER(?). It's out of hand, though.MR. MORRIS. So you're really making a move based on Ml;you're not making a move based on--SPEAKER(?). No, that's wrong.MR. GRAMLEY. That's not fair. That's not fair at all. Theargument that I think people are laying out here is that we now have agood cyclical recovery underway. It's not out of hand at the moment.But I think past cyclical processes strongly suggest that recoveriestend to gain momentum as time goes on. That's not what the staff hasforecast, but I think Jerry would agree that the risks at this pointare on the up side and not on the down side.MR. MORRIS. But we want it to gain some momentum, don't we?MR. GRAMLEY. It depends on how much we want it to gain. Andthe question is--MR. MORRIS. We have more slack than we've had since the1930s.-39-5/24/83MR. GRAMLEY. Everybody recognizes that too.MR. MORRIS. I'd like to see us use up some of that slackfor--MR. CORRIGAN. Frank, I wasn't here; you were. But I have ahunch that exactly this same discussion probably took place sometimearound 1976. And I think it's very apparent where we came out, partlyon the grounds that we didn't have to worry about inflation.SPEAKER(?). I think that's pretty unfair.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's really an unfairconclusion. Lyle, let's accept the fact that there is somepossibility that a stronger recovery than what we want may materializelater. At the moment you say it's going along on track okay butyou're worried that later on it may materialize. Does that mean thatyou anticipate that now, given the situation? It can only--MR. GRAMLEY. I always think that monetary policy has to workon a forecast, Tony. I don't believe that we operate just on what wesee in the past 3 months or past 1 month on Ml or anything else. Youhave to ask yourself where you want to go and where you think theeconomy is going. If I thought the economy were falling off a cliffnow, I'd want to drop interest rates a ton. But I don't. I think theevidence has been accumulating month-by-month that this recovery isgaining a lot of strength. Let's cite some numbers. The industrialproduction index has gone up at a 17 percent annual rate sinceDecember.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the midst of a lot of inventoryreduction.MR. GRAMLEY. That's right. We had private final purchases,residential construction plus personal consumption plus business fixedinvestment, going up at a 5-1/4 percent rate in the first quarter.This is not a weak recovery. We've had an increase in new orders fortotal durable goods at a 24 percent annual rate since December and ata 39 percent annual rate of increase for nondefense capital goods.Now, this is a recovery that's gaining momentum. I grant you that ifwe could be assured that we're going to get 4 to 5 percent growth andno more for the next two years, then I would be happy just to sitright where we are. But I don't think that's the outcome that isgoing to happen, so I think we need to take the precautionary movenow. And if we go up 1/4 percentage point or 1/2 percentage point onthe fed funds rate, it isn't going to end the world. It's not goingto be the fact that dumps Brazil off the edge of the precipice. If wehave to go up 200 basis points next September because we didn't go up50 basis points now, Brazil is going to have a lot worse time of it.Obviously, there are risks in going in either direction. But I thinkthe cautious and prudent thing to do now is to snug up just a tinybit.MR. BALLES. I strongly support Lyle's diagnosis, which Ithink is first-rate. We do have internal dynamics of a businessexpansion going on here; and part of the history is that when thatgoes on, we get price movements associated directly with it. Andthat's my fear--that we may be in the process of getting a greater-40-5/24/83inflation rate than the Board staff has forecast, even though theyhave a lot of logic and plausibility on their side. History wouldargue the other way. And that's what I would like to see us headingoff at the pass by a little snugging up starting now.MR. MORRIS. I think the analogy Jerry drew of 1976-77 is farfrom correct. We are now in the middle of 1975 in terms of that.MR. PARTEE. We snugged up in the spring of '75.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. And by September it wasgoing down in the other direction and interest rates were going downfor a few months and the economy was rising.MR. GUFFEY. But we also had an inflation rate of 7 percentin the CPI in March of '75. In other words, we were then starting atan inflation rate that was much higher than where we are in thisrecovery.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if you want to make a snugginggesture, make it $300 million.MR. ROBERTS. How about $500 million?SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible] going on.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I could live with that; any more Icouldn't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm disturbed by the fact that we'reprobably already de facto, by the results, at $350 million. If weliterally came out below that, it will look as if the economy isgetting better and Ml is going through the roof and we're easing up.MR. BLACK. In the interest of conciliation, after Tony'soffer, I'll come down from $600 to $500 million.MR. MARTIN. You're all heart!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it may depend on how we word thedirective. I don't know whether anybody has any better idea on how toword the directive. I look at mine and it says "increase slightly"and we haven't had that small an increase in which we--. How about"The Committee decided in the short run to increase reserve restraintinvisibly."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'll go for that.MS. TEETERS. I'll go for that too; it's not saying--MR. FORD. By a statistically deviant amount!MR. WALLICH. We could say that we will keep it at the levelat which on average it has been in the last few weeks.MS. TEETERS. No, we don't want to do that. At one point itwas $1-1/2 billion.-41-5/24/83MR. WALLICH. On average.MS. TEETERS. It still would average out well above where weare now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't heard any promising suggestions.MR. ROBERTS. Stick to your guns.MR. PARTEE. I think the "increase slightly" is what themajority of the Committee is inclined to do. In fact, some wouldfavor a little more than slightly, I gather. It sounds reasonable tome. I like your whole paragraph, Paul.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Including the "transactions" [part]?MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think it's time to recognize them.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think it's important for us to keep afacade up that we're using all the monetary aggregates.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't want us to say we're deliberatelypushing up interest rates. That's not the kind of indication that'sgoing to be easy to deal with later on. So, I'd like to use that Mlas a cover.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but that's--MR. PARTEE. And he has the stronger business--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but I don't understand. Youargued very strongly that the reason for your position is not Ml.MR. GRAMLEY. That's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's the strength of the economy.Why not say so, if that's the majority view here?MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, I would want to.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I can dissent. But if that's themajority view here, then why not say so?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, his statement does that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It doesn't say that. He emphasizedtransactions balances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says both. It says that the action wastaken against the background of evidence of some acceleration in therate of business recovery.MS. TEETERS. And what's the rest of it?MR. PARTEE. The second sentence?-42-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the second sentence.MS. TEETERS. What's the first one?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What's the part about thetransactions [balances]? We don't have copies of it; we can't see it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd take out the last phrase.MR. PARTEE. "Some acceleration" seems to me a little weak, abit of the wrong tone.MS. TEETERS. Don't forget they keep revising the GNP down.MR. PARTEE. "Evidence of a strengthening in the rate ofbusiness recovery."MR. WALLICH. We can't really say transactions balancesbecause we don't know what is in Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with changing that toMl, if that makes people feel happy. I don't like the word "Ml."MR. PARTEE. "Narrow money stock."MR. WALLICH. It just may not be in Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There may be some way of writing this toput more emphasis on the fact that M2 and M3 are expected to remain--MS. TEETERS. Well, if they are expected to remain somewhatbelow their rates, why are we raising interest rates?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because M1 has been increasingsubstantially more rapidly and because of the business [picture].MR. GUFFEY. Aren't you elevating Ml to a target again?MR. RICE. Yes, we are.MS. TEETERS. Yes.MR. BLACK. Gosh, I hope so.MR. FORD. I think there's no danger that the market willthink that's what we're doing now when we adjust the rate by 1/8 or1/4 of a percentage point.MR. BOEHNE. Do we really want to convey the notion that M1is re-elevated and also that somehow it's not good that it looks likethe business recovery is getting in line with the average of postwarexpansions and that we ought to raise interest rates because of thebusiness recovery? Somehow that doesn't have a good ring to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would leave out that part about theaverage postwar expansion.MR. PARTEE. Yes.-43-5/24/83SPEAKER(?). Right.SPEAKER(?). Do I have a notion that the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I put that in there to answer Mr.Moynihan.MR. BLACK. I think we ought to have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no indication here of going backagain if these things drop or the economy dropped. I don't know howwe get that thought in very simply.MR. MARTIN. Is there any comment on federal funds?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would leave in the boiler plate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way I would write the directivewould be "The Committee, recognizing that M2 and M3 are expected toremain somewhat below the rates of growth of 9 and 8 percentestablished for the quarter but recognizing that this is in thecontext of a somewhat stronger economic picture, decided to maintainroughly the degree of existing reserve restraint but permitting somemodest changes."MR. MORRIS. In either direction.MR. GRAMLEY. That you're offering in the spirit ofcompromise?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We don't have to have a money marketdirective; we can go back to an M2, M3 target. I think, though, thatwe wouldn't begin to agree on the numbers for the rest of this period.MR. GUFFEY. Is this upsetting to you?MR. BOEHNE. What if we move up "the evidence of someacceleration in the rate of business recovery" to replace"transactions balances have been increasing" And then the lastsentence would be "The action was also taken against a background ofsubstantially more rapid growth in Ml." That would seem to be moreconsistent with recent directives.MR. GRAMLEY. What if we put the two together? "The actionwas taken against the background of evidence of some acceleration inthe rate of business recovery and continued rapid growth of Ml."MR. MARTIN. That gets the business recovery first.MR. BOEHNE. Yes.MR. MARTIN. Which is where we all put it.MR. BOEHNE. Right; that's the point.MR. MARTIN. Not the Ml first.MR. BOEHNE. That's what I'm trying to get at.-44-5/24/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A surge in Ml, to which we don't paymuch attention--MR. MORRIS. Well, we say we don't pay much attention.MR. WALLICH. We're very close to targeting on real growth.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And we don't want to--MR. BOEHNE. Which we say we don't want to do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod is pointing out to me, in thearea of truth in packaging, that in the last 6 weeks borrowing hasaveraged $392 million. This is a terrific snugging up we're talkingabout!MR. FORD. At $350 million, it's minus $42 million; at $400million, it's plus $8 million.MR. GUFFEY. But in part of that period the funds rate was 9percent or thereabouts.MS. TEETERS. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I don't think it's the actual level ofborrowings that matters at all. It's what happens--MS. TEETERS. It's time for me to have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The federal funds rate was above 9 percentthe week of April 6, which Mr. Axilrod left out of this tabulation.The federal funds rate averaged in no week above 8.80 percent during[the rest of] the period.MS. TEETERS. If you put in the first week of April, thefunds rate averages out to exactly 8.75 percent. And if you put inthe borrowing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the first week of April the borrowingswere $1.4 billion.MS. TEETERS. That's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we increase the borrowingassumption $100 million, we are still reducing the nonborrowed reservepath by $100 million and it depends simply on banks' variable holdingsof excess reserves. We still are snugging up in intention. Whetherit's manifested or not would depend on the excess reserves level.MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, even leaving out that week ofApril 6 that had the $1.4 billion borrowing, that average that youcite is still affected by a couple of weeks where we had a wirebreakdown or some special event that pulled that average up. Aimingat $250 million, there's just more room for misses on the up side thanthe down side and I think that's the result that emerges.MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems that we maintained a higherlevel of restraint than we were aware of or than we decided last time.-45-5/24/83Why can't we say that we accept the level of restraint that hasdeveloped for the last few weeks?MR. RICE. I think that's a good suggestion.MR. PARTEE. Yes.SPEAKER(?). It's also offered in the spirit of compromise.MR. BLACK. Our error has worked out better than we thought!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Axilrod is suggesting that we goback to the language somehow or another that he suggested in the firstplace--I'm not crazy about it--about anticipating that growth rates ofM2 and M3 will accelerate. That's not very meaningful to me when theyare below where we said we were satisfied before. That's--MR. AXILROD. I was mainly trying to change your Ml to an"anticipation" instead of "desirable."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's an easy change, changing"desirable" on Ml to "anticipating," but I--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think he's right. I thinkalternative II comes closer--MR. MARTIN. Certainly "anticipation" takes a bit of theweight away from Ml. Rather than say we've done it because Ml isrunning higher to say we anticipate Ml to have certain behavior takesa little--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what is his first sentence inalternative II? What's the verb, "maintain" generally or "increase"or "decrease"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'd suggest "increase slightly." Wecan change it but I think the operative question, however we explainit, is whether we say "increase slightly" or whether somebody else hassome other words.MR. GUFFEY. The alternative is what appears: "the existingdegree of restraint."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's the argument.MR. GUFFEY. And if $350 million is what we have, I thinkthat's a little high. The existing degree of restraint is what wehave and what we maintain.MR. WALLICH. Well, the question is whether "existing" meanswhat we decided last time or what we actually have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the context of reading these things, itreads--whether we aim at something a little tighter than last time ornot and can't make it--MR. ROBERTS. Why don't we just say---46-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The changes have been so modest that--MS. TEETERS. Well, where are you going to start our arguing:between increase or existing? Isn't that just--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right. We can explain itdifferently but that's the substantive thing. [Unintelligible] and inmy mind what this is missing is any recognition, if this is what youwant to put in there, that if these aggregates came in low we mightreverse it, or if business came in less than we were anticipating, wemight be inclined to reverse it.MR. BALLES. That's in alternative I, Paul, if you just wantto borrow the language in the middle sentence there. It's the part inbrackets.MR. AXILROD. I don't mean to press it, Mr. Chairman, butthere is some advantage to having the expectation of a pickup, or somesuch wording, because then if it doesn't occur, we could say itimplies something.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the M2 and the M3 which arereferred to in alternative I are running low now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would have to be still lower.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The advantage of the alternative IIdraft, I think, is that the sentence on Ml is handled better than inwhat you read earlier, Paul.MR. MARTIN. That I agree with. We're really--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It doesn't have to read that we putMl back on a pedestal or as a target.MR. MARTIN. Well, it's forward looking rather than ex post.MR. WALLICH. And it still bases the action on acceleratingM2 and M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I think it's ridiculous when youlook at it. It says we're going to tighten up because M2 and M3 aregoing to be more than 3 percent in the next two months.MR. PARTEE. And it doesn't have the strength in the economy.MR. MARTIN. It seems to me that if we take your language andmove the business conditions comment ahead of the Ml comment and addthat "lesser restraint will be acceptable in the context of..." we atleast begin to have something to work with. It's not completelyconsistent; now we've got to reconcile--MR. CORRIGAN. That might be the way to do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't quite have that operatively.What are you suggesting?-47-5/24/83MR. MARTIN. After the language in your draft "for thequarter and within the longer-run ranges," why not move up "andagainst the background of evidence of some acceleration in the rate ofthe recovery." Then make your comment with regard to transactionsbalances in the anticipatory way that it's done in alternative II.And then close with the lesser restraint sentence. That is, we wouldhave: "The Committee anticipates that Ml would remain above its long-run range," as in the alternative II language, "but that its growthwould be substantially reduced in the period immediately ahead." Andthen close with "Lesser restraint would be acceptable...." Now, thatisn't completely consistent; it needs a little editing once you tackit all together like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my problem is that I lose sight ofjust how it--. I understand adding this other sentence; I don't thinkthere's any great problem with that.MR. MARTIN. The lesser restraint?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. The fact is we haven't got muchrestraint.MR. WALLICH. Well, the case for adding that increases, Ithink, as we shift to increasing the degree of restraint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only problem with that sentence"Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of morepronounced slowing of growth in the monetary aggregates relative tothe paths...." is that it's fine for M2 and M3 but it's hard topronounce a slowing of growth in M1 relative to the path.MR. MARTIN. You're right. So it should be "M2 and M3"instead of "monetary aggregates."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we could just do that.MR. GRAMLEY. That's a rather unusual construction no matterwhat, if we have lesser restraint if M2 and M3 slow further but wedon't say what we're going to do if M1 slows.MR. MARTIN. That's the beauty of it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there's a very seriousproblem with your formulation, Paul, which is not true of alternativeII, which is this: In effect what you're saying in the first sentenceof your formulation is that while M2 and M3 on the one hand aregrowing below the rates established, since transactions balances havebeen increasing substantially more rapidly than desirable we thereforeare increasing slightly the degree of reserve restraint. In effectyou are telling the market that Ml is now more important than M2 andM3. Do you really want to go that far?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it says that. It says thatMl is increasing at a rate of 24 percent and I give it some weight.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It doesn't say that. It says that Mlis more important than M2 and M3 in terms of the bottom line.-48-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it says that. That's yourreading of it; it's not my reading of it.MR. WALLICH. Two are going down; one is going up strongly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. And there comes a pointwhen the one going up strongly outweighs the two. When the two are 1percentage point below where they should be and the other is 18percentage points above where it should be, my weighting says, yes.MR. MARTIN. So here we are to the central bank money as theGerman--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's not my view ofdeemphasis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [It is] straightforward. I'm not sureit's going to solve any of these problems; I'm perfectly happy to tryit out. "The Committee seeks to increase slightly the degree of..."--I don't know about that "seeks to"--"taking account of expectationsthat growth of M2 and M3 will remain within their longer-run ranges,recognizing the recent strength of Ml, and against the background ofevidence of some acceleration in the rate of business recovery.Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of...."MR. PARTEE. String them altogether.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's missing here, but I hate to say it,is that the Committee seeks to increase only slightly.MR. MARTIN. Well, if you put in the reversal language,you'll get some of the members.MR. ROBERTS. I think your first draft is better than any ofthese suggestions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure if I read anything thatpeople are going to like better.MR. GUFFEY. To be clear, Mr. Chairman, I would join TonySolomon in opting for alternative II and lifting the bracketedlanguage out of alternative I with respect to the downside risk on M2and M3. It seems to me we're really adopting a money marketconditions directive and the initial borrowing level is the importantfactor. If that's $350 million, that's consistent with what we've hadin the past. And I don't see any reason to include language in adirective that will be made public after the next meeting, 6 weeksfrom now, which says we're going to snug up slightly or we're going tohave slightly greater restraint or any other such language. I don'tsee where we [gain] anything from it. It seems to me that $300million or the $250 to $350 million range of borrowing is what weought to be focusing on without any language about snugging up.Alternative II, with the lifting of the language on the down side,seems to me to do that. And it doesn't elevate Ml to some targetlevel for the Desk to shoot at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose it will make nobody happy tosay: "The Committee seeks in the short run to increase"--or maybe to-49-5/24/83increase only slightly--"the degree of reserve restraint, recognizingthat, while Ml has been increasing substantially more rapidly thananticipated, M2 and M3 are expected to remain below the rates...."That explains why it's only slightly.MR. PARTEE. I can accept it.MR. MARTIN. Would you add the lesser restraint?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're talking about such narrow ranges.MR. MARTIN. [Unintelligible.]MR. PARTEE. But you would add the sentence on business?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I'm not quite sure what I said. Allright, let's try this: "The Committee seeks in the short run toincrease slightly"--I'd put in "only" before that but it sounds alittle [unintelligible]--"the degree of reserve restraint, recognizingthat, while Ml has been increasing substantially more rapidly thananticipated, M2 and M3 are expected to remain below the rates ofgrowth of 9 and 8 percent established earlier and within their longer-run ranges. The action was taken against the background of evidenceof some acceleration in the rate of business recovery. Lesserrestraint would be acceptable in the context of more pronouncedslowing of growth in the broader monetary aggregates relative to thepaths implied by the long-term ranges and a deceleration of Ml orindications of a little weakening in the pace of economic recovery."MR. BALLES. That sounds good.MR. PARTEE. That's a lot of words for $100 million.MR. GUFFEY. May I ask you, Mr. Chairman, what you believe tobe the advantages of making public 5 or 6 weeks from now the language"to increase slightly the degree of restraint"? What advantage enuresto the System by publishing that language after the next meeting?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess that question is not on the top ofmy mind. My first [objective] would be to try to say something thathalfway accurately reflects what we think we're doing.MR. BALLES. If I may be so bold, Mr. Chairman, to answerthat question: You may not agree with it, but let's not forget,Roger, that this directive will be released right after our Julymeeting but before the Chairman's testimony and hence the Fed watcherswill be really studying that directive to see what nuances they candraw from it. I think it's a particularly important statement.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I don't tend to agree with you, obviously.MR. PARTEE. It's a suggestion that we're not oblivious towhat is going on.MR. GUFFEY. On the other hand, you've also incorporated inthis that we want to increase interest rates, or restraint if youwill, because the economy has just come out of an episode where we hadtwo recessions in three years.-50-5/24/83MR. MARTIN. But it suggests we are moving in a way thatwould avoid the excesses that sometimes have characterized a certainstage of the recovery and overcreating the--MR. MORRIS. And it also place more emphasis on Ml than on M2and M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I disagree with that. I just thinkthat is a plain misreading. It says here we're placing some emphasison it; we are not ignoring Ml when it's huge. We've never saidanything different.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What you're saying is that eventhough we have deemphasized Ml, when it's this large we have to takeit into consideration.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's precisely what we'resaying.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't agree with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how you can read it any otherway.SPEAKER(?). For one month.MR. MORRIS. Well, we're increasing reserve restraint when M2and M3 are falling below their--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. They're falling 1 percentbelow. They're expected to fall 1 percentage point below and Ml isgrowing 10 percentage points above.MR. FORD. I don't see, unless you don't want to snug at all,how we can snug with any less vigor than that statement. If I had agirlfriend that snuggled like that, I'd fire her!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is an empirically correctstatement.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think it read all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To me, the only thing we could debate hereis whether we put in the word "only" before slightly. It just soundsa little--MR. PARTEE. No, I don't think so, because to snug onlyslightly in the short run suggests that a little later you're going todo more. "In the short run we will increase only slightly" seems tohave a little trend.MS. TEETERS. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or we could take out the words "in theshort run."MR. PARTEE. You'd have to take out "in the short run."-51-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me read it once again and seewhether I've got it straight and see whether anybody can do anybetter.MR. BLACK. Don't give them a chance at it!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Committee seeks in the short run toincrease slightly the degree of reserve restraint, recognizing that,while M1 has been increasing substantially more rapidly thananticipated, M2 and M3 are expected to remain below the rates ofgrowth of 9 and 8 percent established earlier within the longer-runranges. The action"--we could say the modest action--"was takenagainst the background of evidence of some acceleration in the rate ofbusiness recovery. Lesser restraint would be appropriate...."MR. WALLICH. We seem to be saying that we're tighteningbecause M2 and M3 are expected to remain below the rates--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's why the word only would help inthat context.MR. WALLICH. It seem to be putting all the weight there onMl.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, you could say marginally, soyou avoid Chuck Partee's--MS. TEETERS. Slightly marginally?MR. CORRIGAN. Could we put a phrase before M2 and M3 thereand say "in the context in which M2 and M3 are only slightly belowtheir..."MR. GRAMLEY. I think we'd need to drop the "while," though.The Chairman's point is correct. The argument seems backwards--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is backwards.MR. GRAMLEY. --if we say we're doing this while Ml [is high]although M2 and M3 are falling below. We ought to drop the "whilerecognizing that."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Like the way I said it originally.MR. GRAMLEY. Or leave the order the way it is but take outthe word "while" and just say "recognizing that [Ml] growth...eventhough M2 and M3 are below."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the result of that is that itgives a little more emphasis on Ml, but I--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A more honest directive would saythat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's pretty honest as near as I can see.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it is. I think a morehonest directive would say we are worrying about too strong a recovery-52-5/24/83and even though we don't pay too much attention to Ml, when it gets tobe this big we would pay some attention to it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we're saying.MR. BLACK. That's all it says.MR. PARTEE. We're going to take a little precautionarysnugging.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's comes as close to saying that as Ican devise.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'll be glad to back off.MS. TEETERS. A more honest way of saying it is when theeconomy shows some--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see anything dishonest about this.It says as plainly as I can say it what I think we're going to do. Ijust reject that entirely. It can't be much more straightforward.MR. GUFFEY. What level of borrowing are we talking about?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a nice question. I'massuming we're talking about $350 million.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I thought that you had assumed before thatthat's the existing degree of restraint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is about that, de facto.MR. GUFFEY. Then the statement is dishonest in the sensethat we are not going to snug.MR. PARTEE. We're going to try for it this time, though.MR. BLACK. Hitting it intentionally is snugging from hittingit accidentally.MR. KEEHN. If we went to $400 million, I think that wouldrepresent an $8 million snugging, which is fairly modest.MR. BLACK. Do you think we ought to put that "only" inthere?MR. MORRIS. Why aren't we talking about increasing the fundsrate to 8-3/4 to 9 percent? Isn't that really the issue?MS. TEETERS. That's what we're really talking about; that'sright.MR. PARTEE. We usually don't say it that boldly.MR. MORRIS. Yes, but that's the understanding. That's whatwe're voting for.-53-5/24/83MS. TEETERS. That is a 1/2 point increase in the funds rateover what we thought we had.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I continue to welcome any suggestions asto how to word this, but I do not think the issue is honesty.MR. MORRIS. It's to snug or not to snug.SPEAKER(?). It's under 9 percent or--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we're trying to say here, assuming wesnug however infinitesimally, is that, yes, we'll give a little weightto Ml when it's way above and we'll give some weight to the economylooking stronger.MR. BLACK. I think it's as close as you're going to get.MS. TEETERS. But the decision is whether to raise theinterest rate or not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The decision is where to put the borrowinglevel.MS. TEETERS. That's raising the interest rate.MR. WALLICH. In a sense the snugging is already behind us.We're now going to aim at what we accidentally hit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what the market--MS. TEETERS. Henry, it was clear last time--MR. RICE. Not in this directive.MS. TEETERS. --that we were to go to an 8-3/4 percentinterest rate. We made that decision 6 weeks ago; now we're going togo to 9 percent.MR. WALLICH. Not if we keep borrowings at $350 million.MR. CORRIGAN. Would that language you have there, Mr.Chairman, perhaps be a bit more acceptable if it said "...increaseslightly the degree of restraint. The action was taken in the contextin which M2 and M3 were slightly below their paths for the quarter butMl was well above and the economy was stronger." Does that help atall in terms of how--?MR. GRAMLEY. I think it helps the syntax of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's what we're trying to say.It's very close to what I said originally.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I think it pushes M1 a little furtheroff into the wilderness.MS. TEETERS. But interest rates went up. If the two of themare below and we raise interest rates because they're below, and whenone goes up we raise interest rates---54-5/24/83MR. CORRIGAN. Well, it's saying two things. It's saying M2and M3 are just in a statistically insignificant way below where wewant them to be and, on the other hand, Ml is very strong and theeconomy appears to be strong.MS. TEETERS. So we raise the interest rates.MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but I think it says it in a slightlydifferent way than the way it's there now. It pushes M1 further intothe background than it is now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not much.MR. MORRIS. Not very much further.MR. CORRIGAN. I myself would be willing to put it on theeconomy but that gets us into the trap of saying we're going to runpolicy more generally on the economy. I'm not ready for that either.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(?). You're going to frustrate theAdministration and Congress for the rest of the year?MR. MARTIN. The Administration [unintelligible] frustratethe Congress and not the economy. You could drop them both andfrustrate both.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Did Regan say 6 percent for Ml?MR. MARTIN. He won. Poole said 5 percent; we can't get themto agree on how far down.SPEAKER(?). For the year, you mean.MR. WALLICH. Anyone who names this Ml number should mentionthe associated funds rate.MR. GRAMLEY. To Poole, the lower the money number the lowerthe funds rate, I think.SPEAKER(?). In the long run.MR. GRAMLEY [Unintelligible] talk about Poole?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you suggest for Ml, Mr. Corrigan?MR. CORRIGAN. Well, it's--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Statistically insignificant.MS. TEETERS. Statistically insignificant.MR. CORRIGAN. Basically I said you have the operativesentence--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that part.MR. CORRIGAN. "This action was taken against the backgroundin which M2 and M3 were slightly below their targets for the quarter,-55-5/24/83while at the same time M1 was growing very rapidly and the economyappeared to be picking up."MR. BLACK. That will eliminate the dangling participle too.MR. CORRIGAN. If there is one thing we've got to do it'seliminate the participle, even if it--MR. WALLICH. Well, only slightly below--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Couldn't we say "While Ml, which wenormally deemphasize, was growing unusually rapidly"?MR. PARTEE. "And the economy, which we pay no attention to,was strengthening"!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Committee seeks in the short run toincrease slightly the degree of reserve restraint." I think at thispoint I'd be inclined to put in "only slightly." "The action wastaken against the background of M2 and M3 remaining slightly below therates of growth of 9 and 8 percent respectively established earlierfor the quarter and within their long-term ranges, M1 growing wellabove the anticipated levels for some time, and evidence of someacceleration in the rate of business recovery. Lesser restraint wouldbe appropriate in the context of more pronounced slowing in growth ofthe broader monetary aggregates relative to the paths implied by thelong-term ranges and a sharp deceleration of Ml."MR. GUFFEY. Why put in that last part about deceleration ofMl? That again is raising its importance.MR. ROBERTS. You have to put it in because that's the onlyreason we're talking about snugging.MR. GUFFEY. No it isn't.MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, no!SPEAKER(?). But then we have a lot of--MR. BALLES. You've muddied the waters.SPEAKER(?). Making him another God.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody like "marginally" better?MR. PARTEE. To seek "marginally" instead of "slightly"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. PARTEE. "Increase only marginally the degree of reserverestraint."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd put the word only in. I guess we'reas close as we're going to get.MR. CORRIGAN. We have to put something in now that says theaction was taken because the Committee was getting hungry!-56-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The first question will be what theborrowing level is and the second question will be the directive."The Committee seeks in the short run to increase only slightly thedegree of reserve restraint. The action was taken against thebackground of M2 and M3 remaining slightly below the rates of growthof 9 and 8 percent, respectively, established earlier for the quarterand within their long-term ranges, M1 growing well above anticipatedlevels for some time, and evidence of some acceleration in the rate ofbusiness recovery. Lesser restraint would be appropriate in thecontext of more pronounced slowing of growth of the broader monetaryaggregates relative to the paths implied by the long-term ranges anddeceleration of Ml"--MS. TEETERS. I think you contradicted yourself in the lastsentence.MR. PARTEE. I don't think so.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would it be sufficient in the lastsentence, Paul, simply to say "slowing of the aggregates" and not sayanything about the broader aggregates or deceleration of Ml?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can't say "more pronouncedslowing of Ml." What it says now is "relative to the paths implied bythe long-term ranges [and deceleration of] Ml."MS. TEETERS. It sounds as if you're heading for the bottomof the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me go to the borrowing level. Howmany people want to hold it at $350 million?MR. PARTEE. I'll buy $350 million.SPEAKER(?). It's $392 million.MR. GRAMLEY. I'd prefer $400 million, but I'll buy $350million. I'm getting hungry too!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One, two, three, four. We didn't get sixvotes for $350 million.MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible.] I'm not sure we're going tohave six votes for anything.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where all the missing votesare.MR. BLACK. I'd be willing to vote for one that won't hold.MR. PARTEE. $400 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we pick up any [votes] at $400 million?MR. PARTEE. No.MR. BLACK. No, we didn't.-57-5/24/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now try $300 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $300 million isn't going to have enoughvotes here.MR. FORD. You can't vote twice!MR. MARTIN. Sure you can. Put your right arm up.SPEAKER(?). You just did; now we're getting ready.MR. FORD. At least use the left hand and the right hand.MR. PARTEE. Well, in some ways $350 million is the weightedaverage.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's pretty obvious: $350 million is theweighted average. We have to reach a decision. I'll promote $350million again. Any votes?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You've got $250 million over here.MR. PARTEE. $350 million again?MR. GRAMLEY. Again as a consensus.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One, two, three, four, five, six. Itwould be nice to have another, but I guess it doesn't make anydifference. We'll have dissents on both sides.MR. PARTEE. Are you counting yourself?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've got to get a ruling from the chair.MS. TEETERS. In a split, do we have any change from the lastpolicy?MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would go for $350 million ifwe're talking about a [funds rate] level of approximately 8-3/4percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anybody can predict [thefunds rate] that precisely. It will probably be 8-3/4 percentsometimes and above that sometimes and--MR. GUFFEY. I understand, but I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sure isn't much different from where weare. And I can't promise you it wouldn't go to 9 percent.MR. GUFFEY. We can operate policy so it won't go to 9percent in the intermeeting period if that's the consensus of thisCommittee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get lots of chances to consult.MR. ROBERTS. Did we have six for $400 million?-58-5/24/83MR. PARTEE. No.MR. GRAMLEY. We had six for $350 million.MR. FORD. Can those who are not voting not be starved intosubmission?SPEAKER(?). No.SPEAKER(?). Sorry.MR. PARTEE. It's one of the disadvantages of attending!MR. BLACK. The thing for you to do is go for $350 millionand then dissent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's go for $350 million and seewhere we come out. Let's have a vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey NoPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice NoPresident Roberts NoGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich YesSix to six.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, someone's going to have to changethe vote. We're going to have to go with a split vote, since thereapparently are people on either side.MS. TEETERS. I don't think so; there's only one on the otherside.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see how--. Well, it only takesone to [unintelligible]. There's no higher number of votes for anyother alternative that I see.MR. BLACK. Would you vote for [$350] million, Ted? It'sbetter than the alternative.MS. HORN. At least there's a focus on Ml.MR. FORD. I'll verify that you're a snugger.MR. BLACK. I'll put a sentence in every one of my talks!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible] get you to vote on$300 million?-59-5/24/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what that means. If it meanswe start out at $350 million, it's all right with me.MR. FORD. The legal counsel is--MS. TEETERS. Six [to six] leaves it where it was the lasttime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know, for a $50 million difference,it's ridiculous.MS. TEETERS. That's not what [I'm] against. That's not whatwe're voting for; we're voting to raise the interest rates or not toraise them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll convert my statement; if youthink there's a great relationship, you're voting for an eighth of apercentage point on the federal funds rate.MS. TEETERS. That's what you told me last time too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will sit here until somebody hasa better idea.MR. ROBERTS. Okay, Mr. Chairman, I give in. I prefer ahigher number but if we can't get any more, I'll go with the $350million reluctantly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we know what it is, we will vote for adirective that says "The Committee seeks in the short run to increaseonly slightly the degree of reserve restraint." We're going to haveseven votes for this. "The action was taken against the background ofM2 and M3 remaining slightly below the rates of growth of 9 and 8percent, respectively, established earlier for the quarter and withintheir long-term ranges, Ml growing well above anticipated levels forsome time, and evidence of some acceleration in the rate of businessrecovery. Lesser restraint would be appropriate in the context ofmore pronounced slowing of growth in the broader monetary aggregatesrelative to the paths implied by the long-term ranges and decelerationof Ml, or indications of a weakening in the pace of economicrecovery."MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon NoGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey NoPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris NoGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice NoPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we can go eat, if we don't have anyother business.END OF MEETING-60-