Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 14-15, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Monday afternoon, November 14, 1983, and continuingon Tuesday, November 15, 1983, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Boehne, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco and Richmond, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Prell,Scheld, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account11/14-15/83Mr. Frost, Staff Director, Office of Staff Directorfor Management, Board of GovernorsMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Deputy Staff Director, Office of StaffDirector for Monetary and Financial Policy,Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Henderson, Deputy Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Forrestal and Wallace, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and DallasMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. Burns, J. Davis, Koch, Mullineaux, Parthemos, andStern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Dallas, Cleveland, Atlanta, Philadelphia, Richmond,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Bisignano, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofSan FranciscoMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, FederalReserve Bank of New York-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 14-15, 1983November 14, 1983--Afternoon Session[Secretary's note: The Committee convened prior to the regular FOMCmeeting to hear a presentation on inflation by Mr. Slifman, Ms.Zickler, and Mr. Stockton of the Board's staff. Although thepresentation and subsequent discussion were not part of the officialmeeting, the text of the Committee's discussion is shown below and thestaff statements are included in the Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a real performance. We have to[decide on] the long-run [monetary] targets for next year soon andpresent some [economic] projections. There have been some proposalsthat we present projections through 1988, which happens to coincidewith [the period covered in] the last table [distributed for thispresentation]. We're not yet obligated to do that; I don't knowwhether we will be by the time we get around to presenting our long-range projections. We're going to have to decide how we willcollectively look at this situation. The staff has a pretty sharpdecline in M2 in 1984 to get on this track [toward price stability].What is it going to be this year?MR. STOCKTON. M2 in this price stability case is 6 percentand that's down from our projection for 1984 of an 8 percent increaseat an annual rate.MR. PARTEE. Did I understand you to say that if productivitygrowth is 1 percent higher--that is, 2 percent rather than 1 percent--that the unemployment rate associated with this long-term projectionwould be about a point lower?MR. STOCKTON. That's correct. That's because if we assume a2 percent productivity growth rate, the unemployment rate could fallto 8.1 percent by the end of 1984 and then would stay at about a 7-3/4percent rate throughout the last four years of the price stabilityscenario.MR. PARTEE. Would that mean that total output would be quitea bit higher?MR. STOCKTON. Yes. That's correct.MR. PARTEE. Because you have lower unemployment and moreoutput per worker?MR. STOCKTON. That's correct.MR. PARTEE. I see.MR. GRAMLEY. I'd like to ask about the increase in the GNPdeflator in 1985. If you take 6-1/2 percent as the natural rate [ofunemployment] and we're 2 percentage points above that in both '84 and'85, that should get us, according to your formula, about a 1-1/2percentage point reduction in inflation per year. You offset thatwith a drop in the average unemployment rate from 9-1/2 to 8-1/2between '83 and '84; that should add about a quarter of a percentage11/14-15/83point to the inflation rate. So, on balance, one would think that in'85 we ought to come up with about a 1 to 1-1/4 percentage point lowerinflation rate than in '84. But you have it going up. Can you[explain]?MR. STOCKTON. Yes. The difference is that the exchange ratebehaves quite differently. In the price stability case we still havesome depreciation of the exchange rate coming and that accounts forthe difference.MR. GRAMLEY. Thank you.MR. PARTEE. You've taken a fairly restrictive definition ofprice stability. How sensitive is this last table to that? If yousaid price stability was 1-1/2 percent or something like that insteadof essentially [zero]--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We see how tolerant you are!MR. PARTEE. In that case you should get [price stability] by1987.MR. STOCKTON. Well, there are a couple of things to keep inmind about this price stability [scenario] that we're presenting. Thefirst thing is that in the next two years we think we're facing acouple of hurdles that are going to make it difficult to reach pricestability: We have a food price shock that is going to be showing upin 1984 and we have a substantial increase in the social security tax.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How big is that?MR. STOCKTON. That accounts for about 0.4 percent oncompensation over the four quarters of 1984. So, that's almost a halfpoint added back onto compensation. We have some depreciation of thedollar in any of the cases that we are examining and we have somemomentum of the recovery moving into 1984. So, we spend the first twoyears in almost any of these cases just keeping the lid on the specialfactors that we think are tending to boost inflation in '84 and '85.Even in this case that we're presenting we achieve all the pricedeceleration really in the last three years. So, we get thedeceleration occurring in three years but we have to spend the firsttwo years--the next two years--holding down those things that we thinkare apt to boost inflation. In either case the costs, obviously, areless the higher you make your target rate of inflation by the end ofthe period. But it does require fairly low rates of growth,particularly in the next two years.MR. CORRIGAN. If by the end of the period we're shootingfor, say, 1-1/2 percent, would that loosely translate into saying thatwe could afford 1 percent per year more real growth? Or, what's theorder of magnitude?SPEAKER(?). We have not done that exercise specifically butI would guess that it would just be a marginally lower unemploymentpath on average compared to the one here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Might as well go for broke--go for zero.Mr. Morris.11/14-15/83MR. MORRIS. I have an intuitive feeling that your 1 percentproductivity assumption is too pessimistic just because I see so manystructural changes that were made in the last three years in terms ofreducing staff overhead and in terms of changes in work rules. Whenwe went through the 1970s with a lower rate of productivity growththan we could explain on the basis of the ordinary analytical factors,we got a big negative residual. It seems to me that maybe we willstart to see some bounceback; maybe we'll start getting a positiveresidual. What was the basis for your 1 percent productivityassumption, which I think is 1 percentage point too low?MS. ZICKLER. At this point in the business cycle we'reseeing increases that are largely cyclical in nature. We try as bestwe can to look through these increases and see what underlying trendthat type of behavior would be consistent with. And that's basicallyhow we came up with it. Now, you're right, that during the lastrecession we saw a lot of shedding of labor, a lot of changes thatkept productivity growing--even last year during a period whennormally it would decline. So, to some extent, these developmentsthat you talk about could be once-and-for-all changes in theproductivity level that wouldn't become embodied in a continuedimprovement in the growth rate. But to the extent that business ismaking an attempt to invest in new technology and really change on anongoing basis some of those undefined things--things that we couldn'tdefine during the '70s very well--then, yes, we could be toopessimistic. I think the coming year will be the critical year forevaluating where we are on this productivity path because generallywhat shows up in the second year of recovery is a sharp decelerationtoward a trend rate of growth. If we keep getting information thattells us that the productivity is doing better than 1 percent, thatwill firm up the view that perhaps the trend is changing and could becloser to 2 percent or whatever.MR. MARTIN. You didn't mention a more experienced laborforce and you didn't mention the impact of these high unemploymentrates you project. Do you discount those factors in getting back tothe 1.1 percent trend?MS. ZICKLER. Well, certainly, some reversal of the problemof having inexperienced workers contributed to moving [up] 1/2percentage point to 1.1 percent. Looking ahead, yes, the demographicscould help us out a bit. There has been an ongoing trend. Forexample, women who entered the labor force in the '60s or '70s nowhave career attachments to jobs or are staying in the labor force allyear and are likely more productive than the new entrants to the laborforce. That could help us out; that sort of change occurs very slowlyand gradually over time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I would like to second what Frank said aboutproductivity. There have been a number of changes in the industrialstructure and demographics and I think your assumption probably is onthe pessimistic side. The point that I want to make is that thisbaseline case is really a gradualist approach to price stability and Ithink that's the right way to do it for this kind of analysis. Butmore realistically we would likely have a recession, say, in 1986 or1987. I wonder how sensitive this model is to having a third11/14-15/83recession in a period of 6 or 7 years. We have seen lots of forecaststhat are always based on a gradualist approach--that we're going tobring inflation down gradually. In reality, if you look back at thehistory of inflation, inflation really only comes down throughrecessions. The last time we really knocked inflation in the head wasin the 1950s when we had three recessions over about an 8-year periodgoing into the early 60s. So, my question is: What does a recessiondo in terms of bringing down inflation and in terms of these realvariables?MR. STOCKTON. Well, I think a recession obviously gets theinflation rate down that much faster. And you're right that it's verydifficult with models to project business cycles. The earlier thatyou have the reduction in output the more immediate effect you have onlowering inflation. Then, that lowers inflation expectations throughall subsequent periods so that a sharp contraction of output couldlead to a substantial reduction in inflation and that would bring downinflation expectations just as it has in the past two years. Inessence, the costs have to be paid in any of those cases [through]recession or slow growth.MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's also the case that where we have'85 and '86 based on a little over 1 percent real growth, the economyis really rather delicately balanced between small and no growth ordeclining output. If you shorten the time horizon, the model is quitewilling to cycle into recession. It's not difficult to get the modelto fall into the negative side for real output.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. My question pertains to Chart 18 on the baselinecase. I want to precede that by saying that the reason I was soimpressed with this presentation is that it's a very useful device forreminding us that an interaction goes on between the monetary side andthe real side of the economy and getting these outcomes for almost allthe variables we're looking at. With respect to the particularbaseline case, in light of the fact that some of us here--I at least--think that the velocity of Ml is in the process now, or soon will be,of returning to a more normal historical pattern, I was wondering ifyou've done any experimenting with what growth in Ml, or indeed othermonetary measures such as growth of total reserves, for example, mightbe consistent with the outcome that you have in unemployment,inflation, and real GNP?MR. STOCKTON. Well, we looked at the path of Ml that wouldbe capable of generating our price stability scenario, and generallythe M1 path that goes along with the baseline case would be around 5percent next year and would stay at about 5 percent the following yearand then drop off to about 2-1/4 percent by 1988.MR. PARTEE. Gradually?MR. STOCKTON. Gradually, yes. It's not in a straight line,like putting a ruler down to a piece of paper; it is gradually.MR. PARTEE. Is it something like 5,5,4,3, and 2 percent?11/14-15/83MR. STOCKTON. [5.5, 5, 3.2, 3 and 2.2] or something likethat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What does this model assume aboutreal growth in the rest of the world and how sensitive is theconclusion to changes in the assumptions on how the rest of the worldis growing?MR. STOCKTON. I think this model assumes about 2-1/2percent.MR. TRUMAN. It's 2-1/2 percent on average and it's a littlehigher than that in the rest of the world.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steadily through the 5-year period?MR. TRUMAN. Right. It is likely reduced by about 0.3throughout the period as a result of the slower growth in the UnitedStates. So, it's a little under 3 percent on the baseline projection,which is basically the staff forecast, and it's a little closer to 2.5or 2.6 percent after you take account of the impact of the UnitedStates on the rest of the world.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's aside from any influence onthe exchange rate. I assume that, say, a 1 point gain in the economicgrowth in the rest of the world doesn't have much impact on this?MR. TRUMAN. In terms of the aggregate demand impact, youmean? Well, it would have an impact just like any other demand shift.It would give you a higher level of aggregate demand and in that senseit would put you on a different point on the given--MR. KICHLINE. But it is a very small effect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I just wanted to observe that I have a gutreaction that this real GNP projection is perhaps understated,especially for 1984. But I really wanted to ask a question about thedeficit reduction. What kind of assumption are you making for deficitreductions in 1985?MR. STOCKTON. In the baseline price stability scenario weassume that starting in 1985 equal cuts are made in both taxes andgovernment expenditures, accumulating to $15 billion on taxes and $15billion on expenditures. So, we get $30 billion the first year, $60billion the next year, $90 billion the following year, and $120billion the following year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is remarkable that you can give apresentation about inflation and never mention the deficit, and thereare a hundred eighty million people out there who think there's somerelationship.MR. RICE. It's in there.11/14-15/83MR. KICHLINE. We didn't focus on that, but it's certainlymentioned.MR. RICE. That was part of the question I wanted to ask. Isthere a feasible monetary policy that is consistent with no progressin reducing the deficit?MR. STOCKTON. Yes. There certainly is. If it required--MR. CORRIGAN. You don't want to hear about it.MR. RICE. Is there a feasible one, a doable one?MR. STOCKTON. Yes. In fact if no fiscal action is taken, itmakes it a bit easier to achieve price stability. Now, the reason forthat is that cutting the deficit leads to exchange rate effectsthrough the effect on interest rates. As smaller deficits lead tolower interest rates that has more of an effect on the depreciatingdollar, which leads to higher inflation, which you have to offsetthrough less output. So, in fact, the unemployment path needed toachieve price stability, if we assume no fiscal action, would be about0.2 of a percentage point a year lower than what we--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't agree with that, because atsome point as the current account deficit gets larger and larger andlarger, with huge leaps, we'll see higher interest rates. It's notgoing to prevent some change--some depreciation of the dollar.MR. TRUMAN. That's precisely correct, I think. Let me justmake two points to President Solomon. One is that to the extent thatwe have built into the baseline projection some depreciation of thedollar before price stability, essentially, I would view it as part ofthe process by which we got the dollar very strong to build up the bigcurrent account deficit. And in fact we don't have much more builtinto there than is necessary to keep the current account deficit inthe current range. So, therefore, it is possible that it could gofurther, as Mr. Stockton mentioned when he talked about otherexogenous factors--exogenous being outside what we currentlypredicted--being part of the process. But in some sense that is partof paying the price for the good luck on the dollar or theappreciation of the dollar that we had gotten earlier which hadaccelerated the short-run process of the disinflation. But once itreverses itself, the lag comes through the system and we will get muchmore. I would regard this projection as in some sense neutral oragnostic to the extent that it doesn't involve a very big furtherbuildup in the current account. That's true of the baseline and ofthe projection. Similarly, it doesn't involve so much correction ofthe value of the dollar; it has as given a relatively moderate growthin the rest of the world such that you get a big improvement in thecurrent account over a period. And in that sense I would say thatit's somewhat agnostic in the way it takes--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask a question of you. Whenyou answered Governor Rice that it would be easier to achieve pricestability if we didn't get rid of the budget deficit because of thehigher interest rate effect and the higher dollar, are you alsoassuming a major recession?11/14-15/83MR. STOCKTON. No. The output path there is associated withthe one here. It would be basically the same; there's no difference.It's fairly uniform, adding output along those cases that were given.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand you correctly, yourassumption on reducing the deficit is that it's bad for inflation?MR. STOCKTON. That's correct.MR. KICHLINE. I think we've been very cautious in presentingthe issues with respect to inflation expectations, and that's whereone presumably has the channel of influence in terms of deficitactions feeding back on inflation expectations. The model simplydoesn't capture that. I think Dave has stated that. So, it's in thearea of expectations that this model and most models are very weak andthat offers something very positive in terms of potential outcome.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's agnostic on the point that Mr.Solomon is raising as to whether you can have those deficits and havethis nice smooth path?MR. TRUMAN. The particular point is that by achieving abetter outcome in 1988 [unintelligible] defined this way to the extentthat a different fiscal/monetary [policy] mix over this period givesyou higher interest rates, a higher dollar, or a larger currentaccount deficit. So, likewise, it might be if you look beyond 1988that you would go backwards and have a correction of that process.You would have to work harder just as we are now in terms of acorrection if you felt that that kind of current account deficit wouldnot be sustainable for an extended period of time. So, you would haveto pay a price later for that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much does the level of interest ratesitself affect your inflation forecast?MR. STOCKTON. Well, the level of interest rates plays asmall role through cost of capital effects, capital being about 35percent. But we don't think that's a major effect in short-run pricedetermination.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no cost push from high interestrates?MR. STOCKTON. There's a small cost push from higher interestrates. That's true of our general outlook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say cost of capital, do you meanin terms of cost or in terms of affecting the amount of investment?MR. STOCKTON. I mean in terms of cost rather than affectingthe amount of investment.MS. TEETERS. What level of interest rates and changes, then,are required to get to the particular path of real GNP?MR. STOCKTON. The federal funds rate is about 10-3/4 percentin this path for 1984 and drifts down to about 9 percent by 1988.11/14-15/83MS. TEETERS. So the implication is rising interest rates inthe short term in order to produce a decreased rate of real growth andprice stability.MR. STOCKTON. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You still have 9 percent interest rateswith a 1 percent or 3/4 percent rise in prices?MR. STOCKTON. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. This cost of capital of over 30 percent: Doesthat include depreciation?MR. STOCKTON. Yes.MR. WALLICH. Can you tell me a little about the period overwhich the data in the model reach? My impression is that the modelderives its data mostly from a period in which nobody believed thatinflation could be reduced to .7 percent, and so it naturally hasbuilt in a very strong resistance to that. Now, if we could have acredible policy--if it were believed that your alternative assumption,the last one [listed], is possible and will be done--wouldn't thatinvalidate many of the assumptions underlying the past data?MR. STOCKTON. Well, it would certainly change. I hope wemade clear that our alternative assumption [of a "credible"disinflation policy]--the last one we've listed under price stability--is clearly a possibility and would alter the cost of achieving pricestability. Now, the past couple of years, this credibility issue hasbeen very difficult. I think many economists went out and said:We've never had observations with unemployment that was this high andthat has stayed this high so long. And when they reestimated theirmodels they found it looked as if prices were more sensitive to higherrates of unemployment than they previously had thought. But it's notclear. We're not able to distinguish the hypothesis that prices aremore sensitive to high rates of unemployment from the hypothesis thatperhaps there was a credibility effect which was bringing inflationdown faster than might have been thought back in 1980.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. We went through a similar exercise using the[MPS] model. But the difference from what the staff has done in thebaseline case is that we used Ml as the money growth rate. We startedwith 6 percent for 1984 and dropped it 1 point per year for the next 3years, using 5 percent for 1985, 4 percent for 1986, and 3 percent for1987 and 1988. That does have some measurable effect on output in thesense that it's just marginally higher in 1984 but is roughly apercentage point higher in both 1985 and 1986. And it brings theinflation rate down to 1 percent at the end of the five-year period.So, what we did was to use Ml, dropping it 1 percent a year for thenext three years and then holding it stable at 3 percent. And thatdoes give a bit better inflation picture, bringing inflation down inthe years 1985 and 1986 a bit faster than is shown in the staff11/14-15/83projection, as well as about a percentage point greater [GNP] growthin 1985 and 1986; it comes out to about the same in 1987 and 1988.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just explore this for a moment. Itake it the staff does not agree that that is possible, [barring] somerevolution of expectations?MR. STOCKTON. Well, I'm not certain from the context of themodel that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know about his exact Mlfigure but, if I understood Mr. Guffey correctly, he has a model thatgives us faster growth and faster deceleration of inflation at thesame time.MR. GUFFEY. That's right. Faster growth in '85 and '86 andfaster deceleration in the inflation rate in '86 and '87.MR. STOCKTON. There are a number of other factors--MR. KICHLINE. One issue is the growth of productivity. Wehave extrapolated--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know one can make other assumptions asto the growth of productivity and all the rest. I don't think I saidanything very startling. Unless you make some other assumptions ofthat sort, you can't come up with that kind of answer. You have tofind the answer in productivity or expectations--MR. STOCKTON. I think that's correct, yes.MR. GUFFEY. I think we're using the same model.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll ask Mr. Guffey how he comes upwith a different answer. Did you put in more productivity ordifferent expectations or what?MR. GUFFEY. I'll have to turn to my staff.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe they have the dollar rising 10percent a year.MR. GUFFEY. I think about 14 percent is close. It may bethe 18 percent that the staff is looking at.MR. SLIFMAN. I was cheating and looking over your shoulderand I see that the terminal unemployment rate is 8-1/2 percent in yoursimulations and the terminal unemployment rate in ours is 8.7 percent,so I really don't think there is that much difference between thebasic thrust of the results that your staff has gotten.MR. GUFFEY. However, I think there is a difference in theunemployment rate because it drops in 1985 to 8.2 percent as opposedto your 8.6 percent and is 8.3 percent for 1986 as opposed to 8.4percent. And then it comes back to about your level in both 1987 and1988.11/14-15/83MR. SLIFMAN. I couldn't read all those numbers!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a relevant question in a way: How dowe do better than these numbers? Mr. Roberts, maybe you can tell us.MR. ROBERTS. I really can't help you much on that; I'msorry. I have two comments, which are sort of questions. On theproductivity, I guess you took into account this major change frommanufacturing to services in the 1970s as one of the factors holdingback productivity. With services now such a large part of theeconomy, would that from here on out tend to cause the same or anincreased rate of productivity if it stabilized, let's say?MS. ZICKLER. The bulk of the research that was done, as wediscussed earlier, was unable to pin that down for the 1970s. Most ofthe research showed that productivity slowed in service industries aswell as in manufacturing industries. The pattern of the slowdown wasat least the same across different types of industries, so we wereunable to pin this productivity slowdown on the growing servicessector. Looking ahead and having the services sector be one of thegrowing sectors, I'm not sure that that should detract from the thingsthat seem to be important in the productivity slowdown, howeverundefined they may be. There are some technological changes thatcould affect the services sector as well as manufacturing.MR. ROBERTS. That really is the point that I was coming to.I think maybe some of the drag in productivity in the services sectoris now being overcome. Productivity is coming to the services sector.And if you have lower [productivity in the] manufacturing sector alsoas [the staff] has here--I'm just saying that I think productivityestimates are too low for the short run anyway. Then I had aquestion. I'm intrigued by this expectations effect on inflation. DoI understand this correctly: That if someone expects inflation, it'smore likely to happen regardless of the policies in effect? That is,if a person loses his job, even though he has expected inflation, it'smore likely to happen although the conditions are [such as] to causehim to be unemployed?MR. STOCKTON. Certainly, if we think of expectations in amore general sense, obviously, the price expectations of the personwho is unemployed are exerting less influence on current wagenegotiations than those of the person who is employed. But ourgeneral feeling is that the level of expectations of future inflationis critical in determining the entire environment in which wages andprices are being determined. We have situations where people have[negotiations] going on for three-year contracts and they have to formexpectations about inflation over a three-to-four year horizon. Wehave businesses making contractual commitments based on expectations.It's certainly the policies that will influence the actual outcome;but if we were to hold policies constant and increase everybody'sinflation expectations by 2 or 3 percent, we think that would lead tohigher inflation.MR. ROBERTS. I guess what I don't see is how, if inflationexpectations rise and policies are in place so that the sales can't bemade at the higher prices, that really would affect real inflation.It might in the very short run.-10-11/14-15/83MR. STOCKTON. Inflation in that case would be lower thanpeople perhaps had expected. But the fact that they had expectedhigher inflation would have been a marginal contribution to the higherinflation.MR. ROBERTS. It would make it tougher for the policies towork.MS. TEETERS. Is the message you are trying to deliver herethat the credible disinflationary policy is basically a long period ofvery high real interest rates and high unemployment? Is that the onlyway we can obtain low or close to zero inflation?MR. KICHLINE. No. That was not the intent. The intent wasto do this exercise and to look at what comes out and then recognizethat, indeed, we're using a model that has some deficiencies. Allmodels do. Outcomes can differ; they can be better or worse. Andwe've tried to focus on those things that we felt could be importantin reducing the costs or raising the costs from a baseline case. So,it was really designed to be illustrative. And then one can thinkabout those things that over the longer run might cause the outcome tobe better or worse.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's precisely right. I thinkthat they set themselves up here as a big fat target, and it's not avery--MR. KICHLINE. I might say it was at someone's request!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's useful. It shows the result. It ismeant to be a vehicle for discussing how to get a better result.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think, though, that the result iseven worse than you have there. You have real interest rates risingsteadily from present levels to a point where eventually they areabout 4 percentage points or so higher than they are now. I find itinconceivable that we wouldn't have a recession in this period. Andfor a period of time we would have a much higher level of unemploymentthan you have. At least that seems to me more likely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that's right, then we would also get alower level of prices.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right. I guess I would saythat is a slightly better scenario. I wouldn't want to be quoted onthis but it seems to me that a more realistic scenario would be amonetary policy that keeps inflation in the 4 to 5 percent range forthe rest of the recovery and then one would hope that a normalcyclical recession at that point would cut the inflation rate down tomaybe half of that and get it to the 2 to 3 percent range. It seemsto me that, in terms of all the elements that have to be accommodated,that is a more realistic way of trying to work toward long-run pricestability.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's examine that proposition.I'll let Mr. Gramley answer that.-11-11/14-15/83MR. GRAMLEY. I would like to ask the staff this question.Did you by any chance turn this exercise on its head and say: Supposewe were to walk the unemployment rate down gradually to the naturalrate by 1988? What results do you get then? I don't think they aregoing to be all that bad, really.MR. STOCKTON. In fact, we have done that exercise, and doingthat we end up with an inflation rate a little under 4 percent by 1988and the unemployment rate would have gotten down to about 7 percent atthat time.MR. GRAMLEY. And if we accept the definition of pricestability of the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,we're almost there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It surprises me a little that you get thatanswer based upon these numbers. You get the unemployment rate downto where? The natural rate is 6-1/2 percent?MR. STOCKTON. Seven.MR. GRAMLEY. If you just take the straight Phillips curveapproach to it and make some rough ballpark calculations, leaving outwhat happens to the exchange value of the dollar, it looks as if youought to be able to get [unemployment] even lower than that. Isuppose you have a very different effect on the dollar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How can you? If the unemployment ratewent down steadily, you would be bound to have a higher inflation ratein 1985, right?MR. STOCKTON. That's correct. The inflation rate goes toabout 4-1/2 to 5 percent in '85, back down to 4-1/2 percent in '86,about 4-1/4 percent in '87, and a little under 4 percent in '88.MR. GRAMLEY. You're always above the natural rate ofunemployment. All that is happening then, if you reduce the extent towhich you get improvement, is that you have the speed limit effect.The speed limit effect in any case is one that has been much indispute; not everybody believes the speed limit hypothesis. But ifyou threw that out, you would get even better performance.MR. PARTEE. May I just tack on to Tony's question? I wasbothered by that too. You just threw out a number on interest ratesin 1988 and I'm not sure I heard it correctly. I thought you said 9percent or so for the funds rate. Is that with a $120 billionimprovement in the budget situation?MR. STOCKTON. That's right. The actual budget deficits, ofcourse, still remain fairly high, but you get much weaker--MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's a $120 billion better budget deficitthan otherwise--that is, without a change in policy occurring. Andthere's still a 9 percent funds rate with a 1 percent rate ofinflation? That sounds extraordinarily tough.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.-12-11/14-15/83MR. BALLES. I'd like to come back just a second to thisinflation expectation problem that, as you said, your model can'tincorporate. As I look at today's Bluebook and the structure of thealternatives there between alternative A and alternative C, theinterest rate levels projected show the T-bill rate going down to the8 to 8-1/2 percent range under alternative A with a slight drop inlong rates. And in alternative C the T-bill rate is up in the 9-1/4to 9-3/4 percent range with a slight rise in long rates. My questionis: Given the dramatic drop in inflation we've already had, what isholding interest rates up at those levels? Might it not, in fact, beinflation expectations?MR. AXILROD. I can spare them an answer. I don't thinkthese people have been involved in the rates. You might want to waitfor another 20 minutes or so.MR. BALLES. I'd rather not wait, but if you have an answer Iguess--MR. AXILROD. I was a little [reluctant] because there is alarge group of people here who don't attend the regular meetings.MR. BALLES. I'm sorry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. If I understand the Phillips curve analysisproperly, your inflation forecast depends upon the markup over cost.Is it possible that international competition could intensify to thepoint that that could be very difficult to accomplish andsignificantly affect your inflation forecast?MS. ZICKLER. That the market could be--MR. BLACK. Reduced.MS. ZICKLER. Oh yes, that's a possibility. In fact, we haveto take into account rising import prices--that there would bedomestic goods that compete with imports, and normally you wouldexpect [producers] to be able to raise their prices. But if thatcompetition is great, the market is limited and they may not be ableto do that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you're assuming a sizable depreciationin the dollar, so all those import prices are going to go up.MS. ZICKLER. Correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Perhaps you said it and I missed it. What isyour expectation with regard to labor contract settlements over thisperiod? The question has a basis--namely, that an awful lot of peopleI've talked to are currently settling contracts in the 6 percent areawith 3-year contract periods. But they do suggest that, whereas theyare sanguine about being able to hold this for the rest of this yearand for 1984, as they get further out corporate profits really beginto improve. I guess most people expect corporate profits to be very-13-11/14-15/83good over the next few years and [thus] it's going to be very, veryhard to maintain that [pattern of wage increases]. There are stillsome COLAs around, and the expectation is that contract settlementswill begin to move back up. What kind of settlement number do youhave in mind during this period?MR. KICHLINE. 5-1/2 percent.MS. ZICKLER. The staff projection through 1984 has somethingclose to a 5-1/2 percent increase on hourly compensation. Now, thedata that we've seen on contract settlements so far this year havebeen on average about 4-1/2 percent, I think, rather than 6 percent.But I don't deny that there are some industries that are returning toprofitability where workers are going to be looking for largersettlements. Within the context of our forecast, in 1984 thepetroleum industry bargains in January and then there's nothing verymuch going on until we get to the auto [industry negotiations]. Bythe time we get to the end of '84, moving into '85, we will start tosee some of these contracts turn over where there had been concessionsand some recognition that profits were low. And we would expect by1985 to start to see larger wage settlements. I haven't thoughtthrough exactly what we're going to put down when we extend ourforecast, but we would be looking for larger settlements.MR. CORRIGAN. In some ways that's the other side of theproductivity point, because to the extent they get a lot moreproductivity they're going to get more profits and more cash flow;that, in turn, will solidify even further on the part of labor [theirresolve] to get their piece of the action.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we could get a recession in1986, which will head off unfavorable contract negotiations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By 1986 we will have had, with or withouta recession, 5 straight years of the consumer price index [in thisprojection] being less than 4-1/2 percent. So, why should theyaccelerate beyond 6 percent? That's your number.MR. STOCKTON. Well, Joyce was referring not to this 5-yearscenario, but rather to--MS. ZICKLER. --the staff projection. In the staffprojection, we had consumer prices in 1984 up around 5 percent.MR. STOCKTON. About 5-1/4 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I think one could argue, Paul,that even if inflation continues at only 4 percent or 4-1/2 percent orwhatever, that we would still get a net increase in wage compensationbeyond 6 percent for this reason: The only way we get today's lowaverage is by having extremely depressed wages and absolute cuts inmany manufacturing industries. It's running much higher, as you pointout, in utilities and the financial sector, etc. So, if we haverecovery in the smoke-stack area--even if inflation is still in this[4 to 4-1/2 percent] area--we probably will end up with a higheraverage wage in the country as a whole.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You read my speech!-14-11/14-15/83MS. TEETERS. But in this projection, on chart 18 you don'thave tremendous increases in corporate profits and, therefore, youdon't have the upward pressure on wages.MS. ZICKLER. Chart 18 is not a staff forecast, necessarily.MS. TEETERS. No, but if we had the scenario in which--MR. KICHLINE. No, that's right. If we have low real growth,we would not have a very bullish outlook for corporate profits.MS. TEETERS. And as a result, that's part of the mechanismby which you get a lowering of the inflation rate in there.MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but some of that probably is alreadybuilt in. Look at the auto industry: The best guess now seems to bethat this year the auto industry is going to earn $5 billion inprofits, and that's in a context in which not insignificantconcessions have been made across the board in a setting in which thewages are too darn high to begin with. I would just speculate, evenon the basis of what has happened this year, that trying to hold wagesin the automobile industry in any reasonable proportion is going to bevery difficult with that $5 billion in profits there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a couple of questions. If youextended this assumption for M2, the monetary policy proxy, of 4-1/2percent for three more years--you seem to have a zero velocity inhere, roughly--what is going to happen to prices and real GNP in '89,'90, and '91?MR. SLIFMAN. Well, zero velocity doesn't [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you still have inflation under thoseassumptions? You have an unemployment rate 1-1/2 or 1-3/4 percentagepoints above the natural rate.MR. STOCKTON. In '88 and '89 you probably would not havepositive inflation, but eventually your long-run equilibrium wouldgive you slightly positive inflation if you have 4 percent M2. So,you could probably have slightly lower M2 in the long run consistentwith price stability.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would go into minus prices and then itwould go plus again.MR. STOCKTON. Yes, that's the likely outcome.MR. PARTEE. You're getting close to the long run now,corresponding between money and prices--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we ever get to that;it takes 8 years to get to the long run on this model. Suppose--theobvious question--you cut all these money figures quickly and thenlevel them off. Where would things go?MR. STOCKTON. Well, we'd probably get a recession or somecontraction in output in the '85-'86 period and that would get theinflation rate down that much faster.-15-11/14-15/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where would we end up in '88: a lowerrate of unemployment?MR. STOCKTON. Well--MR. ENZLER. Those kinds of questions are very hard toanswer. Certainly, if you got more unemployment sooner, which thatwould cause, it would be possible to end up with a slightly lower rateof unemployment at the end that would still be consistent with pricestability. But I can't simulate in my head what would happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there some monetarist here who willgive us a much more favorable hypothesis and explain it?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, in light of the results in chart 17, theremarkable thing is how well the Phillips curve model has done toexplain what actually has happened. It got a little off track for awhile in 1981, but in terms of the overall performance of the economyfrom 1978 on it has done very, very well indeed. So, I think theresult that the staff is presenting to us is eminently reasonable interms of outcome. If what you want to do is get back to pricestability, this is what you're going to have to suffer. And if youwant to get back to the natural rate of unemployment, you're going tohave to have a worse inflation outlook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Phillips curve in Chart 7 doesn't lookso good.MR. BLACK. Well, didn't Henry put his finger on it a whileago in pointing out that we can't incorporate expectations in there tothe extent that we probably should? That's the great missing thing,it seems to me.MS. ZICKLER. Well, to some extent the Phillips curves inChart 7 move across the page as the natural rate is rising and shiftup to the extent that inflation expectations were higher in the '70sthan in the '60s.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, I don't think Chart 7 at all contradictswhat is in Chart 17.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, but counting Chart 17[unintelligible], assuming that there is that correlation, what levelof unemployment do you have to have to get price stability in 1988?MS. ZICKLER. In the quarterly model?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You come back to the same conclusionas your baseline.MS. ZICKLER. The quarterly model is in the 6-1/2 to 7percent area as well; that's the natural rate implicit in the model.MS. TEETERS. Shouldn't the natural rate be coming down overthe decade of the '80s?MS. ZICKLER. Right. To the extent that we get betterproductivity performance, that should lower it. And to the extent-16-11/14-15/83that the demographics favor less of the sort of frictionalunemployment that was associated with the rapid rise in the laborforce in the '70s, that should bring the natural rate down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can make a simple point that if you'renot ready to attack the model, you have to live with it. Do you wantto attack it, Mr. Corrigan?MR. CORRIGAN. No. I think there's some good news and somebad news. The bad news is: My hunch is that, if anything, the modelas we're talking about it here probably underestimates the amount ofinflationary pressure in this period, even though I would agree thatit's likely that we're going to have more productivity growth than themodel suggests. My reason is that I think inflationary expectations,however latent, are probably stronger than this model contemplates.And I continue to believe that the speed effect, if that's what it'scalled, in the short run will hurt quite a bit if prices even begin topick up moderately--say, gravitate up to 5 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is the inflationary expectationsassumption of this model?MR. CORRIGAN. I assume, and maybe I'm wrong, that it'ssomething like what is in that early chart, which basically says 4percent.MR. STOCKTON. It's a weighted average of past rates--probably more like 5 percent.MS. ZICKLER. That weighted average that's on Chart 13 isjust geometrically declining weights. It's similar to most of theeconometric [models with] distributive lags, and that's 4-1/2 to 5percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose you magically changed that in yourmodel and made it 1 percentage point lower. What would that do?MR. STOCKTON. The inflation rate that we're projecting rightalong that path would come down 1 percentage point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One whole percentage point.MR. STOCKTON. That's correct.MR. CORRIGAN. But the converse is also true.STAFF(?) Or one could lower the unemployment by maybe apercentage point.MR. MORRIS. One thing clear from Chart 13 is that theconsumer--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wouldn't both happen? If monetary policyand everything else is unchanged except you have some deus ex machinahere that gets inflation expectations down 1 percentage point, theinflation rate would be down 1 percentage point and the unemploymentrate would be down too.-17-11/14-15/83STAFF(?) Initially the inflation rate goes down, but I thinkeventually the unemployment rate would end up lower too.MR. CORRIGAN. Would you like to hear my good news?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not if it's like your bad news!MR. CORRIGAN. My good news is that some of my staff havedeveloped an alternate model, which is a very interesting model. Itbasically says that the deficit over time effectively has to befinanced through inflation, with a very direct connection between thesize of the deficit and the amount of inflation in the system. Now,working backwards from that, we're going to see a happy result becausethis suggests that if you could eliminate the deficit net of interestpayments, which are roughly $65 or $70 billion, quickly--say, in aperiod of a couple of years--you could find yourself with the happyresult of a combination of real growth of around 3 percent and realinterest rates of around 3 percent. I don't believe that,necessarily--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The inflation rate is where?MR. CORRIGAN. The inflation rate effectively would be zeroor something close to it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does the staff say about that?MR. KICHLINE. I've never fully understood that approach. Ithink that assumes, President Corrigan, that debt equals money.MR. CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. KICHLINE. It assumes that Treasury bonds equal Ml, andit's just hard for me to relate those as one to one. One can spendTreasury bonds as readily as currency, perhaps--MR. CORRIGAN. No, I don't think you have to associate themrigorously, but it does say that financing the deficit in effect canonly be done in one of two ways: through new money, however defined,or through inflation. But if you get rid of the deficit and you getrid of that constraint, then you can have real growth and the realinterest rate at about the same level, 3 or 4 percent.MR. ROBERTS. Finance the deficit from overseas.MR. GRAMLEY. But if you believe that theory, how would youexplain what is on Chart 1?MR. CORRIGAN. You couldn't.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Turning to something else: You showa one for one--MR. CORRIGAN. You couldn't explain Chart 1, but it doesprovide to me a more useful framework for being able to answer thequestion of how the deficit gets into all this. And it doesn'tproduce the kind of perverse result we get here, which says you get abetter result if you increase the deficit.-18-11/14-15/83MR. GRAMLEY. Well, but that's kind of a technical answer outof a model which goes through the exchange rate.SPEAKER(?). That's right.MR. GRAMLEY. It doesn't say what kind of political pressuresevolve when high interest rates begin to upset the capital goodsindustries and residential construction and the export industries getdevastated and trading partners complain a lot. All those exogenousfactors no longer stay unchanged. When you build a model thatendogenizes a lot of these responses, which never would take place,you would get different answers. I don't know how you could argueseriously that in the long run the only way to finance a deficit isthrough money growth or inflation. That to me makes no sense. I'mnot a monetarist, but if you give me 30 years, I have to believe thatwhat happens to the money stock primarily determines what happens toprices.MR. CORRIGAN. All right, but that view is not incompatible,because it comes down to the same thing. It would say in that casethat you will end up with more inflation because the deficit in effectforced you to create more money.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, except if you go back to these 30 years inChart 1, they were years in which the federal deficit as a percentageof GNP was dropping like a stone.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, for that whole period going back to the1950s, the federal deficit net of interest payments was basically zerountil two years ago. For that whole period it was basically zero.MR. WALLICH. This theory is based on the assumption, isn'tit, that there's some limit to the volume of government bonds that thepublic is willing to hold and that, therefore, necessarily acontinuing deficit leads to monetization? I don't know what thatassumption is based on, but the ratio of debt to GNP has been verystable over a long period of time regardless of how the debt was madeup. The debt was large in terms of public debt, and private debt wassmall; and later it changed to less public and more private debt. Nowit has been changing back to a greater proportion of public debt andsmaller private debt. Throughout, the relationship of total debt toGNP has been very stable.MR. CORRIGAN. But look out from where we are now and takethe latest CBO estimates of the deficits out to 1985. If you take outinterest payments and look at it that way, as a percentage of GNPthere is no precedent in the postwar period for the kind of phenomenawe're looking at in the period from now to 1988.MR. WALLICH. Well, doesn't that mean that private debtcreation will be very small, which is the phenomenon referred to as"crowding out"?MR. CORRIGAN. And interest rates are very high and growth isvery low.MR. WALLICH. That's exactly right.-19-11/14-15/83MR. BALLES. And a large part of the deficit is financed byimported capital, which is what is going on right now.MR. WALLICH. The general impression I get from this model,frankly--aside from congratulating you on having the courage to remainat zero inflation, which was by request--MR. KICHLINE. False courage!MR. WALLICH. [Unintelligible], which I think people believewould change the nature of the problem. I see this, as Tony Solomondoes, as a cyclical problem: The economy probably will go intorecession one way or another after two or three years or a little moreafter the last drop. And what your model seems to say is that it willtake more than one more recession in order to get to zero [inflation].The next recession will start from 5 or 6 percent inflation and we cancut inflation in half again. But that's not enough, so we haveanother expansion of two to three years from a lower starting point.And then maybe the next recession will get us close to zero.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And to continue on that line, sinceyou say in the earlier pages that if you have a 1 percentage pointless rapid rate of growth in '84 and '85, you get 1 percentage pointless inflation in '84 and '85: If you were basically following apolicy along the lines Governor Wallich and I are talking about, isthere any additional reduced inflation payoff of running, say, a 1percentage point lower rate of growth in the next year or two,recognizing that what you're really trying to do in the broadestpolicy sense is to contain inflation just where it is during therecovery and then take advantage of the next recession to bring itdown somewhat more? Is there a significant advantage in running alower growth rate over the next two years--that's basically a cyclicalview--rather than doing this?MR. STOCKTON. Over the next two years--again we have to runslow growth just to contain those factors, we think--there may be aloosening of inflation. But--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Unless you're lucky on some of theother things, such as productivity and a couple of other things--MR. MARTIN. Let me tie on to that with a collateralquestion: Is there a one-to-one unemployment increase if you, let'ssay, come down 1 percent in the rate of growth with containedinflation?MR. STOCKTON. No. Normally we think that every one percenton growth might be 4/10ths on [the unemployment rate]. But theproblem is that it's hard to see any major advantages within thestructure of the model to pursuing what you're recommending. That is,you may get benefits from lower inflation and the value of the dollar.But again you have to pay back part of that once the economy begins togo upward. You may get lower benefits from concessions oncompensation, but you may have to pay back part of that. The benefityou get from running lower output early is lower inflationexpectations for the remaining periods of the simulation. In thatsense, the sooner you reduce output, the easier it is to bring down-20-11/14-15/83inflation because you've lowered inflation expectations for allsubsequent periods.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I understand that. But if we wereable to prevent the rate of inflation from going up beyond the presentlevel during the rest of this recovery, though I don't think we willbe, I would guess that there would be a very, very widespreadexpectation in the financial community that the next recession wouldbring the rate of inflation down significantly. We would get a veryfavorable expectational result if, over the next year or year-and-a-half, we could stabilize this level of inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This level meaning what?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 4 or 4-1/2 percent. The [financial]community is expecting basically a 1 to 2 percentage point rise in therate of inflation over the next 2 years.MR. GUFFEY. Well, it seems clear that that is our task: tokeep it from accelerating. And that's what their model shows--the waywe get it. If in '84 and '85 we're going--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This model shows [that we get it] with amore restrictive monetary policy than what we have heretofore talkedabout, if I read it correctly.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what does it assume forvelocity of circulation for M2? If we drop [M2 growth] to 6 percentin 1984, what velocity of circulation does that assume?MR. PARTEE. Between [unintelligible] and 4.2 percentincrease in velocity in '84 and a lower increase in velocity in '85.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but isn't that a lower velocitythan we normally adhere to?MR. WALLICH. It drops each year. Eventually, velocity dropsbecause the nominal GNP is less than M2.MR. PARTEE. Yes, it does.MR. WALLICH. It does unless interest rates--. If you letinterest rates rise as you seem to [assume] here, velocity ought toincrease.MR. PRELL. Interest rates are declining in the latter partof this projection period and that is giving you some decline invelocity--some stronger demand for M2 relative to GNP. That wouldn'tbe a continuing factor, if you extended this out beyond 1988, but it'sa factor in 1987 and 1988.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What assumption do you make about M2 or Mlor anything--zero [effect] except as it affects nominal GNP?MR. STOCKTON. That's correct. It doesn't have a directexpectational effect.-21-11/14-15/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But it has an interest rate effect inyour model, doesn't it?MR. STOCKTON. Oh, sure; that's the channel.MR. KICHLINE. I thought you were referring to expectations.There's no feedback effect on price expectations from altering moneygrowth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have two columns here. It doesn'ttell you anything--it's some pure guess--about velocity.MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's a model that in effect--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a guess; it's your model of velocity.But its influence [unintelligible] model. Well, I'm left with myquestion to the group, not to the staff: Either accept something likethis model, [which has] satisfactory results from most points of view,I guess, or say how you would change any of these factors to getbetter results. You have to come up with a better model or adifferent model if you don't like these results.MR. MORRIS. Well, I think a different model, like the onethat Tony talked about that incorporates--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's really a differentmodel. There's a different timing with inflation [unintelligible].But you don't have different factors to play around with; [you have]the same variables.MR. MORRIS. If you plugged in a couple of recessions in themodel, you'd get different results.MR. MARTIN. Or higher productivity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You would get different numbers, butyou're still using the same model.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the expectation, as I wastrying to say earlier, is a little different and the scenario isdifferent. If you contain the existing rate of inflation during therecovery, you will get a very significant drop in inflationaryexpectations in another couple of years. That, I think, issignificant in working the model.MR. CORRIGAN. I think that's the key: If we could capinflation at 4 to 4-1/4 percent, while the economy for the next twoyears is growing at, say, 4 percent.MS. TEETERS. But that doesn't work. That's not what thissays. It says the faster the economy grows, the more inflation you'regoing to get. As nice as it would be to cap the inflation, we don'thave any way to do it except by slow growth.MR. GRAMLEY. It would be nice if the world worked the wayTony wants it to.MS. TEETERS. Yes.-22-11/14-15/83MR. GRAMLEY. But we've just been through an experience inwhich the Fed said to the world in 1979: Here it comes, guys; we'regoing to put you through the wringer. And what we got, if you believethe model, and there have been other studies that confirmed this, wasby-and-large the response of prices to the degree of slack in themarkets--period, end of story. Now the question is: Why do you thinkit's going to work any differently the next time around? It would benice if you were right, Tony, but I don't--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not saying it's going to be rightor that this is going to happen automatically. And I don't want youto assume that I'm going to vote the way I'm now going to suggest.But if we reduce the speed of recovery by 1 percentage point over thenext year and we get 1-1/2 to 2 percent growth, and assume no actionon the deficit until 1985 and then only half of what we are thinkingat this time, I was wondering what that would look like. We mightvery well not have any increase in inflation in the next couple ofyears because of the exchange rate effects as well. Maybe you fellowsworked this out roughly: A 1 percent lower rate of recovery over thenext two years during this--MR. PARTEE. This package is 3.3 percent next year and 1.5percent the year after.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking about this earlierscenario.MR. KICHLINE. You're talking about chart 15--the staffprojection chart--not the experiment over 5 years. And there we haveassumed, I think, a 4-1/4 percent rate of growth in 1984.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they already assumed a 1 percentagepoint lower growth in the briefing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You have already assumed in '84 andin '85--MR. KICHLINE. Yes, this says you can hold the inflation rateconstant with essentially a little over 3 percent real growth in 1984and a little under 3 percent in 1985.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In '84 and '85 we have reduced [real GNPgrowth], if I understand it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't understand that becausechart 18 has 3.3 percent in '84 and 1.5 percent in '85.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's 1 percentage point lower thanthey otherwise--MS. ZICKLER. Chart 18 is not the staff projection. Chart 18is the model projection, not the staff forecast as shown in theGreenbook projection. Chart 15 represents our forecast.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But at the moment in the realworld we are assuming that growth in 1984, if we were to continue withthe present monetary policy, is likely to be 5-1/2 percent. At least-23-11/14-15/83that's what we are assuming in New York; it's higher than you peoplehave.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we are assuming 4-1/4 percent.MR. KICHLINE. 4-1/4 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. With the present monetary policy?So, we are assuming significantly higher growth. Am I right on that,Peter?MR. FOUSEK. 5-1/4 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, 5-1/4 not 5-1/2 percent. AndI'm saying--well, I guess you can't compare the rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're assuming 5-1/4 percent with thissame inflation prediction?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Our inflation prediction is somewhathigher; I think we have a rate 3/4 of a point higher than the Boardstaff has.MR. GUFFEY. With the current monetary growth rate as yourassumption for '84? Without any reduction in money growth?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We are assuming basically that wehave a 9-1/2 percent fed funds rate.MR. GUFFEY. Now, what about money growth?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't worry about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 5-1/4 percent real growth if theyhave 5-1/2 percent on prices.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, [unintelligible] in the same ballparkbecause you are talking about roughly 1 percentage point. That's thereal growth, and we would have a higher price forecast for that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, in other words, if I'm correct:To maintain 4 to 4-1/2 percent inflation, assuming that's what we havenow, you would have to cut back real economic growth in '84 accordingto your model to what level?MR. KICHLINE. Well, in 1984 real growth would be in the areaof 3 to 3-1/2 percent and in 1985 2-1/2 to 3 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if you had 1 point more inproductivity, you wouldn't have to cut back quite that much?MR. KICHLINE. That's right. They're about offsetting. Ifyou get that 1 percent higher trend growth of productivity, then youcould get the same inflation outcome that we have without cutting backon real growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does anybody else want to comment?Mr. Wallace.-24-11/14-15/83MR. WALLACE. May I ask a question for clarification on thisnatural rate of unemployment? With respect to the factors that you'velisted on chart 8 here: Is it your assumption that on balance thethrust of those factors would reduce the natural rate in the yearahead rather than the productivity that you talked about?MS. ZICKLER. No, as a matter of fact, on income supportprograms there has been some cutback--more stringent eligibilityrequirements introduced on unemployment insurance and benefits--whichshould work to reduce the natural rate. Those sorts of things arehard to estimate. And to the extent that we have seen someimprovement in work rules and labor/management relations, that makesthe labor market a little more flexible. [Those are] conditions thatwould help. But that has been continuing as the recovery goes on.MS. TEETERS. But the most important thing in reducing thereal natural rate of unemployment is the shifting demographics.MS. ZICKLER. Well, I think the sharp [deceleration] ofproductivity growth was far more important in and of itself in the'70s than the demographics, in terms of the percentage points thatadded to the natural rate. On the demographics I think the story is alittle uncertain. You have to assume that all these workers who havecome into the labor force have been getting work experience and havedeveloped career attachments to jobs. As that happens they improvetheir job performance.MS. TEETERS. Yes, but just the demographics are going toreduce the rate of growth in the labor force.MS. ZICKLER. Oh, in terms of the major unemployment rate,yes.MR. MORRIS. I think the answer is clear, Mr. Chairman: Wehave to get the productivity gain up to 4 percent. That would takecare of the whole thing!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If capacity is increasing at lessthan the postwar average or [unintelligible]. So, at this speed ofrecovery, at least it's a normal recovery but we are moving up fasterin utilization of capacity. This is where the Carter Administrationran into trouble quickly because there was a theory that utilizationof capacity was supposed to [unintelligible] noninflationary growth[unintelligible]. I've put a lot of emphasis on capacity utilization.And it's very disturbing not to have it growing at a normal rate, eventhough we're having a fast recovery. I attribute this to theinflation rate. However, we are getting a lot of spending onequipment but not on plant; presumably the spending on equipment willextend the rate of productivity for [existing plants].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we can leave this for theday. But I would urge people to look at this question. I think wehave a rather pessimistic [unintelligible]. But I have not heard agreat deal of attacking of this today. You're simply saying we arebetter off with higher productivity if we could only achieve that.They can have a wrong estimate. But people might want to think alittle about how we can improve this situation or even[unintelligible]. We will attend to it briefly at the next meeting.-25-11/14-15/83If we have enough time, maybe we can go through the Managers' reportsthis afternoon.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if in this review at thenext meeting we could have the advantage of having sent to us the textof the staff's views given in the chart show today so that our ownstaffs may work on an analysis. We'll see if our [unintelligible] andweigh them a little.MR. KICHLINE. Well, there's no problem there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there's a little more to beconsidered, consistent with that. This is very much internal staffspeculation. It has no Committee status and there's no Committee--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seem to me that the[unintelligible] means more optimistic. But I would like to know howto be able to avoid a significant effect rather than a lower growthwith such an elusive combination of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you may be taking it tooliterally. I don't think this is a business cycle forecast. It'skind of a structural forecast with growth tradeoff [unintelligible] ofthese recessions.MR. MARTIN. It depends on when you have recessions--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible] factors cyclical.It's unlikely that the recovery would last beyond '87. I don't eventhink we should wait until '87; we ought to go for '86. And if youfactor in an enormous [unintelligible] then we could get worseinflation. I don't know how to look at this kind of policy.MR. BOEHNE. Are you talking about an improvement in thepresentational sense or one that we really believe?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm only interested in what we canbelieve.MR. BALLES. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or have somebody believe; it may have somecorrelation in the presentation.MR. WALLICH. Well, I think the main thing is to be skepticalwith respect to the model even though it has tracked very well in thelast two years, because the very fact that it has tracked well andinflation came down is a surprise to people. And from here on outthere may be less resistance because there was a lot of resistance tobringing inflation down built into the numbers of this model.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm curious, but I won't prolong this, howyou get this similar result from a long lag money growth model and ashort lag money growth model in the chart that has the deflator andMl. This Ml only goes through '81. Do I interpret that correctly?MR. KICHLINE. Which chart?-26-11/14-15/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Chart 2.MR. KICHLINE. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't remember a 10 percent rate ofgrowth--maybe in 1981.MR. BOEHNE. Do you think, Jim, if you had made thispresentation three years ago, that under any realistic kind of modelyou would have come up with 4-1/2 percent inflation?MR. KICHLINE. If you told me that the unemployment rate wasgoing to be over 10 percent, I think we would have come out fairlyoptimistic. I wouldn't say that our staff view on inflation has beenmuch more optimistic generally than outside forecasts; outsidersbeginning in 1982 have moved their forecasts down substantiallyrelative to the staff forecast. Now as we look ahead to '84 and whatis happening in light of a lower unemployment rate, our staff forecasthas been edging up. So, I'm not so sure. We wouldn't have had 4-1/2percent inflation, but I'd say we would have had in the context of 10percent plus unemployment rates, very strong improvement on priceperformance. But we missed on that, as you well know.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So did we all.MR. PARTEE. And the strength of the dollar.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On a purely monetarist approach here: Ifyou looked at this first chart, chart 2, you would have the moneysupply lower. You've got its growth coming down to below that of the[deflator] for a while and kind of coming back in line with prices,right?MR. KICHLINE. [Unintelligible] based on recent performance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then you would show a sharp increase,which would imply a sharp increase in unemployment at the same time wewere going into a recession if we maintained the recent rate of growthof the money supply.MR. KICHLINE. I think that's right. That shaded area is thearea where there are some questions about the performance of the moneystock relative to nominal spending and that was part of Steve'spresentation last time. And that's where the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, this is really before the most severe[unintelligible]. This money supply stops in mid-1981.MR. PARTEE. That would be in the summer--the third quarterof '81. You only plotted M1 through the third quarter of '81, sothere's another spike in here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because if you get in there--. Well, Mr.Sternlight. No. First, the meeting has to come to order and we needto approve the minutes.-27-11/14-15/83MR. RICE. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you might explain why you need alarger leeway.MR. STERNLIGHT. Over the intermeeting period our projectionsindicate a possible need to add something in the area of $4 to $5billion to System holdings, and I think we could run into the normal$4 billion intermeeting limitation. I would suggest enlarging theleeway to $5 billion until the next meeting, Mr. Chairman.MS. TEETERS. Is that an average figure? Is it that it can'tbe over $4 billion on average?MR. STERNLIGHT. It's not an average, no. At any pointwithin the period we would not be able to increase outright holdingsby more than $4 billion from the starting point.MS. TEETERS. I was wondering because that doesn't includethe repurchase agreements.MR. STERNLIGHT. It does not include the repurchaseagreements.MS. TEETERS. So, the big operations--whether the Treasurybalance is running out or not--are not the subject of this.MR. STERNLIGHT. That is true. Correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't have any limit on yourrepurchase agreements?MR. STERNLIGHT. That's true.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As Mr. St Germain pointed out. Abouta year ago he wrote me a letter, which was in the press, asking: Whyare you doing such a huge volume of RPs? We wrote back explaining thereasons why and I never heard from him again.MR. STERNLIGHT. On a commitment basis we're not changing theSystem's holdings [when we do RPs].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You have had to ask every once in awhile before, Peter, for this kind of temporary increase in the limit.Wouldn't it make more sense, if you can establish your case, to have apermanent $5 billion [intermeeting limit] instead of having to come tothe Committee each time?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, this was reviewed--I forget when--andwe went to the $4 billion limit. The Committee has gradually raisedthis [limit]. When it was reviewed a year or so ago, I think it wasraised from $3 to $4 billion; the feeling was that with $4 billion-28-11/14-15/83there were likely to be maybe one to two occasions a year when wewould have to come to the Committee [for a higher temporary limit]. Ithink the Committee's preference then was to set it a point where onceor twice a year we did face the limitation and had to come before theCommittee rather than to set it so high that it very rarely, if ever,needed review.MR. BOEHNE. This is typical for this time of year, isn't it?MR. STERNLIGHT. Fairly typical for this time of year, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll come back to that. Are thereany other questions on that point or any other point? Operations areall lucid as a spring [unintelligible] flowing out of that swamp.MR. BALLES. We need some harp and string music here!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're saying that if by some chancethe Congress were to reach the end of the week without raising thedebt ceiling, you think the Treasury could get through until earlyDecember?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Does the Congress know this?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think they do, yes. The Treasury has alow point in [its cash balances around] the mid-month and [then] theycan get through to about the end of the month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might discuss this a bit tomorrow; Idon't think we should take time now on the debt ceiling. I sent aletter to Mr. Regan telling him what horrible things would happen ifthey do run out of money now or later. I presume that will bepublished at some point but we could distribute it. Or did wedistribute it, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. I don't think it was distributed generally.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe we can distribute it tomorrowmorning so people are aware. It has strong operational--MR. RICE. Any reply?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not yet. I don't know what happened.I've been out for a couple days; I haven't had a chance to follow up.Any other comments or questions? We need to ratify the transactions.Without objection. We have this proposal on increasing the limit.Without objection, we will approve that. I don't know how I got youout of order, Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.] I also have arecommendation, Mr. Chairman. All of the Federal Reserve Systemregular swap arrangements with foreign central banks and the BIS willcome up for renewal in December. And I recommend that all the swaparrangements be renewed. We would propose no change in the terms ofthe agreements except that in the swap arrangement with the Bank ofJapan we are discussing a possible change in the interest rate-29-11/14-15/83provision. The change under discussion would provide a more favorablebasis for calculating the interest cost in the event of a UnitedStates drawing under the Japanese swap arrangement. We still do nothave that negotiated with the Japanese but if it comes about in timeand we can do it, we would like to introduce that change in therenewed Japanese swap agreement.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What if it came about two monthsafter?MR. CROSS. We would revise it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You wouldn't need a newauthorization?MR. CROSS. Well, I would inform the Committee.MR. PARTEE. Is this to make it more parallel with the otheragreements?MR. CROSS. Yes. There is a difference in the rate we wouldpay if we should draw on the Japanese arrangement and in the basis onwhich we calculate our earnings on investments with the Japanesebecause they were negotiated at two different times. As we looked atthem, tracking them over the period of the past several years, oneseems to be consistently a bit below the other and we're concernedabout that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This contingency would be if we drew yenand invested--MR. CROSS. If we drew yen, the interest rate that we wouldpay on those drawings is based on Japanese rates and would be slightlyless favorable to us, we think, if looked at over time, than the ratethat we would get on investments.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The drawing rate we pay, Paul, as Iunderstand it, is the bond rate three months before the bond matureswhereas the rate we get when we invest is the 3-month rate on an RP.And there is a few basis points difference here to our disadvantage ifwe were ever to draw on the yen swap arrangement.MR. WALLICH. Is this a controlled set of rates? Is that thedifference?MR. CROSS. No, they are not. But when we draw we try towork it out so that what we pay is based on a short-term Treasury billtype rate. In Japan they don't have any such thing, so we base it ona longer-term seasoned bond which is maturing but has only a shortperiod to run. That rate, for reasons I can't entirely explain, seemsto be consistently a little higher than the so-called Gensaki rate,which is a [rate in the] much more liquid repurchase market. It seemsto have rates that are slightly lower and that's the rate we would geton our investments. So, we want to try to bring about a change.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the Bank of Japan is sympatheticand discussions are going on.-30-11/14-15/83MR. CROSS. The Bank of Japan is sympathetic but it is alwaysa long and tedious process to have to negotiate anything like thiswith the Finance Ministry, so it has taken time. But we are trying towork it out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments or questions?MR. BOEHNE. Maybe this isn't the right time or maybe it is:Does anybody want to comment on the international debt situation?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we should just leave that fortomorrow in view of the time.MR. ROBERTS. Just a quick question on Schroeder,Meunchmeyer, [Hengst & Company]: Did they have a lot of foreignexchange positions in the market? Was it a fairly small bank?MR. CROSS. There were no foreign exchange implications inthat problem. It was local.MR. ROBERTS. Just the bank?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think the one thing that isworth commenting on--I don't think Sam mentioned it--is that the priceof gold was declining during this period of enormous "safe haven"flows. The dollar has basically replaced gold and that has shocked alot of Europeans and Arabs and a lot of other people. But theybasically told them there are all these events--Lebanon, theCaribbean, etc. They would all expect the price of gold to go upinstead of going down.MS. TEETERS. The price of silver has gone down.MR. PARTEE. A lot more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You might say a few words about the debtsituation tomorrow, Mr. Truman.MR. KEEHN. I keep reading that there's a large German bankthat has some problems and I assume it's not Schroeder. Is there anytruth to that?MR. CROSS. Well, there are a lot of rumors about banks andthey are usually denied. The foreign exchange market on Friday wassubject to a certain amount of [fluctuation] when we were closedbecause of alleged problems with respect to German banks. But, again,sometimes they talk about the situation in Luxembourg branches thatwe're not aware of.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to ratify the transactions.Without objection. We have this proposal for authority to renew theswaps with the possibility of one small change. Without objection.We will see you tomorrow at 9:30 a.m.[Meeting recessed]-31-11/14-15/83November 15, 1983--Morning SessionMR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anything you want to add, Mr.Cross?MR. CROSS. No. I agree with everything Mr. Truman said.MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question? Have they been able tokeep the regional and smaller banks on these loans to the debtors?MR. CROSS. Well, they generally have, with a certain amountof effort of pulling and clawing. I think the success has been prettygood so far. There are a lot of questions about whether they will beable to bring them along this next go-around, but so far it has workedreasonably well.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know of any small bank thathas refused to reschedule, as distinct from coming up with new money.At least I haven't heard of any lawsuits, attempted lawsuits, orattempted cash-ins, and I find that comforting.MR. CROSS. The expectation is that this time it will be moredifficult. On the other hand, there is greater recognition of thedepth and pervasiveness of these problems. I think that the banksalso are more aware of the situation and probably have less, or notmuch, chance of doing anything but going along.MR. TRUMAN. There were dissents on the other side of the[unintelligible]. I think they are realizing that this is not ashort-term problem, and that leads to increasing concerns among themore thoughtful banks, I think, in terms of considering how it willwork out over a medium-term rather than a more short-term set ofoperations.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think a major problem still is thelikelihood that some major debtor country will ask for better terms.Argentina is discussed frequently on the front pages, even though thatis the more moderate of the candidates [unintelligible]. I stillthink that [such a development] is more likely than not. There arevarious ways in which that request could come forward. Hopefully, itwould be in private and in a moderate form and not be accompanied byany threats of a standstill. How the banks will respond to that isstill a big question mark, if that does occur.MR. ROBERTS. Has any consideration been given to changingthe nonperforming loan classifications that might develop at year-endif there were major failures to pay interest?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we hope that Brazil will get itsinterest arrears up to date by the end of the year. Can they or can'tthey if this [loan] goes through?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, they can.MR. CROSS. They can do it if things go as we are hoping theywill go.-32-11/14-15/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that case, the question wouldn't arisein any important way. There is a lot of accounting controversy anddiscussion and all the rest as to how these [items] are reported. TheSEC wants some reporting of them as troubled reschedules, or whateverthey call them. There will be more disclosure at the end of the yearbut they won't go into a nonperforming category, I don't think.MR. PARTEE. Well, if they are more than 90 days past due, Ithink they are statutory bad debts and they have to be [so reported].The accountants would certainly be negligent not to require that theybe counted as nonperforming.MR. ROBERTS. There are reversals of interest accruals also.MR. PARTEE. I guess that's right, if they are past 90 days.I don't know that anybody is [past due] 90 days.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Argentina will be, I guess, if they don'tmake some payments. Brazil is more than 90 days, but that presumablywill be cleared up first.MR. TRUMAN. There's a reasonable chance that in Argentina'scase there will be enough disbursements so that interest will becurrent on the public sector debt through the end of September, whichwould obviate, for the moment, the 90 days requirement.MR. ROBERTS. What is the latest on the IMF bill? Is thatlikely to be approved soon?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we only have a few days [before weknow] whether it's going to be approved or not going to be approved.There's great negotiation going on; it got tied up with the housingbill and, in a satisfactory way, from the standpoint of the Democrats.That obstacle seems to be removed but there are still a lot ofquestions. They have to get the appropriation as well as theauthorization and it hasn't been through the Appropriations Committee.They are going to try to short-circuit that; whether they can isn't ahundred percent clear. But that is being negotiated right now and hasbeen for the past week.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They still haven't reached anagreement on the [unintelligible] side on the communist countries?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know; in the Congress itvaries from day to day. They were not going to have the communistcountries; there's still some controversy about the apartheid.MR. TRUMAN. I think there may be a consensus but not anagreement.MR. KEEHN. What about the reserve issues? I remember thereis a difference between the Senate bill and the House bill.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those things have all been fixed upsatisfactorily, I think. But there probably will be some reserving,not for these big countries, in accordance with proposals that we gaveCongress when it was before the Senate. When the loan is inprotracted difficulty or whatever we called it, there would be some-33-11/14-15/83mandatory write-off on reserves. This would be for Zaire, Sudan,Poland, and some Latin American countries.MR. TRUMAN. Bolivia.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is being worked out now and willprobably happen in the next week or so is that some directive will goout. The amount is not massive in total; it would be a maximum of$300 and some odd million dollars for all the banks together, lessanything they have already written off, which is a very foggy notion.But it's enough potentially, if they haven't already written some off,to have an impact on some of the bigger banks in reducing theirearnings in the fourth quarter. In terms of the psychology, it willraise the question: If it's Sudan, Poland, and Zaire now, when doesMexico follow and when will Brazil come down the pike and so forth?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But you agreed to create a fourthcategory in between weak and substandard, I gather.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that's different. This is at theopposite extreme where these [loans] are really weak. We will renamethose categories so we will have a category that some of these LatinAmerican countries will fit into where the loans won't require anyreserving but will get a notice in something like a special-mentioncategory for foreign loans.MR. KEEHN. This is action we are taking, as opposed toaction that is a part of the IMF legislation?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's consistent with a provision inthe IMF legislation. But we would be taking the action a little inadvance in a sense. Presumably, the legislation will have passedanyway. It's totally consistent with the Senate version of the IMFlegislation but it raises some questions of precedent. It will be thefirst time we have done it and will raise those kinds of questions.It won't apply to any of these countries that are in negotiation withthe IMF or have IMF programs and so forth, but I think it will send alittle tremor through the banks.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Some of the foreign central banks andbanking commissions are beginning to require a provisioning against[loans to] Latin American countries. [Unintelligible] for this yearare requiring 5 percent of the exposure for the first time and theyare talking about 5 to 10 percent next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this question will arise. Some workalso is being done on proposals that we came up with at the time ofthat [unintelligible] and rejected for the time being--whether torequire a reserve against the aggregation of all this if it's too big.MR. WALLICH. It is reported that the German banks havewritten off enough in Latin America so that they would be amenable toone of these solutions where the interest rate is lower and theprincipal is funded into a long-term security.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's very hard to know what this reservingis for our banks or other banks. They say they reserve. The questionis whether they are increasing their total reserves more than they-34-11/14-15/83otherwise would or are saying within some total they have anyway thatthey are allocating this to Brazil, Mexico, or whatever. I don'tthink anybody knows the answer to it completely.MR. PARTEE. In our case, Paul, I think we ought to recognizethat that will be a segregated reserve and will not be counted ascapital. For these $300 million--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or they will write them off. I think manyof them will just prefer to write them off for their [unintelligible]balance sheet. I say write them off; it's just a partial write-off.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Some of the banks' CEOs said to methat they would be most reluctant to start provisioning if thereserves were [not] tax deductible; they are concerned that the IRSregs would not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a foggy area. This write-offequivalent is what we would be [unintelligible].MR. PARTEE. It's mandated.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They don't want the write-offequivalent. And you're saying that the specific reserve provisioningwould be deductible?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only this particular type of specificreserves. Our banks are very reluctant to write off or reserve in away that really adds to the reserves. It has been argued so manytimes that we can't do enough to make any difference, and it justraises questions about the loans. Our banks operate more in agoldfish bowl than any of these other banks who can write off withouttelling anybody their reserve [unintelligible] and they haven't gotany hidden reserves. The allegation by many of our banks is that theyare reserving whereas these other banks are not really reserving.They just move something out of hidden reserves into calculatedreserves.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the argument against write-offsis that the debtor countries become aware of it and would have lessinterest in trying to keep paying. I'm not sure whether that is anhonest point or not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some of them have written off some ofthese extreme ones.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know. [Unintelligible]trying to differentiate between those that have been charged off orwritten off and those that haven't. So, I'm not sure at all thatthere is that much validity to the argument that one reason they can'twrite them off is to take advantage of the tax cut [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have an ideological question for some ofyour New York banks who refuse to accept [unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Privately [unintelligible].-35-11/14-15/83MR. MARTIN. Ted, what happened to the negotiations oralleged negotiations with the Mexican private sector credits--exploring the notion of a rollover that would be part debt and partequity. Was that just talk?MR. TRUMAN. There have been some of those, I think, in thebig conglomerate cases. I don't know how widespread it is; I thinkit's fairly limited.MR. MARTIN. But if it were rolled over into part debt/partequity, would the accounting or the reserving or the nonperformingstatus be affected at all?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. But the accounting on those privatesector loans is easier to handle. They just fall into the normal rulemore easily than a sovereign credit. So, they would be handled justlike domestic credit.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We still don't have a definitiveclarification from the Comptroller on the legal limit being exceededand how that is to be treated when everything gets rolled over.MR. BRADFIELD. The staff is still working on it; therehasn't been any definitive clarification. In fact, the Comptroller'sstaff and our staff are meeting today to discuss it further.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any better feel on how many banks areinvolved in that now?MR. BRADFIELD. From the data that are coming in so far, itdoesn't look like a serious problem. There are individual banks thathave problems. I don't think it is more widespread than we thoughtearlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought earlier it was less than a dozenbanks but I fear it is more.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the thing I didn't understand isthat, in my naive mind, it looks like an evasion. Bank of America hassaid that they would exceed the limit so, therefore, they are going tomake the loan from their holding corporation and not from the bank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a possible way of doing it.MR. CROSS. That's one way around it.MR. PARTEE. The lending limit is on the bank.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Does that meet the spirit [of thelaw]?MR. ROBERTS. It doesn't diversify for the stockholders ofthe holding company, but it meets the statutes of lending limits forthe banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not probing too closely. It meetsthe technical [requirements]. In terms of the Mexican [situation] andthe interest rates, that is in my judgment the opportunity for the-36-11/14-15/83banks to provide a lower spread--a positive spread, but a much lowerone. They stuck Mexico last year. And we will have a provision inthe legislation that gives strong moral endorsement at the very leaston the part of the United States--it's a Congressional directive--tolook for lower interest rate spreads on these.MR. MARTIN. It's a bit of price-fixing by the Congress.MR. RICE. It looks that way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the language, I guess, is all rightnow. I don't think it's so bad to have a little moral suasion comingout of the Congress. We didn't want it so mandatory that it wouldfoul things up. Mr. Truman and Mr. Bradfield have [determined it is]satisfactory, I hope. I haven't looked at it closely.MR. TRUMAN-. Mr. Bradfield still thinks it can be improved.He believes in this [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff forecast is aboutright, but it's a little cautious on the current quarter. The currentquarter seems to me possibly a little stronger than is forecast. Ithink the economy is slowing down from the third quarter, but not asmuch as [the staff projects]. I'm particularly impressed with thelabor market numbers. There has been some decline in industrialproduction over this month from last month. But all the other numbersseem to show continued strength at roughly the same momentum as in thelast quarter. I wouldn't be at all surprised to see this quarter turnout closer to a 7 percent real rate of growth than the 6-1/4 to 6-1/2percent that has been forecast. So, I would say the forecast for thisquarter is a cautious one. Again, I think the longer-run forecast for1984 is about right. The main difference that I would see is that thestrength of consumer expenditures may continue longer into the earlypart, or the first half, of next year. And the swing toward inventoryaccumulation may last longer than is projected, which of course wouldthen mean that the growth rate for the first half of next year wouldbe somewhat higher than is now forecast. I would consider that to beunlikely. But I mention it just to suggest that if there is any errorin the forecast, it is that the outcome is likely to be stronger thanis now forecast. I was one of those people, I would remind you, whoin the spring of this year were concerned about whether the recoverywas really as strong as most people thought it was. I'd like to saynow that I am convinced and that it's probably stronger than forecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Could I ask a question with regard to pricechanges and the price outlook, Jim? As you know, several of us havehad some discussion with regard to futures prices and spot prices andcommodity and producer price indexes and so forth. What would be yourjudgment as to what the spot and futures markets are showing withregard to the first signs of reinflation or the lack thereof?-37-11/14-15/83MR. KICHLINE. I don't think they're showing much. In termsof industrial materials, prices have perked up a little recently.There is still a good deal of weakness in a couple of markets such ascopper and I guess silver and lead. What has been changing is thatthe very rapid run-up in prices in futures markets that we had seenfor grains has backed off a bit. In fact, our projection of foodprices next year would seem to be high now if you were to take what isgoing on in the futures markets as a likelihood. So, I don't see abig problem there. We are getting hints in some of the markets of atightening in supplies, but it's not really dramatic at this moment.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But, Jim, you have the GNP deflatorgoing from 3.5 percent in the third quarter to 4.6 percent thisquarter; that's a substantial rise of 1.1 percentage points.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, I think Mr. Truman is doing that to us.We tried to offset him; I must say I worked very hard but failed. Ithas to do with oil imports and oil prices and the screwy way in whichthey enter the deflator.MR. TRUMAN. Which I'm not responsible for! I'm onlyresponsible for the raw material!MR. KICHLINE. Apparently it is the mix of commodities thataffects this, particularly on the imports side--the oil imports. Thatmay not be clear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that mean that oil import prices aregoing down?MR. TRUMAN. They were up in the third quarter and the mixwas high. They are going down and, therefore, we get a largerdeflator--more negative.MR. KICHLINE. They are subtracted out and it works the otherway in the initial quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallace.MR. WALLACE. Jim, the retained earnings of corporations haveapparently been an important factor recently in holding down the risein interest rates. I notice in the flow-of-funds tables that this haschanged or is changing in the second half of '83. Has that changed orhas the financing gap become positive at this point?MR. KICHLINE. Well, it is in the process of change. It'svery clear. In fact, we have raised our projected external needs forfunds in the corporate sector especially in 1984 because we've raisedour forecast of business fixed investment. Unfortunately, I have aflow-of-funds table here that has about 50 pages and a million numbersand I can't find the line I'm looking for.MR. WALLACE. I was looking at line 6 on the highlights intable 1.MR. PARTEE. You have a positive financing gap of $8 billionin the second half of '83, according to Monday's [staff] presentation.-38-11/14-15/83MR. KICHLINE. The negative that we have in this forecast inthe financing gap, as noted, ran through the first three quarters ofthe year, and we have a financing gap of around $17 billion in thefourth quarter. So, our expectation is that this quarter will be thefirst one where the financing gap has swung from a negative to apositive and it rises further throughout 1984.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd like to make a modest request thatoccurred to me earlier. These flow-of-funds figures are always shownin half-year terms. Could you put them in quarterly terms for theperiod?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, as long as you recognize the volatilityand the substantial revisions in those numbers that half-yearpatterns--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You like this volatility submerged!MR. KICHLINE. If you want the full display, we can certainlydo that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody else is going to comment at themoment, let me ask you a question, Mr. Kichline. Mr. Rice said hethought, if anything, that the forecast may be on the low side.Suppose we want to explore the opposite. I'm not saying you wouldforecast it, but what plausible scenario could you make forsubstantially more weakness in the first and second quarters than youhave projected? What would you expect to see happen if the economygets weak?MR. KICHLINE. Well, we'll put Mr. Truman on the spot. Ithink one of the areas of potential weakness is on the foreign side.Obviously, as the dollar continues to be very high, it raisesquestions about performance on the foreign side. That's one area of[potential] weakness. Another may well be in residential constructionactivity. We've seen fluky numbers there--shooting up in August anddropping back in September. Our view is that that's about the bottom,but that's not necessarily clear. It could easily go a bit weaker.Another is this dramatic increase in business fixed investment, whichhas shown up in terms of orders and shipments in the durable equipmentarea. And we've had a lot of gyration on the building side innonresidential construction. There were deep declines in commercialconstruction in the spring and then big increases in the summer, andit's hard to read those numbers. It may well be that there's not asmuch happening on the structure side of business fixed investment, andthat would turn our forecast weaker. I would note particularly thatwe continue to get very bearish reports in office construction; thenumbers are still quite weak. We have built in here a flattening outof that--very little growth next year. But it may well be, given thedramatic increase in vacancy rates in many areas across the country,that office building construction is winding down and will go moredeeply negative. So, in the investment area and in residentialstructures and the foreign sector I think there are potentialnegatives.MR. PARTEE. May I just note, Jim, that you have brought thesaving rate back now, but it's still not a high saving rate.-39-11/14-15/83MR. KICHLINE. No, that's right. It's in the 5 percent areawhich, as you know, is very low. And we have perceived that to be aconstraint on consumer spending next year.MR. PARTEE. To hold that up?MR. KICHLINE. Yes.MS. TEETERS. You have assumed that interest rates are goingto stay where they are now, is that right?MR. KICHLINE. Well, they're a few basis points higher; theyare a little higher than the forecast we had used last time, but it'sa quarter of a point or so--nothing dramatic.MS. TEETERS. One of your contingencies is not risinginterest rates?MR. KICHLINE. You mean in the fourth and first quarters--inmy answer to the Chairman?MS. TEETERS. Yes.MR. KICHLINE. No, I didn't sprinkle that in. If you were totalk about a significant rise in rates, which we have not built intothis forecast, again, it seems to me that certainly the residentialstructures area could be hit early on. But it would have to be muchmore than we have built into the forecast to alter the picture in thevery near term. I think it would have a longer-run implication.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I just have a comment on capital goods,particularly for those industries or those companies in the MiddleWest. While there has been some improvement, I think, nonetheless ina broader perspective many of these industries are still doing very,very poorly. We took a look at four components of the industrialproduction index--farm equipment, construction equipment, metal works,and railroad equipment--all of which are terribly important in theMiddle West. We compared their current levels of operations with thethird quarter of 1981, which was for many of them a high point. Andthese four individual sectors are still operating at a very, verydepressed level. I'm sure they will come along, as Jim is suggesting,but I also think some of them have undergone some pretty importantstructural changes. They are still operating at very low levels andthe people running these companies continue to be quite depressedabout the outlook. So, if there's any error at all, in my judgment itcertainly is in that area on that side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The four you mentioned were what?MR. KEEHN. Farm equipment, construction equipment, metalworking, and railroad equipment. Railroad equipment, for example, iscurrently operating at 81 percent under where it was in the thirdquarter of 1981. It has some very individualistic circumstances,which caused that, but it's an industry that is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. An 81 percent decline from 1981?-40-11/14-15/83MR. PARTEE. Yes. That's freight cars.MR. KEEHN. They are going to deliver about 5,000 freightcars this year, and it's an industry that has frequently delivered,say, 80,000 in a year; and that has been as high as 120,000 in a year.MR. KICHLINE. In the index, I might note, I'm told there wasa dramatic increase in October. The numbers were just released; it'sup about 50 percent or something like that. The index level goes from13 to 19 or something like that. It was 100 in 1967, so it'soperating at 87 percent below where it was in 1967.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I'd like to ask whether, in terms of ourcapacity limitations, the labor supply limitation is more or lesssevere in your judgment than the capacity utilization. As I look atthe numbers here, you forecast that by the end of 1984 we will get to82.5 percent capacity utilization, which I would regard as close tothe flash point, even though that's hard to define. And at that timewe get to 8 percent unemployment, which is still well above areasonable range for the noninflationary rate or non-acceleratinginflation rate of unemployment. Does that mean that we have a tightercapacity ceiling over us than a labor supply ceiling?MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's a very murky area, as you know.Our concern at the moment runs in the direction that capacityutilization appears to be rising more rapidly, given growth in theeconomy, than it did in previous cycles. But there are some factorsthat clearly could affect that. One is that we apparently do havesubstantial additions [being made] to business equipment at themoment, which would presumably add something to capacity growth.We're uncertain about how to measure recent capacity growth and,indeed, some of the facilities that were removed from the capitalstock or allegedly closed down may come back on stream depending onwhat happens to the economy. So, it may be that the numbers[projected for] a year from now or two years from now are not as tightas they look. But for now I would very much agree that it appearsthat the risk is on the side of capital shortages rather than laborshortages.MR. MARTIN. Jim, wouldn't you add the question of worldcapacity and the business relationships that have been entered into byAmerican firms with foreign suppliers over this last four-year period?Obviously, you have built into the forecast changes in the exchangerate, but I think the business relationships, contracts, and so forthto some extent transcend the exchange rate question. If you talked tosome of Silas' constituents and some of the others, they say they aregoing to continue to use those foreign sources. Now, that's too flata statement, but isn't that--MR. KICHLINE. No, I should have mentioned that. Thatclearly is very important in our thinking about all of this and aboutthe price pressures that might stem from rising capacity utilization.I would say that it's particularly important in the context of a verysluggish current and prospective recovery abroad. So, there appearsto be in many key areas ample world-wide capacity.-41-11/14-15/83MR. MARTIN. Let me ask a second question with regard tolabor resources. If your productivity figure is indeed too low--as Ihave said innumerable times that I think it is--where does that leaveyou with regard to unemployment rates?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think in the shorter run we willprobably be talking about higher unemployment rates. It's conceivablethat in the short run it means that businesses would not be adding asmuch to payrolls as we have projected in this current forecast. So,we would expect that to give us perhaps a bit higher unemployment ratein the shorter-run context--that is, the demands for labor would beweaker.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the conditions in the SixthDistrict are substantially different from those reported by Si Keehn.In practically every sector, with very few exceptions, we're seeingvery, very robust growth in the economy--August auto sales, retailsales, housing construction, and so on, and even areas that have beenbadly hit by the recession and were giving us very gloomy reportsuntil recently. Alabama, Louisiana--particularly due to the energysector--and Mississippi are reporting substantial gains in theirsituations. Even the areas that I mention as exceptions--housing andagriculture--are doing better. The farmers, of course, were hit bythe drought and the excessive heat during the summer. But the PIKprogram has insulated a lot of them from difficulties, and theirrevenue will probably be up. When you put all of this together, asfar as the Sixth District is concerned, we see very, very robustgrowth ahead for the rest of '83 and for '84.I don't have any particular quarrel with the staff's analysisbut like Governor Rice I would think that the strength of the economy,if anything, is being underestimated, especially for the fourthquarter. So, we would be looking for higher rates of growth in thefourth quarter and probably in '84. Associated with that, I wouldsay, too, that we think the staff's inflation forecast for '84 isperhaps a little on the low side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. The situation in the Ninth District is a lotlike what Bob Forrestal has just described in the Atlanta District.The reports that we're getting are of strength across the board, evenin some of the areas that have been very weak, such as iron ore and soon. It's not booming yet but the mere fact that one of the bigtaconite companies has just announced that they're recalling 1600workers as of January 1st, in the context of the situation up there,is quite a dramatic development. The lumber and timber areas arevery, very strong. There is even a renewed surge of activity--I don'twant to call it a burst yet--in the oil and gas producing areas inwestern North Dakota and Montana. The number of operational rigs inthe field has doubled--from admittedly a low level--in the last coupleof months. The farm price situation as it was reported to me isprobably compatible with what Jim said earlier; in a sense it'slooking better. If anything, our people are suggesting that theythink it looks even a little better than Jim says. One of the thingsthat is now being cited is that the change in the dairy and milk-42-11/14-15/83program that was enacted by Congress last week in all likelihood isgoing to put a lot of milking cows into the slaughter market and thatwill work to hold down the widely expected big jump in beef pricesnext year. So, by and large, our agriculture price outlook is thoughtto be improving, if anything.In the Twin Cities area, the character of the situation, Ithink, really has changed. For example, we even heard reports lastweek of strengthening in office space rentals in a context in whichthere's a tremendous amount of new building going on in the TwinCities. And last of all, in terms of an anecdotal leading indicator,I've been struck myself just noticing the number of help wanted signsin the store windows of small businesses throughout the Twin Cityarea. That is something that I certainly can't recall seeing sinceI've been up in those parts of the woods. On the housing side, thoughI don't know to what extent this is generalized, I get the sense thatthe housing market is being held up by the increased acceptance ofvariable rate mortgages on which the initial rate, the rate thatpeople are looking at today, is a relatively moderate rate compared tothe rate on conventional fixed-rate mortgages. To what extent thatwill last is another thing. But right now I think it is one of thethings helping to hold up the residential side.I also think, as I have for some time now, that the risks areon the up side in terms of the economy and clearly on the up side interms of inflation. I've looked very hard to find any hard evidenceof a resurgence of price pressures and can't really find it. But Imust say I have the distinct sense, extracting from the numbers, thatit's either there or lurking close at hand. Certainly, we do get alot of reports of disappearing discounts--in some cases substantialdiscounts off posted prices for industrial goods--which may or may notbe captured in the price statistics. And, getting back to thediscussion of yesterday, I think the character or the chemistry of therecovery as it pertains to the interaction of wages, productivity,unit labor costs, and cash flow to the business sector--any way youlook at it--clearly is about to change. Even if productivity isstronger than the Board staff's forecast, we still are going to have amarked shift away from the phenomenon of the last few quarters inwhich wages were decelerating, productivity was growing very sharply,and unit labor costs were actually declining for two quarters running.So, even if productivity is stronger than the staff estimates, which Ithink it will be, I still think that the character of the recovery asit pertains to cost-price pressures is about to change. And that isone of the reasons why I think it's going to be very, very difficultto hold the inflation rate in the 4 to 4-1/2 percent range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. With regard to the economic outlook in the FourthFederal Reserve District, I thought I would come at it from the sideof some of the industrial developments in the District and what theymight mean for the near-term outlook for inflation. It has been saidmany times around this table, and I just repeat it, that the laborconcessions that we've seen have been in industries that are undersevere market pressure and are fighting for survival. Of course, thequestion remains: How long-lasting will those concessions be inindustries that pick up? They may, of course, continue in thoseindustries that are getting smaller over the long term.-43-11/14-15/83Let me make some specific industrial comments. First, aboutautos and the nationwide Chrysler settlement that had been followed bythe local settlements: All the locals settled except Twinsburg, Ohio,which is the metal stamping plant for Chrysler, and Twinsburg went outon strike. The settlement of that local agreement was considered aunion victory to be settled regardless of cost to the company, whichin lost earnings was somewhere between $50 and $100 million. I thinkthere are reasons to argue that that is overstated and that Twinsburgwas unique. There had been a terrible industrial accident there inwhich a man was crushed to death in a stamping machine. The workingconditions are bad in metal stamping plants and that is an oldstamping plant. In addition, it had a rather unique situation inhaving quite radical union leadership at that plant. Nonetheless, Ithink what happened at the Twinsburg Plant is indicative of workers'attitudes and it is one of the things that makes me apprehensive aboutthe upcoming auto negotiations. It makes me think, as we look atthose negotiations next year, that maybe a number like 6 percent is onthe low side of what might come out of those negotiations in anindustry that has been quite profitable. In thinking how autonegotiations might affect inflationary expectations and inflationthrough the economy, one can look at other sectors of the economywhere there is some strength and talk about those being the next togo. One strong area that we see, of course, is trucking. That mightbe the dynamics by which inflationary expectations build.Let me turn to another industry that's heavily represented inthe Fourth Federal Reserve District, which is steel. That bringsquestions of both capacity and productivity. Capacity has beendiscussed, of course, and capacity growth rates have been slowingdomestically in a number of our industries, and in some industrieswe've even had liquidations. This brings forth a great question ofhow we measure capacity and when the cost pressures will show throughinto prices, as has been discussed. Steel causes me to see theproductivity outlook as mixed. On the positive side, I agree with anumber of comments that have been made to the effect that if you talkto businessmen, they think that they not only have accomplishedsignificant increases in productivity but they see ways that they willcontinue to increase productivity in the future. On the negativeside, if you look at some of our beleaguered industries in the FourthDistrict and talk about labor attitudes toward productivity, it's verydifficult to convince organized labor that productivity increases areimportant. We tell them [they are]. I think they believe qualityincreases are important--that they are not competitive because theirproduct is shoddy compared with a foreign import. But I think theysee productivity increases as a way to lose jobs. It's like the oldstory about when oil prices were going up and people were supposed touse less electricity, and they paid more for their electricity. It'sthe short-run effect. It is very hard to convince labor of theimportance of productivity increases, particularly in industriesfacing severe international competition. To go back to the Twinsburgsituation, in the context of productivity, I think almost the mostimportant thing that came out of Twinsburg was probably the re-evaluation of the way of doing business that we thought was going tohappen in the auto industry. It still may, but I think they are verycarefully looking at something like a just-in-time concept ofproducing products because they found out that if they don't have thesame kind of labor market conditions as they have in Japan, aninventory control method like just-in-time can shut down their-44-11/14-15/83business. And at least at Chrysler they are really evaluating theirpossibilities.MR. PARTEE. That might lead to larger inventories?MS. HORN. Yes--not labor productivity but capital managementproductivity, that's for sure. I think that's a very serious outcome.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'm getting worried about whether or notwe're going to get the speed and the degree of slowdown that the staffhas forecast. I agree with Governor Rice that the current quarter isone in which we may end up with more GNP growth than 6.3 percent. Iwouldn't worry too much about that, but I would worry a lot if growthin 1984 didn't slow down to somewhere close to the 4-1/2 percent or sorate the staff is forecasting. One can make a strong argument, basedon past cyclical performance, that we're going to get a lot lessthrust from those two areas that typically lead the recovery--housingand inventories. What we don't know at this point is the degree ofstrength that is developing in the business fixed investment area,which tends to replace the strength that comes along from housing andinventories in the first year of recovery. We're in a very difficultposition, I think, in trying to predict that because the investmentintentions surveys that we used to depend on so heavily have becomealmost totally worthless. The two private surveys we have gotten nowfor 1984 are predicting increases in nominal terms of between 9-1/2and 11 percent. And the staff has said, quite properly, that thosenumbers can't possibly be right; a lot more has happened. The otherkinds of information that we've tended to use are the contracts andorders figures, and they show simply enormous strength. The contractsand orders figures in September in real terms are up at a 25 percentannual rate [from] the fourth quarter of 1982. The problem withforecasting from those figures is that they carry for about a quarteror maybe two quarters but not much further. The staff's forecast forbusiness fixed investment is reasonably strong for next year but itshows a progressive slowdown in the rates of increase from what we'vehad recently--from a 15 percent annual rate in third quarter of 1983to 13 to 11 to basically 9 percent. And if that doesn't happen and weget something more toward the upward end--in the 10 to 15 percentrange--then we have a lot more growth ahead of us than we've allowedfor.The other reason I think we ought to ask ourselves whetherpast cyclical patterns of slowdown in the second year are going toemerge is the policy assumption the staff is using on the monetaryside. It is true that we've had a very, very substantial slowdown inthe growth of the monetary aggregates, but we've also had a verysubstantial turnaround in the performance of velocity. The staffhere--and there are many other economists who have been doing the samething--have been using what we call effective money growth or whatother economists call adjusted money growth. I have been looking atsome of the numbers. What you do is ask yourself what would havehappened to the money stock if the relationship between money and GNPand interest rates had been what it was prior to 1974. Now, that's awild kind of thing to have to do, but it yields some interestingresults. What it says is that effective money growth in the firstthree quarters of this year was about 6-3/4 to 7 percent at an annual-45-11/14-15/83rate, about 5 percentage points below the actual figures. And in thefourth quarter it's going to be reversed; it's going to be about 8-1/2percent at an annual rate, about 5 percentage points [above] thegrowth forecast by the staff. Next year the staff forecast assumesthat 7 percent is appropriate; but if we translate that to effectivemoney growth, it comes out to 8 percent. And that means, if youbelieve the staff's forecast for real money growth, that Ml isincreasing at a 3-1/2 percent annual rate next year. That is very,very high by historical standards. On the fiscal side, I would remindyou that we still have a lot of fiscal spending ahead of us. The fullemployment deficit, based on the 6 percent unemployment ratecalculation, went from a $10 to $15 billion range in the first half of1981 to a $65 to $70 billion range in the first half of 1983. It goesup to a range of $115 to $120 billion in the first half of 1984 and to$125 to $130 billion in the last half of next year. I have to figure,with that kind of fiscal stimulus and monetary expansion stillproceeding quite rapidly, that the chances of an overrun of thestaff's forecast for next year are very substantial.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallace.MR. WALLACE. Mr. Chairman, I could echo the kind of bullishreport that you heard from Bob Forrestal and Jerry Corrigan as far asour District is concerned. Of course, I'm talking primarily about thestate of Texas; the recovery is very much in evidence there. It wasfueled initially by the construction industry, which remains a strongelement of that recovery, at least on the commercial constructionside. I think residential construction has plateaued at this pointbut now we're seeing strength developing more generally from theindustrial side of the economy. That is in evidence in suchindustries as aluminum, copper, and steel; and although the evidencein the high-tech electronics industries is spotty, that is still asource of strength. And we're beginning now to see some evidence ofrecovery in the energy sector though, of course, it's also not as muchas in the District economy generally. But we are seeing evidence inthe variables we tend to look at such as the active rig counts, whichhave shown a 23 percent increase since July, and the seismic crewcounts in the District, which have increased 20 percent sinceSeptember. This is occurring throughout the four-state region that welook at but, again, primarily in Texas. So, there is evidence of someupturn in activity in that industry. That does not indicate that wewill see relief any time soon in the sense that some of the bad loansin regional banks that have been very much in the news recently willnecessarily get paid off, but at least over a long period of time itshould provide some relief there. The services side of the energyindustry is still very much depressed--the mud suppliers, the welders,the truckers and all that goes along with it. That has not shown anyevidence of picking up yet. Of course, this is attributable toseveral things but it's not attributable to any prospect, at least atthis point, of higher oil prices. It seems to be resulting from lowerproduction costs and the fact that the economy in general is showingsome increased strength. Certainly, the weakest part of our economyat the moment continues to be the border region, which I think wewould have to say is still in a state of depression. There has beensome improvement in the economy in the El Paso region but not in areasfarther down such as Laredo, Brownsville, McAllen, and so on. Thosecities are flat on their backs. The city of Laredo at this point has-46-11/14-15/83the distinction of having the highest unemployment among those citiesrecorded in the labor statistics.We have noticed some curious activity in certain parts of theDistrict. One of the questions that you raised with us when you weredown there last week was about land prices, and we talked with a fewpeople in this area. Some prices of raw land are being bid up on thebasis of the prospective development of retail strip shopping centersand that sort of thing. We've uncovered a few instances of landchanging hands as often as 3 or 4 times a day in this process, whichwe hope is not a usual situation, but that was the latest--MR. PARTEE. It has to be set up in advance.MR. WALLACE. It could be.SPEAKER(?) But not in Texas.MR. WALLACE. For example, there are instances of land as faras 25 miles out from the central business district of Dallas whereprices have been bid up to $5 to $6 dollars per square foot on theanticipation that these properties will be prime sites for shoppingcenter developments and that kind of thing. That, of course, would bealong major highways. One of the members of our staff attributes thisto unsophisticated developers being fueled by unsophisticated lenders,primarily in the thrift industry. Unfortunately, this is not a veryfavorable development. But I think on balance the economy of theEleventh District is very strong at this point, and I certainly wouldagree with Jerry Corrigan's comment that the risk is on the up side,and I think we will continue to see increasing inflationary pressuresin the months ahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else see the kind of landspeculation that is going on in Texas?MR. BLACK. You mean land changing hands three times?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Prices are up in some areas four or fiveor six times.MR. WALLACE. I don't want to leave you with the impressionthat this is a common everyday occurrence; on the other hand, I don'tknow that it's not either.MR. PARTEE. That's better than $200,000 an acre!MR. WALLACE. That's right: $5 to $6 dollars a square footis $250,000 to $300,000 an acre.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, New York real estate is still[unintelligible]. To the extent that people are looking around for aninflation hedge, the collectibles market has picked up quite rapidlyin the last two months; much higher prices are being bid at auctionhouses. It's almost as though people are thinking in the inflationaryhedge terms we saw a couple of years ago. I can't understand whythere is such a rapid rise in prices at the better end of the scale.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.-47-11/14-15/83MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, I continue to be impressedby the differences in the strength of an aggregate like real GNP,which is looking strong, versus the reports I hear around the tableand the conditions I witness in our own District industry by industry.Basically we have both great strengths and great weaknesses. Perhapsthat is what one expects in a recovery that is less than a year old.Certainly, if you disaggregate the economy, you get a markedimpression that things are not going well across the board; somethings are going very well indeed and some things aren't going sowell. It's only in some aggregate sense that the economy iscontinuing to move upward. But I'm beginning to get concerned aboutsome of the distortions that are taking place in some key industries,despite overall growth in employment and production--in areas such asconstruction, trade, finance, services, and so forth. The drop inhousing starts that we had last September of some 15 percent is reallybeginning to feed back into the forest products business now, and therecovery that had taken place in the state of Oregon clearly hasstalled. Unemployment is rising again. In our aerospace business,our country's biggest company has continued to reduce its payroll upuntil very recently. But there is some good news there because theyhave just gotten a heavy inflow of new orders for commercial aircraft.New orders in the last month or so have been greater than all the restof 1983 put together and the backlog of unfilled orders is now rising.And that's, of course, good news for the Pacific Northwest.MR. BLACK. John, are they domestic orders or a combinationof domestic and foreign?MR. BALLES. It's a combination of domestic and foreign inthe commercial field. I'm not talking about the military areas now.The other thing, which is disturbing in the sense of representing somereal distortion in the structure of production in the country, is thatwe have important agricultural economies in the the western region--California, of course, being the country's biggest single agriculturalstate--and I keep hearing many of our directors sing the blues aboutwhat the high value of the dollar is doing to export markets. Thisranges all the way from log exports to Japan to cotton exports comingout of the central valley in California to a good part of the rest ofthe world. So, even though yields on a good many agricultural cropsare reaching new records, the markets for these products are lousy andthat's a direct reflection of the value of the dollar on the exchangemarkets. I think we ought to keep these kinds of things in the backof our minds as we assess the outlook, [knowing] that not all ofreality gets captured in things like real GNP.MR. RICE. Doesn't our forecast call for a decline inagricultural output?MR. KICHLINE. Yes.MR. RICE. That's somewhat contrary to what John Balles seemsto be observing.MR. BALLES. It depends on which commodity you're talkingabout, Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Agriculture overall.-48-11/14-15/83MR. KICHLINE. I think overall it's a small decline inoutput, but there really is a bad mix problem in terms of somecomponents rising and others declining substantially.MR. BALLES. My information, Jim, is that the wheat cropsaround the whole country will be at a new record level by a big marginand that the foreign demand for it just isn't there and the farmersare very worried about price prospects. Does that jive with what youhear in your District, Roger?MR. GUFFEY. As a matter of fact the wheat crop has receivedmoisture and looks very good at this point. Lots of things couldhappen between now and harvest, to be sure. But if it comes forth asa good year, then we could be in trouble again in wheat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. In the Eighth District, things are lookinggood. I would say we've moved from what I previously called reluctantoptimism to near euphoria. Sales, which reflect consumer attitudes,are running very strong. The merchants we've talked to in the majorcities in the District think we're going to have a very outstandingChristmas season. Automobile sales are good; they are running about21 percent over a year ago. Unemployment, which has been high, iscoming down now very noticeably and the Missouri Division ofEmployment is predicting substantial reductions beginning in December.A large part of this is due to planned expansions at the area's autoplants. Ford and GM are planning expansions around the first of theyear and Chrysler is going to add a second shift of 1,200 workers toone of their assembly plants, number 2. There is an interestinganecdote regarding this workforce expansion--some good news and somebad news, I guess. Chrysler is limiting applications for the jobs toa total of 6,000. They're taking 3,000 applications through theirPresswood employment office but they distributed 3,000 interview cardsto present employees to give to interested parties. The story goingaround is that employees are selling these cards for about $200 apiece, which either indicates that there are still a lot of people whowant to be employed who aren't or, if you figure the chances of beinghired are about 1 in 5, that the present value of the rents afterunion dues is $1,000 per worker at the Chrysler plant. I guess thattells you something about why we don't do well with importcompetition. GE is adding 1,400 workers to its Louisville applianceplant by mid-January--again, an indication of a tough area that'scoming back. Granite City Steel is going to add 1,000 to itsworkforce, and steel has been a very depressed area. Even residentialhome sales are looking good. They're below the peaks but still strongand well ahead of a year ago. Construction of new homes is brisk. Wehave good order backlogs. I hear the builders expressing optimismagain after being rather blue a couple of months ago. Residentialconstruction in St. Louis is up 21 percent. Nonresidentialconstruction in September in Missouri was double the September '82figure. Overall, the nonresidential numbers are looking quite good.So, except for agriculture, where we've had the worst drought in 50years and where with the PIK program we've had big reductions inyields in corn, soybeans, tobacco, and cotton, I would be with theoptimists in terms of the outlook, for the fourth quarter inparticular.-49-11/14-15/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I would like to address some ofthe downside risks with regard to the expansion in order to get thaton the record and also some pessimism as to prices. Obviously, ourgoals are both disinflation and growth. And those of you who haveserved on the Federal Reserve Board since 1979 deserve all therecognition that you'll never get. But this is not an expansion likethat of the 1970s. We don't have the kind of world inflation or thekind of economic growth in the OECD countries or in the less developedcountries that we've had in other periods. I wonder if, in a globalsense, the problem today isn't the illiquidity of so many financialstructures and corporations around the country and the slow growththat characterizes most of the world outside the United States. We'vetalked about productivity, and certainly that is a positive factor interms of future inflation. But that should be coupled with the kindsof comments of an anecdotal nature that I have picked up from mybusiness contacts. Certainly, the businessman is going to try toraise his prices. Certainly, the union leadership, particularly thenew young faces you see in union halls who have taken over from theold guard, are going to try to make their reputation. But we have nottalked much about the natural rate of unemployment and the currentrate of unemployment and the projected rate of unemployment sinceyesterday. That kind of analysis is still before us. The anecdote Ihear is: "We're going to try to raise our prices but we're not sosure in terms of world competition that we're going to be assuccessful in that as we have been in previous recoveries."This is still a typical recovery. I think we are talkingabout it here a little in terms of our awe that we have so exceededour own forecast. But if you look at the 5 or 6 recovery periodssince World War II, on an average basis we're talking about 5 percentreal growth or so in the first three quarters of a rather typicalupswing. [As for] the expectational side of what data we can get--what President Corrigan [mentioned]--I've certainly examined thesedata. If you look at the commodities, spot and future price indexes,other than what has happened in the past few days, you find if you goback a month or two months that index after index on the spot market--seven or eight of them--is down or pointing in that direction. If youtake the futures market, it's not so clear. But of 10 or 11 indicesthere 7 out of the 10 are pointing downward. The stock markets, onceyou get beyond the misinformation of the DOW and look at the othermarket indices, are down; the common stock prices of the NASDAQ and ofthe AMEX and the general markets are certainly not pointing toward arevival of inflation. It seems to me, then, that looking at the worldsituation and looking at how we stand vis-a-vis previous recoveryperiods something can be said for steady-as-you-go rather than usingout intuitive feelings about a revival of inflation. Rates, bothshort and long rates, have already revived some; they have gone upsome since the last FOMC meeting. There may be a question that weshould keep in mind about 1985 and how we're going to sustain theexpansion into 1985 when inflation is still perhaps not as revived asour intuitive sense would say and unemployment is going to be verysubstantial and the world economy is probably not going to be thatrecovered.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I think the Tenth District issharing the general optimism about the recovery, particularly as it-50-11/14-15/83relates to consumer retail sales. Residential construction has pickedup. For commercial construction, on the other hand, it depends onwhat area of the District one is talking about. The Denver area wasin a boom for a number of years and is well overbuilt, and that's nota very vigorous sector. But if you begin to disaggregate the basicindustries or areas of economic activity in the Tenth District--if youlook at energy, there has been some moderate upturn in the number ofrotary rigs actually working. But it is only modest, even thoughpercentage-wise it looks pretty good. It is maybe 40 percent greaterthan 8 to 10 months ago, but that was a very low base level from whichthey are working up. Mining, on the other hand, particularly coal, isflat. There is certainly no increased activity in the miningindustry. That whole industry hasn't begun to recover yet.Commercial aircraft, which is a very big segment of our economicactivity, is flat on its back, contrary to what John has reportedabout the Northwest. There is no backlog of orders; as a matter offact there are continuing cancellations of commercial jet aircraftorders. The one bright spot is a military contract landed by the LearCompany down in Wichita and in Arizona, but that's just one blip onthe horizon. As for the rest, they are looking at a rather dismaloutlook.With respect to the agricultural sector, you spoke of landprices. As I think most of you around the table know, through thisrecession agricultural land prices fell somewhere between 15 and 21 or22 percent, depending upon whether it was dry or irritigated land.And those prices have not yet turned up. As a matter of fact, thereport that I've had is that there will be some continuation offoreclosure on farmers and ranchers as a result of their not beingable to service their debt. Although there's a good deal of optimismat the moment in the farm area over the PIK program, which has giventhem a cash flow so that some of them can service their debt, I thinkthe observation is correct that without some improvement in the exportmarket, there isn't a great deal of hope for substantial improvementin the period ahead.As to unemployment, it has been decreasing; one of theprincipal reasons is auto assembly, which is a fairly large segment ofour economic activity. Auto plants have put people back to work andas a result the unemployment rates have dropped dramatically inMissouri, as has been observed by Ted Roberts, as well as in Oklahomawhere there are auto assembly plants. With regard to the mainstreammerchant in the agricultural area, it's a mixed bag. In theagricultural chemical area, they have had a very good fall season andlook forward to a good spring. On the other hand, for the farmequipment manufacturers there's nothing going on in sales. It'sobvious that the ranchers or farmers are just not buying anyadditional equipment; they are not making any capital expenditures.They're just sitting and waiting to see what will happen. So, insummary, it seems to me that we're enjoying the benefits and theoptimism of the consumer but the underlying support in the TenthDistrict isn't all that great.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Listening to the reports from around theDistricts, by and large they certainly do show a change in attitudesas against two or three months ago, probably just because we've moved-51-11/14-15/83to a later stage of the business cycle. We're now clearly in theexpansion phase of the business cycle and that's reflecting itselfvery broadly across the economy. There are structural differences,and I don't think we ought to be misled by them. The policy mix inparticular creates different circumstances than in previousrecoveries. John is concerned about his agricultural industry and hislumber products, but that's a direct result of the change in policymix; we have higher interest rates and a higher dollar than we wouldhave otherwise. And the counterpart of it is generalized purchasingpower, reflecting more [after] tax [income] that people are earning.That just goes throughout the spectrum and brings us these reports ofbetter retail sales and consumer optimism and so forth; that's justthe other side of our picture. So, taking that into account, I don'tthink there's anything that unusual, after adjusting for the policy[mix] change, in the recovery.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Isn't business fixed investmentstronger than one would expect with that policy mix?MR. PARTEE. The difficulty there is that we don't know howmuch the tax incentives are. It may be that the tax incentives areoffset by the [higher] interest rates in the aggregate. Although Imust say, speaking to Governor Gramley's comments, that I'm inclinednot to think that there is much strength in the business fixedinvestment area. I don't think it has that thrust and momentum; and Idon't believe it's going to be that strong looking out ahead. On theother hand, I'm impressed by what Karen Horn says about inventories.I've noticed that in the last several months we've had very [sizable]accumulation but the ratio of inventories to sales has not improved atall; it's right at the bottom. And if business should have a viewthat in order to take advantage of opportunities it needs a littlethicker stocks, we could get quite an inventory accumulation,particularly if it should follow a Christmas season with very strongconsumption because people feel good this year. Therefore, there maybe a little more [upside] hazard in the combined inventory-consumptionarea for the expansion. But I don't agree that plant and equipment isall that strong. Maybe I'm just too much of a Midwesterner and I'mimpressed by the continued weakness in the basic industries whichseems to me to be still, as Si says, very, very marked. In sum, Irather agree with Pres Martin that we're having a good expansion.There is some danger that it may run too strong as time goes on, butwe don't have any indication of that at this point. And we don't haveany indication of a heating up of inflationary pressures. And,therefore, perhaps what we ought to do for the moment is to sit backand enjoy it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without any other comments, we'll ask Mr.Axilrod to deliver his remarks.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can put a doughnut in your stomachsnow![Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess as Mr. Axilrod carefullyexplained to us, we have somewhat conflicting feelings and signals of-52-11/14-15/83great ebullience and some [concern] about the economy. I just had Mr.Kichline check, and you have to look fairly hard among past recoveriesto find three consecutive quarters [of growth] as high as [we havenow], including the projection for the fourth quarter. Interestinglyenough, 1958 was a bit more rapid and immediately terminated afterthree rapid quarters.MS. TEETERS. There was a steel strike.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe it was the steel strike that made itend so abruptly.MR. MORRIS. The first two quarters of 1981--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I mention that because I think some ofthese things about the strength of the recovery are a littlemisleading. We started out with a fairly slow quarter. That'sprobably an accident of when somebody dates these things or just howit starts out. The recovery really is in my judgment somewhat aboveaverage since it has gotten some momentum; it may be quite a lot aboveaverage. We have some weakness in Ml; I don't think we have too muchweakness in the broader aggregates at the moment. That Ml weaknesscomes against the background of having had a big increase earlier andhaving raised our target in effect by rebasing it. I'm not sure thereare grounds for making any very violent move at this point. But,let's see what other people think.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I just want to bring up one thingthat I don't think has been touched on, except in the early discussionthis morning. I'm not sure we have an awful lot of room to do verymuch because of the foreign international debt situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a tightening direction.MS. TEETERS. In a tightening direction, that's correct. Ihappen to agree with [the view] that this is a typical recovery atthis point; if anything, it's a little stronger than even I predicteda year ago. But I don't see any great need to move it down becauseit's going along at a very nice clip, though perhaps a little toofast. I don't see that we have any upward mobility at this point, atleast until we have some of these things a little more firmly set inthe international area. And I think it would be extremely dangerousto make a major move of any sort at this point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I second it.MR. KEEHN. Third.MR. PARTEE. Fourth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't hear any sentiment for a majormove now. Maybe we'll do this in a different way. Does anybody wantto make a major move?MR. RICE. I think we have no basis for a major move downwardat this time.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or up.-53-11/14-15/83MR. RICE. Or up.MR. BOEHNE. It seems to be in the nature of human beings towant to complain a lot when things go poorly and to want to worry alot when things go well. As I was listening to what was being saidaround the table I thought that at least central bankers are human:Things are going pretty well, so we'll worry a lot. But I think nowand then we ought to have the courage, as Chuck said, to sit back andenjoy it. So, I'd fifth or sixth or whatever [the motion] and leavewell enough alone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, I guess I'll take on the role of theschool of contrary thinking for about the third month in a row, justso we don't get too complacent. What I'm referring to, Mr. Chairman,is the move we made--with which I agreed at the time and which we allknow about--to deemphasize Ml and to pay more attention to the broaderaggregates. There was good reason for doing that. We also said toourselves, I think [the record] will show, that when and if Ml beganto behave more normally again, particularly in terms of velocity, wewould reconsider whether more emphasis ought to be put on it. Acouple of months ago--specifically in August--I circulated a paperthat had a couple of key conclusions. One was that the broaderaggregates, M2 and M3, looked to us to be highly unreliable as aforecaster of income, prices, or anything else for the last couple ofyears. Ml admittedly wasn't perfect but it was a lot better than thealternatives had been in the past, and I expect it will be again inthe future once we get a revival of velocity looking somewhat normal.We were forecasting in our Bank at least that that would happen by theclosing months of this year, and that forecast looks better than evernow. It is pretty much expected--I see similar figures in theBluebook--that we will have a strong rise in velocity of Ml in thefourth quarter. And for that reason I'm again suggesting that we notwait too much longer before putting Ml back as one of the primaryintermediate targets, along the lines it used to be, simply because Ihave such a big distrust of M2 and M3 telling us anything.We went through a big recession and now have a strongrecovery, and we hardly would have noticed it from what happened inthe behavior of those broader aggregates. I recognize your point, Mr.Chairman, that the recent slowdown in Ml has to be viewed against thebackground of the strong growth earlier and the fact that we didrebase in July. Having said that, I'm not sure I'd be comfortablewith seeing another month or two of very low growth in Ml just becauseit seems to be coming back on track in terms of behavior, includingvelocity behavior now. Our San Francisco money market model would notsuggest any major move and I too am against a major move in policy atthis time. But I would suggest a modest move toward nudging thatfunds rate down at least 50 basis points in order to get a littlestronger Ml growth in the remaining months of this year and bring itby December at least a little closer to the midpoint--though it wouldstill be under the midpoint--of that 5 to 9 percent range. Frankly,I'm skeptical about whether we're going to get the 7-1/2 percentgrowth in November-December mentioned in the Bluebook, given therecent level of the federal funds rate. So, in a word, I would be infavor of moving toward the specifications of alternative A in order toaccomplish what I just outlined.-54-11/14-15/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just comment that I think it ispossible that more predictable relationships may be returning to M1but, speaking for myself, it's a little too early [to be sure]. Ithink we probably are going to have a very big increase in velocityhere, which will make up for some of the reverses earlier, but whatthe trend is going to be in the future isn't clear. I wouldn't assumethat this increase in velocity is going to continue. But whether itwill lapse back [unintelligible]. But, given the burst that we hadearlier and now the retracing of it, partially anyway, at what pointdoes one assume that [a return to normalcy] begins? It stillmystifies me.MR. PARTEE. John, I think technically that's a reasonableproposal. But I must say that you're making an awful lot of smalldifferences in Ml growth. The projection is for pretty good growth.If it doesn't occur, of course, then we have a situation that needs tobe confronted. But the projection is 7-1/2 percent [for November-to-December] and 5-1/2 percent for the September-to-December period. Andit seems sort of strange to be reducing interest rates significantlywith the background of the economic discussion that we had before thecoffee break. It almost requires, it seems to me, a confidence in thetechnical relationships that exceeds what I'm able to have in them.So, I just can't agree with your particular proposal, but I do agreewith your general comment that Ml is a lot better than it has beencracked up to be and quite a bit better than M2 and M3. And we oughtto review this in connection with the posture we take for next year,which I guess would be at the next meeting and the January meeting.MR. BALLES. Well, that's right, Chuck. I didn't expect tochange many minds today, but one of the reasons I wanted to raise thisflag of caution here is that, as I look back at the 11 years I've beensitting around this table, I think the mistakes that we've made havebeen ones of intuitively trying to look through the intermediatetargets to the economy as a whole, while officially we never did, ifyou wish, target real GNP and even interest rates. That has led usmore often than not into a pro-cyclical monetary policy. And it wasone of the reasons that the Chairman proposed to this group in Octoberof 1979 that we get off our interest rate stabilization in the shortrun and onto monetary targeting. I think what we really have beendoing in the past year de facto is targeting interest rates, and I'mafraid that again that will lead us to some pro-cyclical monetarypolicy if we keep it up too long.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I shudder to think of what wouldhave happened to the economy if we had followed Ml on its crazy turnsin the last year.MR. BALLES. Well, I would never have proposed that we followit in the last year, Tony, because we did realize in a timely way thatsomething funny was going on in velocity and were wise enough tooffset it. It would have been a disaster if we had not let Mlincrease by 8-1/2 percent in 1982 instead of the targeted 2-1/2 to5-1/2 percent in view of what in fact was going on in its velocity andthe big drop that we had first in inflation and then in interestrates. We are convinced, and I think a lot of people around the tablewould be too, that what happened was that the opportunity cost ofholding money dropped very significantly with that drop in interestrates and, therefore, more money was demanded. It wasn't that the-55-11/14-15/83demand curve was shifting but that the amount of money demanded movingalong a given curve was going up, given the fact that interest rateswere coming down.MS. TEETERS. John, I think there was one cost of ourmonetarist experiment that tends to be overlooked, which was theextraordinary economic cost of the volatility of the rates. Thevolatility of short-term rates is not all that serious, but when itwas transmitted totally and completely into long-term rates it helpedto destroy the long-term market. I think not only the level of therates but the volatility of the rates was just economicallyunacceptable. And if we do consider going back to Ml, I think weought to keep in mind that it has a very high cost in other areas.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I've been troubled by the great deal ofstability that we've had in the funds rate, which does seem to harkenback to olden times. But the error that was committed in olden timeswas not that we became too tight as a result of holding the interestrate but that we became too easy. The natural tendency in anexpansion, it seems to me, is to generate that kind of pressure.Inflation expectations rise and, therefore, the real rate falls, andat a given [nominal] interest rate we have really less restraint thanbefore. Then the aggregates have tended to expand too rapidly. Wehave not had that this time, if we discount the earlier behavior ofMl. But I think one can't discount it completely; at least one has togive it a chance to unwind now, as Steve said. If too much of it wentinto the economy earlier, there's a good reason why it should movemore slowly right now. I think the whole picture of the economy thatwe're seeing is one of much greater strength than we expected. Half ayear ago we talked about the fragile expansion. Now, each time wemeet the expansion is a little stronger and the forecast is raised alittle more. We're not borrowing from the future and cutting down theamount of expansion we see hereafter; but we're more or lessmaintaining the projection for the future, which means that theeconomy is moving at a higher level and, therefore, a potentially moreinflationary level. The tendency to approach the capacity ceilingsearly is part of that general picture. So, if I had to make a moveright now, I would certainly want to make it in an upward direction.But I think we don't really have to make a move. There are a lot offactors on both sides and enough leeway continues to exist so that wecan wait; I don't know whether we should enjoy but, at any rate, wecan wait.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallace.MR. WALLACE. Mr. Chairman, if I may be permitted a somewhatdifferent view: I come out very supportive of the position thatGovernor Wallich just expressed, although I think that perhaps somemove is called for. It is becoming increasingly clear that therecovery is more robust than we expected earlier, and I think thatcombined with the prospects of continued high deficits will put upwardpressure on interest rates, notwithstanding Secretary Regan'sposition. I think we will see increased inflationary pressures. AsGovernor Partee has observed, inventory building is going to continue;the inventory/sales ratio is low; corporate retained earnings areceasing to be a factor holding rates down. So, I'm inclined to-56-11/14-15/83believe that the best thing that we can do now is to let the fundsrate move up closer to the 10 percent level and send a signal to themarket that we continue to be concerned about future inflation.Therefore, I would come out in favor of a "B-" position or "B" perhapswith a higher borrowing assumption that would carry a clear indicationthat we would like to see the funds rate move higher. I might addparenthetically that my preference would be to see the record statedin terms of that rate. But knowing that that's not an option we have,I would opt for "B" or "B-."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. Well, I share John Balles' concern about thepersistent deceleration in the rate of Ml [growth] as evidenced fromAugust through October. I don't think any major change is called for.Alternative B, which would show [M1 growth] rates of 6 percent inNovember and 9 percent in December would be fine with me. I would becautious in view of the character of the expansion about moving overto "A," because if we were successful in achieving it, John, thatwould have us moving into the new year at an 11 percent rate of growthin Ml, which I think would be excessive. I agree that there has beensome unwinding, but all of our research would indicate that if wepersist in restraint of this magnitude, we will in fact stop therecovery sometime beyond midyear of next year. So, I would like tosee us get back on track and address the issue in terms of themonetary base and Ml and let the interest rate fall out wherever itdoes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm very much in John Balles' camp.Or, to put it in a slightly different way, he has returned to a campthat I never left. We've heard a lot of criticism of Ml during recentyears and a lot of it I think has been warranted, but nobody has putforward anything that seems to have any promise, from my viewpoint, ofbeing a better intermediate target. Just to cite one case: The onlything that would have led anybody to predict the amount of strengthwe've had in the recovery was growth of Ml. So, I still focus most ofmy attention on Ml, but I'm very pragmatic about it. If Steve'sprobing into the behavior of M1A or anything else turns up somethingthat will behave better, then I'll gladly switch. Given thatposition, on the basis of past experience I think there's a legitimatereason to be concerned about this deceleration that we've had in M1and to conclude that it conceivably might have a negative impact onbusiness next year if it continues. So, I can understand why John hassome sympathy for easing up a bit to stimulate the rate of growth inthe money supply. I would have a lot of sympathy for that point,particularly if I thought that if it turns around the other way wewould move as quickly to snug up. But there are a couple of reasons,or maybe three reasons even, why I don't think that would be very wiseright now. One, of course, is that the economy does seem to be verystrong. I will buy pretty much Lyle's and others' argument on that.And after the kind of growth we've had in the money supply, againnarrowly defined, I think it's probably inevitable that we will have afew bumps and grinds as we try to get this back down to where it oughtto be.SPEAKER(?). Bumps and grinds?-57-11/14-15/83MR. BLACK. That was a Freudian slip! But in more technicalterms, we've been playing around inadvertently with the seasonaladjustment factors. I think it's at least conceivable or plausiblethat the introduction of the MMDAs and also the advent of the OCDs andthe inadvertent seasonal adjustment that seems to have gotten into ourmonetary policy the last several years may have biased our seasonaladjustment factors upward for these last three months, in which casethe reported figures are going to be lower than they really ought tobe. If that analysis is right, then that's a reason for not beingquite as concerned about the weakness we see there. So, to get to thebottom line, which I probably should have gone to directly, I would gofor alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I would favor what I would calla small precautionary move in the direction of firming a little atthis point. What I would have in mind is perhaps letting theborrowing level go up to $750 million or so, or maybe a bit higher,with the funds rate moving from 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent to 9-1/2 to9-3/4 percent, at least for the time being. I say that, of course,primarily because of the way that I'm looking at the economy. Again,if I look at the staff forecast for 1984 fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter, nominal GNP growth is 9 percent--4.3 percent real and 4.9percent inflation. If indeed the risks are on the up side, as I thinkthey are at the moment, it seems to me quite plausible that we may belooking at a situation in 1984 where we will have to try to restrainsomewhat the growth of prices and nominal GNP. Now, when I look atthe specifications that Steve has put together, even though one has totake the numbers with a grain of salt, alternative B growth rates forMl, M2, and M3 basically between October and December range from 7-1/2to 8-1/2 percent, which are still pretty robust numbers. I don'tthink I would care too much if growth came out in that range, but Isure wouldn't want it to come out much higher than that. Thoseconsiderations, in combination with my view of the economy, lead me tobelieve that a small move in the direction of a little precautionaryrestraint right now might prove to be very helpful in the longer run.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I share Governor Wallich's concerns that we'relooking at an economy that is growing a lot faster than we thought itwas going to. And I think it's probably still going to show a lot ofrobustness over the next couple of quarters. If I think about thekind of posture monetary policy for the course of 1984 that's likelyto be consistent with keeping the economy's growth rate down to 4-1/2percent or so and inflation no worse than 4-1/2 to 5 percent, I end upconcluding that we're going to need higher interest rates. I justdon't see how we can run a monetary policy that provides the kind ofexpansion in the money supply that is in the staff's forecast for 1984together with this horrendously stimulative fiscal policy in aneconomy that has a tremendous amount of cyclical momentum developingand not have an outcome that's rather different from what the staff issuggesting. I've listened to what [Governor Martin] has said withgreat interest. I think there are considerations on the down sidethat we need to think about. But in my judgment the risks of anoverrun are much greater at this point. So, I agree with Jerry fully.I think a precautionary step in the direction of firming is necessary-58-11/14-15/83and desirable. It wouldn't have to be done today. It can even waituntil the December meeting. But the sooner we make it, I think thebetter off we're going to be. Jerry's specs were a "B-;" I had putdown $700 to $800 for borrowing and 9-1/2 to 9-3/4 percent [for fedfunds] and that's exactly where he was. So, I agree fully with him.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I have a good deal of sympathywith the comments that John Balles made about Ml. I think the time isfast approaching when we need to take a hard look at restoring Ml tosome degree of respectability, which apparently was lost along theway. But I part company with John at that point. Even if we look atMl, the situation of the economy is such that I don't believe anydegree of loosening would be appropriate at this time. I wouldassociate myself with the remarks just made by Governor Gramley. Ithink that the concern we have is with a very robust economy in 1984.The projections, even of the money supply, are on the high side. So,the bottom line for me is "B-." I too had a borrowing range of about$750 million with a fed funds rate of 9-3/4 percent. So, I would comeout for a B- alternative, although alternative B would certainly beacceptable. But I wouldn't like to see the Committee move below "B"to a position closer to "A."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to enter a vote foralternative B. One reason is my concern with regard to our leadershipin the world economy and our impact as the world's biggest market forthe less developed countries. Speaking on a domestic basis, though,we are not yet back to a trend line in real GNP, described using thelast decade or 1973 to 1980 or whatever you feel is the appropriateperiod. Things have changed so much, though, in the last few years--financial institutions, financial instruments, business institutionsand the way they're dealing with their unions, and the worldcompetition that has now been vectored into this country. But I thinkany fine-tuning, considering how little we know about our institutionsand their financial instruments and how they perform today, would gojust as fine-tuning has always gone--not so fine. So, a slightfirming of interest rates or so-called precautionary firming, giventhe disappearance of Reg Q and given the removal of other estoppelsthat the government had built into the financial system, means that ifwe're going to tighten it has to be, in my not so humble opinion, amajor tightening--not a firming of a 1/4 or 3/8 of a point. And I'mnot prepared to support either a fine-tuning or a major move. Iunderstand most of us are not willing to support a major move. I'dlike to see the status quo and borrowing between $600 and $700million, with emphasis on the lower number.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On balance, I also come out forstaying as we are, although I do think it's quite possible that nextmonth we will have to give more consideration to a tightening move.In addition to the arguments that have been offered around the tableagainst a move at this point, I would add that a tightening move atthis point really would not be understood in the markets. It would betotally unexpected in the country at large. And I think there would-59-11/14-15/83be a lot of speculation that the Fed is expecting much more inflationnext year, notwithstanding the Chairman's testimony in which he saidit could be 4-1/4 percent or less. I think the only way the countrywould understand a tightening move at this point would be [toconclude] that we privately are expecting significantly higherinflation. Obviously, I'm not saying that that should be the solegoverning consideration, but it does seem to me that, even though onecan make an argument for a precautionary move, the force of thejustification for that might be very much clearer at our next meeting.So, I would vote to stay where we are and for borrowing in the $650million area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, I have somesympathy for those around the table who have spoken for returning toMl, but not now. I also have some sympathy for those who expressedthe position that we will indeed face a period in the future when someadditional tightening is needed, but I think not now. I would comeout very much as Tony has for retaining our current position with aborrowing level of about $650 million. This may be the month to sitback and enjoy it. Come next month, before Christmas, I believe wemay be the grinch who takes away Christmas. It may be appropriate tomake a modest move, even in view of the international situation, inthe upcoming month or two.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, I would end up associating myself withthose who are in favor of continuing the current policy, probablyalternative B. I think we are in a period in which things are goingwell, and that suggests that change would not be appropriate. It'sclear that the economy is far better now than we expected earlier andit is continuing to improve. If this continues into the time of thenext meeting, we may want to move modestly toward tightening. But Ithink there still are enough uncertainties that I'd like to see a fewmore cards before taking that move. Therefore, I favor alternative Bwith a borrowing level at about its current target level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, even though I believe in anactivist monetary policy, I think there are times when the best thingto do is to do nothing. It seems to me that the case that Lyle madeis one which has a reasonably high probability of being right. Ithink we have an environment for a strong surge in capital spendingnext year but the case is not that clear that we ought to be movingright now. One thing that I think we learned from the May 24 decisionof the Committee is that with the new mortgage market we really have avery powerful instrument in monetary policy in that the mortgage ratenow is so responsive to changes in monetary policy. We used to thinkof a six-month lag between a change in policy and the impact in realactivity. What we found when we pushed up interest rates in June isthat we got a decline in new home sales in July, a decline in permitsin August, and a decline in starts in September. The textbook wouldsuggest that we should not expect that prompt a response. I think thereason we got it is that we now have a mortgage market in which thethrift institutions are mortgage bankers; they take in mortgage-60-11/14-15/83packages and sell them in the market. And they have to get a marketrate on them if they're going to sell them. So, that means that afairly modest change in monetary policy can have a pretty big impacton the housing sector pretty fast.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How do you explain the fact that inthe last month or the last few weeks--I don't know exactly what timeperiod--while there has been a firming in bond yields there has been aslight lowering in mortgage rates?MR. MORRIS. Well, there certainly hasn't been much of afirming in bond yields and the short-term money rate structure hasbeen moving down.MR. MARTIN. Tony, the variable rate mortgage is coming intoits own; it's 30 to 45 percent of the market. I mean no disrespect,but we don't have good measures of those rates and how those loans aretraded in the markets. If we had that data, I don't think you'd findthe discrepancy. You're talking about fixed-rate mortgages.MR. GUFFEY. There has also been quite an inflow into theS&Ls recently.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. The explanation I heard is thatthe competition among the thrifts has become more intense for mortgagebusiness and they are--MR. PARTEE. That could be true and Frank's point could stillbe right. But I think it is true that we have a very responsivemortgage rate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I wasn't disagreeing with that.MR. MORRIS. I think this is the tool we can use when we getevidence that the capital goods boom is really taking off. I don'tthink the evidence is strong enough yet, so I would argue foralternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have a comment?MR. RICE. I'd just like to register a position on this.Because of the way I see the economy developing, I have a good deal ofsympathy for the position taken by Lyle and Jerry. That is, I can seethe case for some precautionary firming at the present time. But I'mnot prepared actually to move in that direction at this time. I doagree that we have to be looking in a firming direction and I agreewith Tony that it may be next time [we meet]. But I think Tony puthis finger on the problem and that is that if we took any firmingaction at all at the present time, it simply wouldn't be understood.The public and markets are looking at the aggregates and they see themeither well within the ranges or toward the bottom of the ranges. Andif we firm up now, even in a slight way, it simply wouldn't be easilyunderstood. But at the same time, we still ought to keep ourselveslooking in that direction. And if we expect that we may have to takesome firming action next time, perhaps we ought to find some languagein the directive this time to prepare the markets for such an action.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.-61-11/14-15/83MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, perhaps I should defer; myquestion has nothing to do with current specifications. I would liketo ask Steve a question about our meeting yesterday after you getthrough this. Pardon me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a couple of people for whom I donot have an opinion indicated, if they want to express an opinion.MS. TEETERS. I thought I did at the beginning. I'm verymuch for just staying where we are and not moving one way or theother. But I'm a little curious: What do you expect to know in amonth that we don't know now? We will have one more unemployment rateand we will have the flash on the fourth-quarter GNP, which is not avery good number.MR. PARTEE. We won't have Christmas sales yet.MS. TEETERS. And we won't have Christmas sales. So, I'm notsure that we're going to have that much more information in anothermonth. Now, if we go into February, we'll have a firmer number on theGNP and another two or three months of unemployment data and hopefullygood information on the international side. Those seem to me thethings necessary for making a decision.MR. GRAMLEY. I agree with what you say. You're right thatwe are not going to have any better numbers a month from now. Theproblem is that if we wait until February the capital spending plansfor 1984 would be set in concrete; they are all being developed now.The Christmas sales boom will have taken place and there is all theinventory planning that stems from that. And it then becomes late.If I'm right in my hypothesis, and I may not be, we're going to findourselves in February wishing we had acted last August.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though I agree that we won'thave any better monthly numbers, there would be some anecdotalinformation. We may have a better feeling for how the fourth quarterwill be coming in and what is happening in business fixed investment.MR. BOEHNE. Ideas grow on people over time; they sink in.MR. RICE. The most important thing is that there will betime for a few more public statements to the effect that we might befirming.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have you expressed a view, GovernorPartee?MR. PARTEE. Yes, I'm for staying right where we are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought I had that correctly.MR. PARTEE. I thought I rebutted John.MR. BALLES. It would have been a very peaceful meetingexcept for me; I'm sorry about that.-62-11/14-15/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have a lot of people who want tostay more or less where we are, with some tendency toward tighteningby some. I don't recall many times when we've tightened prematurely.MR. PARTEE. I do.MR. MARTIN. Let's keep it up.MR. RICE. Yes.MR. MORRIS. January of 1981.SPEAKER(?). January, 1982.MR. MORRIS. January, 1982.MR. PARTEE. How about May of 1975?MS. TEETERS. How about May of 1983?MR. RICE. May, 1983.MR. PARTEE. We tightened because the aggregates went up.MR. RICE. To no avail.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We tightened in January '81, if Iremember.MR. MORRIS. We pushed short-term interest rates up 400 basispoints in response to a rise in Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have to discuss next time orthe time after how we get into a disinflationary policy if we want tohave a disinflationary policy over a period of time. A five percentM1 figure, if M1 is going to return to normal, looks a bit high to me.MR. GRAMLEY. Five percent Ml?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about next year.MR. GRAMLEY. That isn't what the staff is projecting fornext year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't care what the staff is predicting;it looks a bit high.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, but if 5 percent looks high, what does 7percent look like?MR. PARTEE. Very high!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it returns to normal--I don't know ifit's going to; that's a big if. Well, I could convince myself totighten up a little now, although I don't feel that strongly about it.But I'm not sure we will want to wait for the next meeting if theaggregates turn out on the high side and the business news remainsthat good. We can start off where we are and stay there if everything-63-11/14-15/83goes according to the forecast. If the aggregates or the economy comein more strongly, obviously, we have room in these directives to moveanyway. I think we ought to discuss how to bias this a bit, if wewant to. I don't know that it takes any change in the wording. Whatdoes the [current] directive say? Maybe we should start out by saying"maintain the existing [degree of reserve restraint]." And if webelieve what the staff tells us, that 8-1/2 percent [for growth in M2and M3] can remain, I think. We're in a mid-quarter meeting; I don'tsee any necessity [to change] the second sentence. The third sentencemay be a question. Let me just look at it.MR. WALLICH. We could say "further evidence of strength inthe economy."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I could reverse the sentence in a sense,and say "Depending on evidence about the strength of economic recoveryand other factors bearing on the business and inflation outlook,greater restraint would be acceptable in the context of more rapidexpansion in the aggregates."MR. GRAMLEY. That sounds good to me.MR. PARTEE. And then pick up the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Reverse [the order].MR. PARTEE. Yes, because we might well have continued slowgrowth in the aggregates. That [bounceback] is something that hasbeen projected; we don't see it.MR. BLACK. If you think of this seasonal adjustment thing--MS. TEETERS. We can reverse it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, reversing it is an obviouspossibility.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't there an implication if wesay that greater restraint would be acceptable should the aggregatesexpand more rapidly, that that's the only condition under which wewould go to greater restraint? And yet, of course, we could haveweakness in the aggregates and still have enough business evidencethat we would want to move a little. What I'm saying is that we oughtto put a little more emphasis on the strength of the economic recoveryconsiderations in that sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have discovered historicallythat we can't take care of every permutation and combination in thesesentences, but--MR. RICE. Well, we do mention the strength of the economy.MR. MORRIS. The beginning clause "Depending on the evidenceabout the strength of economic recovery and"--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I understand that. I just felt[we needed] a little more emphasis there rather than on theaggregates.-64-11/14-15/83MR. BOEHNE. Well, instead of "would" we could say "might."It seems to me that that's a slightly weaker word.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think that would be--MR. GRAMLEY. If we leave it the way the Chairman hasexpressed it and we understand that he's thinking of taking intoaccount particularly the business news as well as the aggregates, thatseems to me to be reasonable. We can't express all the different--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we do it this way, the first half ofthe sentence seems to be simple enough. If you want to put in abalancing thing on the other side--. But it's weighed somewhatdifferently, I guess. "Depending on evidence about the strength ofeconomic recovery and other factors bearing on the business andinflation outlook, somewhat greater restraint would be acceptableshould the aggregates expand more rapidly."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You could achieve what I want simplyby putting in one adjective: "Depending on evidence about theincreasing strength of economic recovery."MR. PARTEE. But the rate of increase is decreasing.MR. RICE. Well, it's a question of whether it really isincreasing. The rate of expansion [may be] decelerating at some pointand if you get that and continue to do so--MR. PARTEE. We just received the production number today andthat is a half point less than last month.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. What I'm trying here may bequite technical--MS. TEETERS. How about "continued"?MR. RICE. Yes, "continued" would do it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, or "continuing." If we dothat, it gives a flavor of the Committee's concern that there may besomething further down the road.MR. MARTIN. Some of the Committee's concern.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's acceptable to me.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And then make the change yousuggested, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What change that I suggested?MS. TEETERS. Reversing the clauses.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Reversing.MR. PARTEE. The market might notice that.-65-11/14-15/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't quite see how to word this secondthought. We could just put in a semicolon and say "lesser restraintwould be acceptable in the context of a significant shortfall in thegrowth of the aggregates from current expectations." I'm not surewe're saying that; I don't know what significant is if business lookedeven stronger and the aggregates had a shortfall. That's the mainproblem. Then what would we do?MS. TEETERS. Call a meeting.MR. BALLES. Have a telephone call.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could do it that way. We couldjust put a semicolon and say "lesser restraint would be acceptable..."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How about "might be acceptable"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, what number do you want to put inthere?MS. TEETERS. Shouldn't we put 7-1/2 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had 7 percent before?MR. BERNARD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think if we leave 7 percent, we have toput 7 percent or less.MS. TEETERS. "Or somewhat more." It's 7-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. It's 5-1/2 percent.MR. MORRIS. But we could change it to read October throughDecember. Then we could put 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could do that but it's fine-tuning. I think we can either put in 5 to 6 percent percent or 7percent or less. Or we can change it to October through December andleave it at 7 percent.MR. PARTEE. I think I prefer September to December, Paul.We [generally] follow this policy and I'd keep it. And I think 5 to 6percent sounds like a quite respectful growth rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Put 5 to 6 percent?MR. CORRIGAN. For September-to-December 5 to 6 percent getsyou almost up to the top of alternative A.MR. PARTEE. Or almost down to "C."MR. MARTIN. Somewhere between "A" and "C."MR. PARTEE. It's just an indicator. We're not even runningon this.-66-11/14-15/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mind putting in "7 percent orless," as a matter of fact. I'd just put in the "or less" to takeaccount of the fact that we've had some [slowing]. But 5 to 6 percentis all right with me.MR. PARTEE. 5 to 6 percent or less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7 percent or less.MR. GRAMLEY. That "7 percent or less" sounds so bloominghigh that it leaves the whole thing wide open.MR. ROBERTS. Well, isn't "7 percent or less" saying thatwe're staying on the track that we were on but weren't accomplishing?Isn't that all it's saying? And that implies a higher growth ratefrom now until year-end, which is in line with "B."MR. CORRIGAN. For September-to-December 7 percent growth forM1 is higher than 9 percent--MR. ROBERTS. He said "7 percent or less," I thought.MR. PARTEE. Zero is a lot less than "C."MR. MARTIN. We could say "zero or more"!MR. ROBERTS. I don't think we ought to imply that 5-1/2percent is the desired path from here forward.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you think it's too low or too high?MR. ROBERTS. I think it's too low.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We did rebase. You were critical torebasing, I presume, so haven't we--MR. ROBERTS. Monthly rates aren't affected by rebasing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No. But I don't see the reasons forpushing hard to get above the bottom of the rebased range.MR. ROBERTS. I'm not thinking about the base or the range.I'm thinking about a very restrictive 3-month pattern that is likelyto extend into at least another month, and I would like to see apattern of expansion in the money supply from here forward so thatwe're getting back more on the track that we set out to be on when wesaid we wanted a 7 percent rate of growth.MR. PARTEE. Well, 5 to 6 percent, Ted would give you whatyou would require--quite a lot of expansion.MR. ROBERTS. Yes, I understand. I could go either way:with 7 percent or less or 5 to 6 percent. I just said I don't seeanything wrong with 7 percent or less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can certainly go either way. Idon't think it's a terribly sensitive decision given our ability to---67-11/14-15/83MS. TEETERS. I think 5 to 6 percent gives a little moreinformation to the market.MR. PARTEE. I'm worried about the open-end nature of the "orless." If we say "or somewhat less," that perhaps is sending it toohigh, so I prefer 5 to 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we want 5 to 6 percent?MR. MARTIN. Yes, 5 to 6 percent.MR. ROBERTS. That should imply tightening, while inactuality we're loosening if we accomplish this. A 5 to 6 percentgrowth gives you 7-1/2 percent October to December, and we've beensaying 7 percent from another period. Now if we say 5 to 6 percent,it sounds like less but it's really more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to put in a phrase at thebeginning of the sentence such as "Given the relatively slow growth inOctober, the Committee anticipated..."?SPEAKER(?). That would do it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, are we putting the 6 to 10 percent[funds rate range] down at the bottom?MR. PARTEE. Are we looking at the long-term aggregates orthe credit numbers?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't put credit numbers in here.MR. PARTEE. It's in there somewhere--that they are withinthe [long-term] range or something.MR. AXILROD. It's right after that part of the sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the figures aren't right up-to-datebut we have had a quite rapid increase in the liquidity figure throughthe period for which we last had figures and the debt figure waswithin the range but not low.MS. TEETERS. They include Treasury borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They include the Treasury bills. Thosehave been going up, commercial paper has been going up, and bankersacceptances have been going up. Over the summer liquidity was risingat an annual rate of around 8 to 12 percent. Anyhow, I guess this iswhere we are. If nobody has any comments, we can vote.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, do we have 8-1/2 percent for M2 andM3 growth?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, 8-1/2 percent for M2 and M3. I thinkthat's what "B" shows.MR. ROBERTS. Before we vote, Mr. Chairman, what does thisimply about borrowing?-68-11/14-15/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $650 million.MR. ROBERTS. May I ask a question of the staff? Steve, isthe $650 million intended to be consistent with your November andDecember [projections of] 6 and 9 percent growth in Ml?MR. AXILROD. That's what we are projecting but with regardto 2-month projections for Ml, as the Committee knows, the results canbe highly variable.MR. ROBERTS. You don't see anything in the level ofborrowing you've been assuming that is associated with theseconstrictive growth rates up to now?MR. AXILROD. Well, we assume that the market conditionsassociated with this level of borrowing--I'm not sure I'm answeringyour question--would result in roughly a 7-1/2 percent growth in Ml.Now, the market conditions can be a little variable with this level ofborrowing, depending on other things, and the demand for money can bea little variable. But that is our best estimate at this time.MR. ROBERTS. That's what I wanted to know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the best estimate, which might becalled a big fat guess.MR. AXILROD. No, it's a careful study of various models withjudgment applied!MR. PARTEE. Plus or minus 300!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What they are saying is that, with thisrate of business activity, they think it's going to pull up M1 even atthe current levels of interest rates and borrowings. But that is ajudgment about this unwinding being over or possibly over. But whoknows?MR. AXILROD. And I might add, Mr. Chairman, just in thecontext of what was said before about business activity being strong,that it's not clear to me from the recent performance that thatnecessarily means stronger Ml. It could be that people are justwriting checks on their NOW accounts, which is sort of stored upsavings, and we could get lower Ml with strengthening businessactivity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I haven't looked at the figures inthe last couple of weeks, but I think one can argue that the moneymarket deposit accounts, which are not in Ml, remain very low, don'tthey?MR. AXILROD. They are edging up, but essentially--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe it's beginning to go up again.But it looks suspiciously like there was this great attraction intothat account when it was first offered. There was a lot of publicityand very high interest rates. People put more money in there thanthey wanted to hold in there permanently, and as things settle downthey are taking advantage of other slightly higher rates in 6-month-69-11/14-15/83certificates or 3-month certificates or something else. And we mayget some of the same phenomenon perhaps on NOW accounts.MR. AXILROD. It really isn't worth making a federal case,but with respect to the alleged pickup in activity in September andOctober, if that occurred, the component of M1 that showed thestrength was currency, where growth picked up to 10 percent. It'sprobably a coincidence, but right in that same period the NOW accountgrowth virtually stopped.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the thing that has looked best overthe past year or the past two years is not Ml but old M1A. What hasthat been doing recently?MR. AXILROD. I'll get the figure here in a minute. Thatgrew very little. In September and October it picked up to around a 2percent annual rate of growth, which is slow, and it declined slightlyin August.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, you have an increase in currencyoffset by a decrease in demand deposits?MR. AXILROD. That's right.MR. WALLICH. Wasn't there a reason for that--namely that theinterest-bearing checkable deposits went up? So, you can't look atM1A in isolation anymore.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Except old Ml was just as weak,apparently, in that time period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, during this very recent periodapparently. But last year when Ml was going up so rapidly andvelocity was declining, old M1A was not going up so rapidly and thevelocity looked more normal. That may have been a pure coincidence,but I--MR. AXILROD. Well, we've had for three months this sort ofunwinding of the build-up in demand deposits, which we were somewhatat a loss to explain. We really expected that to start coming downearlier in the summer. We've had that in August, September, andOctober. And now we're anticipating that that will stop and willstart going back up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we have is: "maintain theexisting degree of reserve restraint." We have 8-1/2 percent in thoseblanks and then "Depending on evidence about the continued strength ofeconomic recovery and other factors bearing on the business andinflation outlook, somewhat greater restraint would be acceptableshould the aggregates expand more rapidly; lesser restraint might beacceptable in the context of a significant shortfall in the growth ofthe aggregates from current expectations. Given the relatively slowgrowth in October, the Committee anticipates that M1 growth at anannual rate of around 5 to 6 percent from September to December willbe consistent with its fourth-quarter objectives for the broaderaggregates..." All the rest would remain the same with 6 to 10percent [for the funds rate range].-70-11/14-15/83MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we are finished aren't we, Mr.Secretary?END OF MEETING-71-