Passage number 1.
   Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on October 15, 2010 _______________ A conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Friday, October 15, 2010, at 2:30 p.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James Bullard Elizabeth Duke Thomas M. Hoenig Sandra Pianalto Sarah Bloom Raskin Eric Rosengren Daniel K. Tarullo Kevin Warsh Janet L. Yellen Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser,¹ Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Jeffrey M. Lacker and Dennis P. Lockhart, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Atlanta, respectively John F. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Nathan Sheets, Economist David J. Stockton, Economist Alan D. Barkema, James A. Clouse, Steven B. Kamin, Lawrence Slifman, Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors ¹ Left meeting at point indicated.Michael Leahy, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Andrew T. Levin, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; David Reifschneider and William Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Stephen A. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Christopher J. Erceg, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors David H. Bowman, Assistant Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Edward M. Nelson, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ryan S. French, Senior Research Assistant, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors William H. Stone, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Loretta J. Mester and John C. Williams, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and San Francisco, respectively David Altig, David A. Marshall, Margaret M. McConnell, Mark E. Schweitzer, John A. Weinberg, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Chicago, New York, Cleveland, Richmond, and Minneapolis, respectively Evan F. Koenig, Giovanni Olivei, and Michael Schetzel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Boston, and New York, respectively Argia M.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply listing the individuals who were present at a conference call.


Passage number 2.
 Sbordone, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of the Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call on October 15, 2010 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, everybody, for joining us on a Friday afternoon.  This was a hard meeting to schedule, and this seemed to be the only time that worked, so I apologize for any inconvenience.  We’ve told everyone we are going to try to finish by 5:30, and, depending on how things go, perhaps we can do better than that.  Is President Plosser on the line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement of gratitude and an apology for inconveniences.


Passage number 3.
 MS. DANKER.  We think so, but we’ll check back later.  We have Philadelphia represented.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Danker is simply stating that they will check back later and mentioning that Philadelphia is represented.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser is on vacation.  He’ll be listening in.  As you know, he submitted a memo expressing his views, which I hope you’ve seen. A theme of our meeting in September was the possibility that we might want to modify our policy and communication framework to help provide clarity in the current situation, which is one where interest rates are essentially at the zero lower bound.  A number of you suggested starting the next FOMC meeting earlier on the first day in order to discuss this possibility further.  But it seemed to me that the topic was big enough that we might have questions and want the staff to go back and look at various issues.  So I thought it made sense to meet in advance of the regular meeting, which would give the staff and the Committee time to consider whatever comes out of this discussion.  Depending on how things go today, I’m prepared to schedule additional time in November as well, but I’d like to see what kind of progress we can make today.  Again, our focus today is our monetary policy framework and the associated communication issues.  The staff has also done some work on tools, which is a somewhat separable issue, though not entirely. As Debbie’s memo indicated, my hope is that we can leave discussions of the current economic outlook and policy situation to the regular meeting in November and focus as much as possible today on the framework issues.  I’m sure people won’t be shy about talking about theseissues, but I want to reassure you that anything you say does not commit you to any particular policy position in November. I’d like to structure the meeting as follows.  In a moment, we’ll start with a presentation by Board staff, followed by Q&A.  Then we’ll have a go-round of participants to get your feedback on those presentations as well as on the material you received that was prepared both by the Board and by a few Reserve Banks.  I don’t anticipate having any votes or final decisions today—this meeting is really just for information-gathering and getting initial impressions.  That being said, as Debbie properly indicated, this is a meeting, not a briefing, in that we would expect you to make comments relevant to policy.  I’m not going to ask for presentations from the authors of the two Reserve Bank memos, but, certainly, if you have questions for them, or if you would like to refer to their work in your own discussion, that’s obviously appropriate. Before we get into the main content of our meeting, I did want to ask your assent to add another item to the agenda of the November 2 and 3 meeting on the subject of external communications by both participants and staff of the FOMC.  Just to give you a bit of advance notice, let me tell you a couple of things I’m concerned about and would like to talk about at more length.  First, I was very disappointed, as I know many of you were, to see a few months ago some stories in the press that showed access to considerable inside information, including quotes of what people said at FOMC meetings, staff materials, and the like.  I did circulate a memo on this problem, but we never discussed it as a group.  I think it might be worthwhile to have some discussion of those kinds of issues collectively.  Second, I think many of you also saw a Reuters article that suggested—and I don’t know if this is true or not—that there may be leaks to non-media outsiders, including market participants, former officials, consultants, and others, some of whom stand to make money by their inside access either to participants or to staff.  If this is in fact true, it’sobviously a serious problem and one that could even have legal consequences.  So I think we need to discuss that issue as well at the November 2 meeting. A third and final issue that I’d like to include in that item on the agenda for November is not really a security issue, but it does concern me, in any case.  I perceive an increasing tendency of FOMC participants to stake out strong policy positions in advance of our meetings.  Now, it’s perfectly fine for people to give their own views, and that has been a long-standing tradition; but I think that it has also been our tradition that when participants express their individual views, they do so in a way that emphasizes the collegiality of our process, the consensus nature of our process, and the fact that our decisions are made collectively in the FOMC.  If everybody has already made up their mind before the meeting, why don’t we just phone in the votes and save ourselves the travel.  This idea of trying to maintain at least some plausible deniability and some reference to the Committee’s prerogative to make decisions is in the memorandum that Michelle put together and that all participants receive when they join.  You can review that for your reference, if you’d like.  Now, we may decide that this implicit contract, if there is one, has become outdated.  In any event, it does strike me that, although it’s good for people to know what our views are and for us to air differences and so on, the public may perceive the Committee to be more fractured than it, in fact, is, and that clarity and communication may suffer as a result. This issue is really a subjective one, and it may or may not warrant any further action.  The other two issues, though, obviously raise security issues, and we need to make sure we’re comfortable with how things are going.  I will want to raise with you on November 2 the possibility that we might, for example, appoint a small subcommittee to look into strengthening our rules or strengthening our procedures to make sure that we have adequate confidentiality.  I don’t want to discuss these issues now, but I wanted to get your assent to put this on the agenda for, say,45 minutes—not too much time, I hope—at the beginning of our next meeting.  Will that be acceptable to the Committee.  I’m seeing nods.  Okay, we will begin our discussion next time with some of these communication issues.  Thank you for that. I will now turn back to the main subject of our meeting, which is the policy framework, communication, and tools.  To repeat, you received two memos from the Board, one on the framework, one on policy tools.  Let me turn first to Michael Kiley, who will give a short presentation.  Mike Leahy will then present material on tools, and then we’ll have Q&A from the Committee.  Michael.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 5.
 MR. KILEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One of the background notes sent to the Committee earlier this week discussed issues related to the possible adoption of a new policy framework, including the specification of objectives, tools, strategy, and communications. With regard to the specification of objectives, the memo highlighted three approaches, each of which includes a summary of the FOMC’s interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote “maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Under the qualitative mandate approach, the FOMC statement would provide a qualitative assessment of current inflation and unemployment in light of the Committee’s statutory objectives.  It would also indicate whether employment and inflation are expected to converge toward the Committee’s longer-run goals at an acceptable rate without further policy action in the near future.  Such an approach would not require much change in the FOMC’s decisionmaking process, but it also might not deliver much additional clarity about the Committee’s objectives and its plans for achieving them. Under the second approach, the statement would include an explicit numerical inflation objective.  An explicit inflation objective could help keep inflation expectations well anchored by increasing the public’s confidence that the Federal Reserve will keep inflation close to its objective and, thus, could allow the Committee greater flexibility to put in place more stimulus in the near term.  To avoid the misperception that the FOMC was downweighting its statutory mandate to promote maximum employment, the statement also would summarize participants’ views about the longer-run sustainable rate of unemployment.  Participants’ estimates of the sustainable rate of unemployment could be drawn from the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), provided the Committee were willing to interpret its long-term projections in that way; the inflation objective also could be taken from the SEP, or the Committee could periodically vote on its inflation goal.Under the third approach, the statement would provide an explicit target path for the price level along with a summary of participants’ judgments about the longer-run sustainable unemployment rate.  A target path for the price level could aim to raise inflation temporarily above the Committee’s longer-term desired rate to compensate for inflation having previously fallen short of that rate.  For example, if the target path starts in late 2007 and rises at an annual rate of 2 percent, then moderately higher inflation of around 2½ percent for three years would be sufficient to bring the PCE price index back up to the target.  In theory, price level targeting would lead inflation expectations to adjust in ways that help stabilize the economy, but how it would perform in practice is an open question, given that no country has recently used this approach. Under any of these options, the Committee might also wish to reconsider its strategy for adjusting its policy stance.  The Committee has made substantial adjustments to its large-scale asset holdings on only three occasions:  November 2008, March 2009, and August 2010.  Taken together, these choices may have suggested to the public that the Committee prefers large and infrequent adjustments to the SOMA portfolio.  Such an approach has possible benefits, including potentially eliciting more sizable macroeconomic responses and clarifying the FOMC’s intentions for the size of the balance sheet for longer stretches of time.  Large, infrequent policy actions also may have costs.  Because policy actions would be triggered only by large shifts in the outlook, the approach may prove insufficiently responsive to a gradual accumulation of “bad” or “good” news.  In addition, such actions could increase economic volatility because the effects of large portfolio shifts may prove to be different from what the Committee intended.  Finally, the Committee may judge that its experience with this approach has underlined the difficulty of explaining infrequent policy adjustments. Alternatively, the FOMC could adopt a strategy of making more frequent and (typically) smaller policy adjustments.  This approach might better calibrate policy to incremental changes in the outlook.  It also may reassure the public that policy will be adjusted more promptly, thereby helping to keep the economy on track through better management of expectations.  Finally, it would allow the Committee to initiate incremental sales in response to improvements in the economic outlook, if desired. The background note also highlighted how a strategy for adjusting the SOMA portfolio (or alternative instruments) more frequently could be informed by quantitative benchmarks.  Such benchmarks are familiar in the context of the target federal funds rate, and the note illustrated several points regarding “rule-based” or “optimal-control-based” policy prescriptions for the SOMA portfolio.  First, benchmarks that embed a moderate sensitivity to gaps between current inflation and employment from their objectives would not necessarily prescribe additional stimulus at this time.  Second, more activist rules would imply more stimulus, potentially substantially more, and hence would push inflation and activity toward their objectives more quickly.  And finally, strategies that involve credible forward guidance that policy will likely remain accommodative for a sustained period of time,as is assumed in the optimal control simulation, are particularly effective because of their impact on expectations. Indeed, the importance of managing expectations under all the possible specifications of objectives and strategies implies that the Committee’s communications may need to evolve in conjunction with any change to the policy framework.  To illustrate how this might be done, the background note presented three draft statements, reflecting hypothetical decisions regarding objectives and the magnitude and timing of policy adjustments; the draft statements also emphasized the potential role of guidance regarding possible future balance sheet actions. To facilitate its communication, the Committee might also consider enhancing the SEP to include information about participants’ assessments of the appropriate path of policy, potentially with regard to both the funds rate and the balance sheet.  Such a step, coupled with the announcement of an explicit inflation objective and quantitative information about the long-run sustainable unemployment rate, might be particularly effective because the policy projections would help the public understand how the Committee intends to set policy to foster its objectives over time.  The Monetary Policy Report might also shift in emphasis with a change in the policy framework, providing information on the Committee’s assessment of the outlook relative to its objectives and on the role played by policy in that outlook. Finally, a number of major central banks, such as the ECB and the Bank of Japan, regularly use press conferences as part of their communication policies.  Post-FOMC press conferences could offer an opportunity for the Chairman to inform the public about the Committee’s decisions in more detail.  If the Committee decided to adopt a new quantitative framework, participants may wish to consider this possibility.  That concludes my remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply discussing different approaches and options for specifying objectives and adjusting policy stance.


Passage number 6.
 MR. LEAHY.  The second note we prepared for this meeting, “Strategies for Targeting Interest Rates out the Yield Curve,” examines ways to provide additional monetary stimulus through targeting or capping market interest rates.  It looks at three possible approaches that would use outright purchases of Treasury securities to achieve interest rate targets.  These three vary chiefly in terms of how far out the yield curve they seek to target rates.  They also offer different combinations of expected benefits that might be achieved in terms of economic stimulus and risks to the Federal Reserve balance sheet.  Other variations and approaches are possible, of course; we briefly consider one of those, the use of options, at the end of the note. One approach to targeting interest rates that we discuss, the policy-signaling approach, seeks to cap at low levels interest rates on all Treasury securities that mature during the period over which the Committee expects to keep the federal funds rate near zero.  For example, under this approach, the FOMC might seek to target interest rates at, say, 25 basis points for all Treasuries that mature on or before June 2014, or whatever other date the Committee anticipated would be the liftoff date for the federal funds rate.  This approach is self-extinguishing in the sense that, if monetary policy unfolds as anticipated, the range of targeted interest rates shortenswith the passage of time, terminating just as the Committee anticipates that it would begin raising its target for the federal funds rate.  The approach might be used if the Committee sought to clarify its expectations regarding the “extended period” over which the federal funds rate was likely to be at an exceptionally low level. The second approach described in the note, the incremental approach, begins with setting interest rate targets at the short end of the yield curve and moves out in steps at the discretion of the Committee.  The first step of this approach might be to set a cap of 25 basis points for interest rates on Treasury securities that mature on or before October 2012, the maturity date of the current two-year note.  As the targeted rates decline in response to the policy, rates on Treasuries further out the yield curve should also move lower.  If the effects on the yield curve and the economy were seen as sufficient, no further steps need be taken.  If the effects were seen as desirable but insufficient, the horizon of targeting operations could be extended.  Like the policy-signaling approach, this approach terminates with the passage of time. Like the policy-signaling approach, the objective of the incremental approach is to cap rates on Treasuries at low levels.  However, the intent under the incremental approach is not to signal the length of the “extended period.”  This approach might be preferred if the Committee feels more comfortable setting explicit targets for near-term rates, and moving incrementally may be viewed as a prudent way to discover how far out the yield curve targeting operations would need to occur to achieve the desired effect on the economy. The third approach described in the note is that of targeting a longer-term Treasury yield.  For example, the FOMC could announce a cap that is 100 basis points below the current yield on the 10-year Treasury security.  The Committee might prefer this approach if it believes that targeting longer-term interest rates is likely to stimulate economic activity more directly than targeting short- and intermediate-term rates.  Unlike the other approaches discussed, the expiration date of this approach is not tied to the maturity of the assets targeted. All three approaches work to lower yields through two channels:  the signals they send about the expected path of the federal funds rate and the compression of term premiums.  The policy-signaling approach would deliver the most explicit signal about expected future short rates, although the other two approaches might also influence expectations about the Federal Reserve’s commitment to low interest rates.  To the extent that such signaling shifts expectations, the increase in the size of the SOMA portfolio needed to keep rates near the desired targets can be smaller.  Term premium effects may be largest in the case of long-term interest rate targets, where the scope to lower term premiums is the greatest. The three approaches offer a range of benefits and risks.  A key benefit of targeting a long-term interest rate stems from its capacity to affect directly the part of the yield curve most likely to influence economic activity.  The incremental approach is likely to be weakest in its ability to influence long-term rates, at least initially.  The policy-signaling approach might influence longer-term interest rates significantly if itprompts an adjustment of the expected future path of short rates, which may work to lower a broad range of interest rates across the yield curve. The balance sheet risks associated with each of these policies are lowest for the incremental and policy-signaling approaches and highest for the policy of targeting long-term yields.  The differences reflect the maturities of the securities likely to be purchased under each program.  The note discusses ways to mitigate balance sheet risks, all of which involve limiting the degree to which interest rates are controlled.  However, none of these means eliminates balance sheet risk entirely. Finally, the note offers a few thoughts about the possibility of selling put options on Treasury securities.  The Federal Reserve could impose an interest rate target by selling options with a strike price consistent with the target.  Moreover, by aligning financial consequences with rate objectives, selling options could reinforce and clarify the Federal Reserve’s communications about interest rate targets and the expected path of the federal funds rate.  Selling options also withdraws risk from the market, which should reduce term premiums and so reduce interest rates via that channel as well.  Against these benefits, there are balance sheet risks related to uncertainty about the quantity of options needed to achieve a measurable effect in markets and about the extent to which options sold would be exercised.  The use of options could also pose communications and operational challenges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different approaches to targeting interest rates and discusses their benefits and risks.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much for those summaries.  Are there any questions for presenters.  [No response.]  Everybody has fully assimilated the material.  [No response.]  All right, seeing no questions, we can turn to a go-round.  Again, you were given some suggested questions to address, but, of course, you are free to talk about whatever you’d like.  One point I would like to make is that the decisions we make at the coming meeting or subsequently about our framework will probably be with us for a while, so we need to think about how they will work not only immediately but also at other stages of our policy cycle.  Let me begin with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage mainly consists of statements and instructions, without any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 8.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll try to be brief in answering the questions you asked.1  In terms of specifying the objectives, I find myself between option 1 and option 2.  In some respects, I view option 2 as a concrete version of option 1.  I think many observers already view our longer-run goals for inflation as a target, so we currently operate with  1 A list of the questions addressed by meeting participants is attached to this transcript (appendix 1). what amounts to a fuzzy target.  There are certain advantages to speaking with one voice on where we expect to go with both inflation and unemployment, so I’d lean a bit more towards option 2 than option 1, but I could be comfortable with either of those two. I think price level targeting is an interesting proposal and has some advantages, but, at least for now, I think it has some challenges as well.  I’ll just highlight three issues that I’d want to think hard about if we were going to move in that direction.  First is the challenge of communicating; I think we need to make sure that we really believe we can communicate the concepts in a clear way, not only to economists but also to other people who matter.  Second, I do have some questions about our ability to bind future FOMC members to whatever path we get started on.  Third, I’m a little concerned about how easily we can bring inflation down once we get to that point. In terms of the LSAPs, I am in favor of doing more.  Actually, I’d be open to doing mortgage-backed securities or possibly even investigating whether SBA loans could also be used for purchases.  I know that market is relatively small, but it would signal that we are interested in credit availability more generally.  If we decide that we are focusing on Treasuries, I don’t think it makes too much of a difference which of the long-term maturities we choose to do, since we will be taking duration out of the long end of the market.  But I do have a preference for focusing on rates rather than quantities.  If we don’t go the route of fixing rates, I would prefer to do the purchases in medium-sized amounts; that is, I would not want to be fine-tuning the amounts.  I wouldn’t want to go much smaller than purchases of $500 billion.  That seems like an amount that could have a material effect, and, hopefully, we wouldn’t have to change it in a very high-frequency way.  It would highlight that this is an unconventional policy, and we’d want to see what the effects are.  But I think that, if we try to fine-tune things with very small amounts, we might see relatively littleeffect, and it might actually undermine some of the goals that we’re trying to achieve in terms of getting interest rates to move. Regarding the suggestion of a postmeeting press conference, I think that might be a good idea—that’s easy for me to say, because you’d be the one doing the press conference, not me.  If you were willing to do it, I do think there are some advantages to providing a little more clarity to what was discussed at the meeting; furthermore, it dovetails with some of the concerns about interpretations of what came out of the meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own view and preferences on various topics, but there is no explicit disagreement with other speakers or participants.


Passage number 9.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead, Eric, sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any information that would suggest contention or disagreement. It simply instructs Eric to proceed with whatever he was about to do.


Passage number 10.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Can you still hear me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: and is the connection clear?


Passage number 11.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, we can hear you now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 12.
 MS. DANKER.  President Plosser.  If you could drop off, President Plosser, that would be great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks President Plosser to drop off.


Passage number 13.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Am I back on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging their return to the conversation.


Passage number 14.
 MS. DANKER.  We’ll keep our fingers crossed.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 15.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I’m about to conclude anyway.  In terms of interest rates, if we were to go the route of targeting, I would prefer to work in the area where we thought we would have the biggest impact, so I’d prefer to be at the long end of the market, not the short end of the market.  Finally, I think we need to get more clarity on some of the options before we worry too much about communication strategy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

In this passage, Mr. Rosengren is expressing his preference and opinion on interest rates and communication strategy. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Charlie, if that feedback happens again, you might have to go off.  Okay.  It’s quiet, anyway.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The conversation appears to be polite and straightforward.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 18.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It solely expresses gratitude from the speaker, President Evans.


Passage number 19.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ve stated my views at previous meetings, so perhaps I can keep my remarks today brief. We should adopt a framework that will last throughout the current period, which I think of as a liquidity trap.  That probably means it should last until the unemployment rate is in the 6 to 6½ percent range.  I think a new framework can help a lot.  I think it could help today.  I think it’s risky to remain complacent about the current situation, but I won’t go into that too much today.  We could use this framework to help increase accommodation soon.  I believe being explicit about ourdual mandate objectives is always preferred.  But given our current situation, I would say it’s as important now as ever.  Therefore, on question 1, I continue to prefer option 3, a state-contingent price-level objective; for maximum effectiveness in hitting both elements of our dual mandate, we would target a specified price level.  Once we reach that price level, we would clearly revert to a 2 percent inflation target, in which future misses on either side of 2 percent would be bygones—that would be option 2.  I know this is viewed as a communications challenge.  I’ve found that, at least among academics who hear about this, they seem to get it pretty quickly.  I think we could work hard and regularly to enhance understanding of it among the public.  I won’t downplay the challenge, but I think it’s doable.  If we were to adopt option 2, we’d leave open the possibility of choosing option 3—price-level targeting—next year if the situation continues to be unsatisfactory.  I’d be concerned that we’d have to do that. Turning to questions 2 and 3, we need to construct additional policy actions to be consistent with the chosen framework.  I think we should start with more LSAPs.  I’m not sure I appropriately grasp the distinctions between “shock and awe” and a flexible approach.  Let me just describe my preference.  I would prefer to start with a total volume of asset purchases calibrated to be on the order of a 100 basis point cut in the funds rate.  Using the staff’s rule of thumb, this would be about $700 billion.  I’d announce the overall level of purchases now and say that they would be expected to be completed by May 2011.  Then, we’d review events at each meeting.  We’d want to take some time to see how the overall purchase announcements affect the economy.  As we get closer to the May 2011 completion, we’d begin to comment on any further actions that would be necessary. This would be difficult for everybody to understand.  But if we have a framework that indicates very clearly what our objectives are, that would help a lot—for example, if we had a price-level target, or even an inflation target at 2 percent, or whatever number was agreeable, thatwould be helpful.  That would provide forward guidance about what our future actions are likely to be and presumably about the LSAP path.  I don’t think option 1 would help us at all in that regard—it would make it more difficult. For question number 4, I think the statements are good structures.  Statement 3 is the closest to the option that I prefer; I think it needs slight wording edits, but I won’t go into that now.  I think the language on the dual mandate is important as long as it is our legislated mandate.  I don’t know how we get around that. Finally, I acknowledge that communicating what we’re doing will be challenging, but I don’t think it’s impossible.  I would suggest some kind of press conference following the announcement as long as we have a framework, and you, Mr. Chairman, could clearly state what the sense of the Committee was and that it was relatively narrow—that is, not too divergent.  I think a framework would help.  I think speeches can help, as can technical reports.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their views and preferences on various options and strategies.


Passage number 20.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much, and my apologies to you and Eric for taking you away from the conference in Boston.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is expressing gratitude and apologizing for any inconvenience caused.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 21.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, applaud all the staff’s work.  I think it was a great idea to work hard at this juncture to try to move towards some coherent change in the framework around our monetary policy actions. I’m very sympathetic to the idea of a mandate-consistent inflation objective, and I think that putting the objective in the statement or in our communications, as in statement 2, could really help.  We were on the verge of adopting a numerical objective for inflation four and a half years ago.  Events intervened, so it would be great to find a good opportunity to get back to that and to cross the line to making it explicit.I’m against a price-level target at this time.  I think it’s sort of complicated.  I think it’s hard to communicate, and it’s hard to prevent secondary accounts that would boil our decision down to a statement of, “Well, they want to increase inflation for a couple of years.”  I think that’s inevitably going to be the headline version of how a price-level target would be communicated.  Also, it would look sort of opportunistic, and it would convey a sense that we have a regime where we move our near-term inflation rate target around a lot, and I think that would be detrimental to our credibility. As for putting some numerical information about an unemployment rate in a public communication of ours, I strongly object.  I don’t think we’re ready for that, I don’t think it’s a good idea, and I think it’s dangerous for some of the reasons that Presidents Bullard and Kocherlakota have articulated.  I think that, even with the qualifications that you articulated this morning in your speech, Mr. Chairman, and that are in the statement, it would inevitably be viewed as a target equal in stature and importance to our inflation target but somewhat above the “moderate long-term interest rate” objective that is part of our mandate as well.  I think that the language that’s in the proposed statement about the unemployment rate is confusing and potentially highly misleading in very dangerous ways.  It describes it as “sustainable in the longer term.”  When I think about “sustainable” inflation rates—that’s where we use the term, after all—I think of a longer-run average inflation rate.  Yet I don’t think people think of this unemployment rate, 5 to 5¼, as the longer-run average unemployment rate.  I think what you have in mind is full employment—the language that was used in the 1963 Economic Report of the President.  From the data, it doesn’t look as if it’s going to be easy for us to sustain an unemployment rate of 5 percent—the unemployment rate gets down there, but in recessions it goes up again.  It’s also not clear to me that we need to talk about the unemployment rate in our statement.  Our mandate says “maximum employment” after all.  A lot of other things go into the unemployment rate, as others have noted.Let me take a crack at articulating something I tried to convey at our last meeting.  This notion of a sustainable longer-run inflation rate seems to me to be motivated by the NAIRU idea; that is, the NAIRU is a latent variable to which the unemployment rate returns, and it’s slow moving—maybe it responds to demographic factors or productivity growth or the like, but it does so only over long time horizons and in a smooth and gradual way.  But I think it’s important to recognize that this slow-moving characteristic is an assumption that’s imposed on the model—maybe there are some technological assumptions that lead to it—and it’s not verifiable or testable within that framework, because it’s a latent variable. If you relax that assumption, as the New Keynesian Phillips curve models do—the ones built on preferences, endowments, and technologies—you find that this latent variable, the NAIRU, responds to all the shocks that affect business cycle fluctuations in output and inflation.  What’s important to recognize is that there’s a bunch of theory built into the way the NAIRU has been constructed, and it is theory that is very, very open to debate, and I don’t think we’ve seen enough by way of staff analysis of alternative approaches.  The approach built into this NAIRU idea is one that goes back to Samuelson and Solow and to the models that, I think, got us into trouble in the 1970s.  I thought the debate about this was sort of settled in the 1980s, so I’m surprised that it lingers for so long in our thinking.  As I said, I think this is a somewhat dangerous and misleading idea, because it’s going to lead people to believe that we need to reduce the unemployment rate rapidly to its longer-run sustainable rate.  I don’t think it’s going to be easy to communicate the sense that that’s something that we don’t expect to be able to get to for four or five years. Let me emphasize that, for me, this isn’t a matter of not caring about unemployment.  I think unemployment is a problem.  But I’m with President Bullard on this—and I think it’s the consensus in the field—namely, that our best contribution is to keep inflation fluctuating around a level that’slow and stable.  Inevitably, there’s theorizing when you make the transition from economic models that allow you to evaluate the well-being of people to a reduced form, such as thinking of policy as pursuing an objective of low inflation and unemployment.  I’m not against theorizing, and I’m not against basing what we do on some theory.  But we ought to be explicit about it and put our cards on the table.  I don’t think we’ve had enough time to do that, and I don’t think the staff is focused on that step of the movement from maximizing welfare to the point where we say, “All right, here’s how we’re going to operationalize the mandate Congress has given us.” My preference would be to leave any numerical discussion of the unemployment rate to the SEP, as we do now.  I found myself drawn to the idea of an option that wasn’t on the table—you might call it 1.5—where we’re explicit about our inflation rate but not numerically explicit about the unemployment rate.  If being explicit about our inflation rate is something that needs to be held hostage to being explicit about the unemployment rate, then I’m with President Kocherlakota and say that we just ought to defer that step for the time being and communicate about inflation as we do now.  After all, we’re very, very close to having articulated the target rate as 2 percent or a little under that. On LSAPs, I agree with President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention. The speaker is in favor of a mandate-consistent inflation objective and against a price-level target. They also strongly object to putting numerical information about the unemployment rate in a public communication. They disagree with the idea of the NAIRU and believe that the staff has not done enough analysis of alternative approaches. They argue that the focus should be on keeping inflation low and stable rather than reducing unemployment rapidly. They also express a preference for leaving numerical discussions of the unemployment rate to the SEP.


Passage number 22.
  Let’s drop the L or else add an MSAP to our arsenal.  If more accommodation is needed, the arguments President Kocherlakota articulated are quite persuasive to me.  I think it depends on what we’re worried about and what we’re trying to achieve.  If we’re worried about preventing a deflationary spiral, then the size of our balance sheet in the next couple of months is probably much less important than what people believe about the future path, and, in this case, the far future path, of our policy.  In the model where people are forward-looking and we have perfect credibility, it’s sufficient to convince people that we will not let the money supply decline in a way that’s consistent with deflation, at least relative to how thedemand for money evolves.  I’ve always viewed quantitative easing as operating at least as importantly through the channel of convincing people that we’re focused on the quantity of money and not going to let it decline, as through the portfolio balance mechanics that the staff has spent so much time quantifying.  If we do go down the path of asset purchases, I do like the idea of the type of small-scale program that President Bullard outlined.  I think that has the advantage of conveying that we’re engaged in more rule-like behavior, that is, that we’re engaged in a consistent pattern of behavior, rather than acting on our own discretion and moving opportunistically. I’ve sort of expressed my preference about the proposed statements.  I do like the idea of press conferences—I think you’d be great at it, Mr. Chairman.  I do not think we’re ready at this time for other social media, like Twitter or Facebook, for communicating our monetary policy, but maybe down the road we’d want to consider it.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and preferences without contradicting or challenging anyone else's ideas.


Passage number 23.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Rates up”—under 140 characters.  [Laughter]  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments. It is a quoted statement followed by laughter, suggesting a light-hearted or humorous interaction.


Passage number 24.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to commend the staff for putting together a very useful set of materials and questions to guide our discussion today about a new policy framework.  I favor adopting an inflation objective as described in the second option in the staff memo.  An explicit inflation objective would provide us with more flexibility to achieve our dual mandate, and I think it would be helpful in anchoring inflation expectations around our objective.  Option 1 leaves our inflation objective too vague, and, in the case of option 3, I am not sure we could effectively communicate about the transition to and from a price-level target.  Additionally, the memo that I circulated suggests that a price-level target could result in a fairly large overshoot, which could complicate the management of inflation expectations.While I support specifying an inflation objective, like others, I would prefer that we not provide quantitative information about maximum employment.  As others have already noted, measures of the natural rate of unemployment are not observable, they are subject to various conceptual differences, and they pose considerable measurement challenges.  Putting greater emphasis on our employment objective, I think, also creates some additional policy risks; for example, it is fairly typical to begin a tightening cycle even when the unemployment rate is high, because the unemployment rate tends to be a lagging indicator.  I think we should, instead, argue that the two mandates are generally complementary and that maintaining stable inflation helps to promote maximum employment over the long run. Although I favor option 2, a number of important issues still need to be resolved.  I found the contingent policy approach in option 3 attractive, but, as I said, I personally find the price-level target a bit too aggressive.  I would advocate a state-contingent action based on medium-term inflation objectives rather than a price-level path.  The statement could provide forward guidance by linking the removal of accommodation to exceeding a pre-stated inflation threshold.  I think this approach would clarify what we are committed to achieving over the next several years.  This approach would most likely lead to some overshoot in inflation rates, as price-level targeting would, but it would help to center inflation expectations around our longer-term objective or target.  We would have to determine as a Committee the specifics of how we interpret our inflation objective.  Is it an annual objective as measured by core PCE.  Do we need to center inflation around the target, as the Bank of England does.  Or do we want to set an upper bound, more like the ECB.  We have discussed these issues before, so I think it is feasible that we could agree on an approach to a numerical objective for inflation at our November meeting.Turning to questions 2 and 3, if additional accommodation is necessary for the timely achievement of our dual mandate, I would support additional asset purchases.  I would prefer large, discrete adjustments, consistent with those that are proposed in the draft statements.  We have had experience with this approach, and I have some confidence that it would be sufficiently reliable.  However, I think that the uncertainties around the effects of purchases make trying to formulate a rule to calibrate them somewhat problematic.  On question 4, I certainly find draft statement 2 an effective statement structure, particularly if we leave the numerical unemployment rate out of the statement.  A version of statement 2 would be enhanced if we provided some supplementary information and media communications, such as a press conference.  Obviously, these remain challenging times, and I believe that clarity in our framework will aid in setting monetary policy, both now and once the economy is on a more sustainable recovery path. Let me close with a comment on setting precedents.  As we move forward with our work, I think we should recognize that some of the steps that we are contemplating are intended to be temporary, while we may want to make others more permanent.  So, if possible, I think we should try to identify these issues before we move forward with a new policy framework.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their opinions and preferences, but there is no indication of any argument or disagreement with others.


Passage number 25.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" followed by "President Hoenig" indicates gratitude or appreciation towards President Hoenig.


Passage number 26.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  

Explanation: The passage contains a polite expression of gratitude towards President Lockhart, but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me add my thanks to the staff for their excellent preparation of materials for the meeting.  In my comments, I’m going to express, at a fairly high level, what I favor and am sympathetic to versus what I’m skeptical about. At this point, I favor an explicit inflation objective.  I could see it as possibly a step in the direction of a price level objective, with which I have some sympathy, but, at this point, I think it’s best to stay with an inflation objective.  I do think it’s timely to introduce an inflation objective.  I believe it would shore up concerns about the growth of the balance sheet in the event that we doimplement new LSAP programs.  As I said, I am sympathetic to price-level targeting, but I think the public needs much more preparation to understand that and to be able to factor it into expectations. I am very concerned and very skeptical about quantitative guidance related to the unemployment rate.  As I think President Lacker said, I think this would be construed as a target, and one where we have little if any flexibility.  I’m not clear how useful the concept of a longer-run unemployment rate is.  As regards communication, because I’m skeptical about this, my skepticism also applies to draft statements 2 and 3.  Again, President Lacker said something that I had considered:  Although it wasn’t in the staff’s materials, I wonder if the statement could combine a quantitative inflation target with some fortified qualitative treatment of unemployment.  That might produce a satisfactory model for the statement. I do favor additional LSAPs at this time.  For my part, it would be preferable to do so with an inflation objective, but, if necessary, we could do so without.  I think LSAPs will have some positive effect through a variety of channels. I’m skeptical at this stage about interest-rate targeting.  But if we go there, I would prefer a 10-year Treasury rate option.  I see that as almost a benchmark for the curve in the minds of market participants in many respects. Regarding the method of adjusting policy, I favor the smaller, more continuous approach.  I think we can do the same kind of thing with LSAP adjustments that we have done with the federal funds rate:  We can accustom the markets to small, discrete, incremental adjustments.  I do think it’s important to introduce conditionality or state-contingency, which I think will help with communication.  We can manage the communication and the market reaction to some extent by assessing the program at each meeting and trying to communicate that assessment as clearly as possible.  I think we are best served by estimating the cumulative size of the LSAP, announcing thisas the size, and then treating this number as the most likely outcome, barring any clear evidence that conditions have changed enough to alter the stated direction. As regards communication issues, I don’t have a lot of comments today.  As I said, I think it’s important that we make clear the conditionality of an LSAP as well as the notion that it goes both ways.  I favor the idea of the Chairman conducting press conferences, particularly to explain any regime change that comes out of these meetings. I do want to bring up a question that I thought was close to being on the table a few months ago, which may seem in some respects a digression at this stage.  I think at that point we were at least beginning to entertain the idea of introducing some treatment of interest on reserves in our communication and in our statement.  I think at some stage in the future, during an exit period or even earlier, that might serve us.  I raise this issue because, if we’re going to make substantial changes in how we communicate, or if we’re going to try to socialize a new approach to monetary policy, this might be the time to introduce more treatment of interest on reserves.  Those are my thoughts at this stage.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

There is contention and disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses favor and sympathy towards certain ideas (explicit inflation objective, price-level targeting) but also skepticism and concern towards others (quantitative guidance on unemployment rate, interest-rate targeting). The speaker also suggests different approaches (combining quantitative inflation target with fortified qualitative treatment of unemployment, conducting press conferences) which indicate disagreement or difference of opinion.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, President Lockhart.  First Vice President Moore from San Francisco.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude followed by an introduction.


Passage number 29.
 MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We had a Board meeting yesterday, and during the discussion, one of our Directors was talking about the use of temporary employees.  He turned to me and asked if I knew the ratio of permanent status employees to temporary employees in the Federal Reserve.  I told him I didn’t know the answer for the System as a whole, but I did for the FOMC, and the ratio is 17 to 1.  And as that one temp on the FOMC at this moment, I will limit my comments to the specific questions that have been posed.First, regarding the description of our objectives for monetary policy as they relate to price stability, I see benefits to going with option 2, the explicit numerical inflation objective.  I regularly hear from our directors and other business contacts about all of the uncertainty they face, especially stemming from the government sector, in which they tend to include us.  So it seems to me that, at the margin, one thing we could do to help matters a bit is to add more clarity, especially if it could help dispel fears about deflation.  I’d be inclined to do this in as clear and straightforward a manner as possible, with the Committee ideally arriving at and communicating a single number rather than a range. Communicating the Committee’s views on what constitutes maximum employment seems to me to be a far more challenging question, because this number changes over time and because there’s such a wide divergence in views.  Although FOMC participants seem to be in some rough agreement about their unemployment rate forecasts five to six years from now, there’s much less agreement about the current full employment benchmark.  This communication, therefore, may be best left to the description of the projections.  However, at this juncture, we also think it’s important not to give the appearance of giving less weight to our employment objective. Turning to the second question, I think the LSAPs have done their job at getting borrowing rates down, and I would favor additional purchases if needed.  I’m also open to other policy tools as well, especially clear communication of the conditions under which the Committee will raise rates, which can complement and reinforce our other policy actions. On the subject of communication, I would make one observation that hasn’t been brought up today, and that is that I think it would also be desirable to be explicit to the Congress about the possibility of losses at some point in the future.  The implication of a bigger balance sheet with a longer duration may not be well understood by the Congress and the broader public and may be thesource of reputational risk for the System if we are successful enough with our policy moves to require a fairly quick exit down the road.  It seems to me that the most favorable time to get this point across is when our policies are yielding substantial earnings for the Treasury rather than when the opposite could occur. The answer to the third question of how to adjust the level of LSAPs is less clear in my mind.  It appears that it is the stock of these assets that affects rates and, thereby, the economy.  So it makes sense to me that in our first communication we would announce the maximum amount of the stock that we are highly confident we will need to add, and then we would make it clear that, beyond that, we will be adjusting depending on how events unfold.  So I guess I fall into the “large and discrete” camp for the first adjustment, but I’m more open to how we would handle subsequent adjustments if they are needed. Overall, I thought the draft statements presented a good set of alternatives.  If we think the initial announcement amount is probably not going to do the trick entirely, I would recommend language that conveys the likely direction of future policy moves.  This is accomplished in the second and fourth alternatives in paragraph 5 of draft statement number 1, where it says, “The Committee is prepared to expand its security holdings as necessary.” And, finally, it would be helpful to have a special description of the Committee’s discussion and agreement on a numerical inflation objective in the minutes.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much, and very good temporary work there.  [Laughter]  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is expressing gratitude and positive feedback, as indicated by the phrase "thank you very much" and the laughter that follows. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 31.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement "Thank you. Vice Chairman" is a polite expression of gratitude and acknowledgement, without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a polite expression of gratitude and a mention of Governor Yellen, but there is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 33.
MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to express my appreciation for the excellent memos, including those from Cleveland and Dallas.  Let me take the questions in order.  On question 1, my preference is for option 2.  I would make the Committee’s objective for inflation and our assessment of the unemployment rate corresponding to maximum employment quantitative and explicit.  I think this would improve the public’s understanding of our goals, helping to combat any tendency that could develop for inflation expectations to decline over time, which would exacerbate the zero-bound problem and impede recovery.  It would also help contain the risk that, as our balance sheet expands, inflation expectations could become unhinged on the upside.  But if we quantify our inflation objective, I consider it essential to do so in a way that emphasizes our balanced commitment to both parts of the dual mandate.  So I see the proposed statement that also includes unemployment as a way of achieving the needed balance. Including the Committee’s quantitative assessments represents in some ways a relatively small communication step, because we already regularly publish participants’ longer-term assessments of these variables in the Summary of Economic Projections.  But taking this step is still consequential.  If we set sail in this direction, we will probably end up tying ourselves to the mast, in the sense that such numerical assessments will become a permanent feature of our communications framework. On the inflation objective, I don’t think we need to seek Committee agreement on a single specific inflation target at this point.  To say it is “about 2 percent,” or “2 percent or a bit less,” strikes me as an accurate characterization of our SEP responses.  But should a day come when our preferred longer-run inflation objectives don’t cluster in a narrow range, the Committee would have to agree on a single objective.  That would be a more significant step, I think, requiring consultation with the Congress.  While I prefer numerical objectives, I could also support the qualitative dualmandate approach embodied in statement 1.  The Committee’s objectives are already pretty well understood by markets, so they’ll probably get the message without the numbers.  I would not pursue either price level targeting or nominal GDP targeting at this time, although I understand the attractions.  The staff memo shows that, with forward-looking expectations and a high degree of credibility, a price level targeting strategy could be extremely effective.  However, these strategies entail very significant risks, so I would not pursue them at this point. Turning to question 2, which concerns the form that accommodation would take, my preference would be to provide additional policy accommodation via further purchases of longer-term securities rather than by setting interest rate targets.  There is substantial uncertainty about their effects, but I am persuaded by the staff analysis that further purchases will have a meaningful impact on aggregate demand.  And I agree with President Dudley that we are probably right now seeing the impact that such purchases would have, given the heightened market anticipation that they will occur.  Interest rate targets also have some appeal, though; and the approach described in the staff memo, where we would cap rates at the front end of the yield curve to signal our policy intentions, is a strategy I would hold in reserve if further stimulus proves necessary and if we see market expectations concerning the length of “extended period” diverge significantly from the Committee’s own views. Turning to question 3, on the method of adjustment, President Bullard has won me over to the continuous approach.  If we implement and communicate it properly, I think it will be seen by markets as an extension of our long-standing strategy for adjusting the federal funds rate.  As Jim has emphasized, it will be important to communicate a reaction function, so that markets understand how our policy moves will be calibrated to changes in the outlook.  If we succeed in communicating such a reaction function, market responses to incoming data will anticipate our eventual policyactions, thereby enhancing and speeding the transmission mechanism.  On the issue of calibration, I would choose a number like $200 billion or $250 billion as the size of our basic step, the equivalent of our 25 basis point step for changing the federal funds rate, and I would look for a way to communicate this calibration to markets.  We do sometimes move the federal funds rate by 50 basis points, or even more, so I think we should be open to this possibility if we resume purchases.  My own view is that we’re behind the curve, so a move equivalent to 50 basis points would certainly make sense to me at the outset, and I would not consider this “shock and awe.” More generally, if we pursue the continuous strategy, I think it is important for the Committee to issue some forward-looking guidance in the statement; in other words, we need to enunciate a policy bias or tilt with respect to future LSAPs, just as we have done in the past with the federal funds rate.  The market effect of our actions will depend on the entire expected path of future policy actions, and we’ll undercut the effects of our purchases if we suggest that further moves in either direction are equally likely—that is, if we convey right away that we’re at neutral when the odds instead are far more heavily weighted in one direction.  The options in paragraph 5 of draft statement 1 offer constructive suggestions for communicating such a bias.  My final point on this topic is that I think we need in every FOMC statement to state the intended size of the SOMA portfolio in addition to the time period over which we plan to reach that target.  Theory suggests it is our stock of longer-term assets, and not the flow of purchases, that matters to market yields and asset prices. Finally, turning to the fourth question, on communications, I do think the sample statements do a good job at implementing both the qualitative and inflation target approaches, and they’re good models to follow.  However, given their brevity and the novelty of a continuous LSAP approach, many questions will immediately arise about our strategy, and the three-week lag until the minutescome out is much too long to leave such uncertainties unresolved.  My preference would be for the Chairman to conduct a press briefing immediately following the announcement.  It could take the form that was used, I believe, when we moved fed funds rate down to the lower bound.  It need not be a full-blown press conference.  It could be remarks to the press that are either on the record or on background.  I think such a briefing would accomplish what we need at this stage.  A press conference does have some appeal, but it would probably become obligatory on a regular basis and would be quite a commitment for the Chairman to undertake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only consists of a polite expression of gratitude and a mention of "Governor Warsh," which does not indicate any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 35.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 36.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Beginning with the question of how we should specify our objectives, I favor option 2.  I think an interesting case was made for option 3, price-level targeting, but the communication job is going to be tricky enough without adding that as a complication.  I think the actual outcomes have a good chance of following the trajectory that this option would imply, but expressing it in this way runs the risk that we will be suspected of inflating our way to recovery. I do prefer option 2, an explicit inflation objective, along with quantitative information regarding sustainable rates of unemployment over the longer run.  I just don’t see how we can specify an inflation objective alone and not talk at all about unemployment.  I think part of the logic for choosing a framework depends on what you think you’re trying to accomplish.  If I viewed the low level of inflation as an objective to be tackled directly, and if I were choosing a tool to increase inflation and inflation expectations, I might choose price-level targeting as the strongest tool available, as the Cleveland paper indicated.  But I actually view the low level of inflation as reducing the cost of doing everything possible to attack unemployment, so I would choose a framework that amounts to a limit on how far we’re willing to go in that effort.  Therefore, setting forth numerical objectives should communicate the limits on our willingness to continue to add stimulus if inflation does emerge, and should be our actual agreement of how far we’re willing to go.Turning to the statement alternatives, I would be reluctant to put these communications into the postmeeting statement.  Having heard the debates over structural versus cyclical unemployment effects in previous meetings, I can envision a statement with dissents over the unemployment number alone.  And having been taught by Governor Tarullo to pay attention to the words in red, I took a highlighter and actually highlighted all of the items in each statement that would require agreement.  I found that statement number 1 had the fewest points of potential for disagreement.  So I moved on to the possibility of using the SEP more directly to express both these judgments as well as opinions about the proper course of policy, and that seemed like a good place for us to be quantitatively specific about the range of judgments.  The SEP would also be a place for everyone, voters and nonvoters alike, to express their views for the record.  And the readers of the minutes might finally be able to figure out how many “many” or “some” actually means.  One alternative to using the SEP or the statement could be to specify the targets in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. Finally on the subject of communication, I think the press call on background held by the Chairman the last time we changed our framework was particularly effective.  I’m not in favor of an open press conference, where the attention is as much on the questioners as on the person answering the questions, and I’m especially opposed to beginning a tradition of them. Returning to question 2, I could support additional LSAPs, though I’m still skeptical about their effectiveness, and I would prefer incremental over large announcements.  But I was most intrigued by the interest rate targeting approach and, specifically, the policy-signaling approach, as a way of calibrating and communicating our purchases.  It has the advantage of being completely different from the way we used the LSAPs the last time, so it doesn’t appear to be a more tepid use of the same tool.  It allows us to target interest rates directly, and it seems to me that certainty on therate would be more effective than certainty on quantity.  And there’s at least the chance that it requires less in purchases, and, therefore, less additional reserve creation.  Targeting the shorter end of the curve would put us in the part of the curve with the most issuance, so it would have a lower risk of disturbing market functioning, it would shorten the duration of our portfolio, something we’ve already discussed, and it would provide us with a smoother exit.  It’s not quite so targeted at longer-term rates—and I’ll talk more about this at the next meeting—but I don’t see lower rates doing much for the housing market, because I think the forces acting on the housing market are much, much different.  Furthermore, longer-term rates are already low enough to be a danger to the banks that put them on their balance sheets, so further lowering the rates on new mortgages could actually become a disincentive for one class of lenders. Finally, interest-rate targeting would be something the general public could understand.  While markets may be able to interpolate purchase quantities into a rate expectation, ordinary people cannot.  When we used to announce the fed funds rate, it meant something to people, even people who had no idea what the fed funds rate was.  If we have a strategy we can communicate in terms of interest rates, I believe that ordinary people will react to that as well.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Governor Duke.  I was a little confused about your view on the explicit numerical inflation target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards Governor Duke and stating their confusion about the governor's view on the explicit numerical inflation target.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 38.
  You said first that you liked it, but then you went on to— MS. DUKE.  I do like it, but I would like to work it into the SEP somehow rather than putting it in the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The individual speaking (MS. DUKE) indicates that they like something but would prefer it to be done in a different way. This suggests a difference of opinion or conflict about how to proceed.


Passage number 39.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Thank you, Governor Tarullo." It is simply an expression of gratitude.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 40.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to begin by underscoring something Bill Dudley said a few minutes ago, namely, that the most important thing about our structure for communication and for specifying objectives of monetary policy over the near to medium term is less about inflation targeting or price-level targeting and more about giving people a pretty clear indication of how we would make decisions subsequent to a further accommodative policy step. That actually was my initial thought—just to agree with Bill’s observation.  But having listened to many of you who preceded me, I’m now almost affirmatively of the view that it would be a bad idea to try to specify some further objective for monetary policy in the near term.  It seems to me that significant disagreements have been voiced today and that an effort to resolve those disagreements may be more difficult than actually getting ourselves onto a path where people understand why we’re making a large-scale asset purchase and what to expect about what we may do in the future.  Both Bill and Janet laid out potential paths that could be followed—though they were somewhat different, either path would allow markets to project with fair assurance how they could anticipate our reactions to subsequent market or economic developments.  I will just state that I would be opposed to enunciating any inflation target while omitting any reference to the maximum employment mandate.  I have feared for some time—a fear that has now been reinforced—that there’s a tendency to want to read the second part of the dual mandate out of the Federal Reserve Act, and I’m unalterably opposed to that.  That feels to me the way some people are conceiving of an inflation target.  I thought Richard Fisher put the point very well, and, whether or not you agree with Richard’s alternative, I think one has to be sensitive to his identification of the problem.  With respect to the second question, yes, I would favor additional LSAPs.  As a couple of people have said earlier, we do have some basis now for evaluating their efficacy.  Surely, LSAPsmight not be one of the measures that people would favor were they able to control all policy, fiscal and monetary.  But we can control only monetary policy, and we have to respond to whatever situation we find, using the tools available to us. I was inclined to say that I favor large, discrete adjustments made infrequently as opposed to smaller, more continuous adjustments made more often.  But I want to be very clear that I don’t think “shock and awe” is on the table.  I don’t think anybody is going to be shocked and awed by $500 billion, given talk and market expectations already.  I do think, for the reasons that a couple of people have stated so far, that there is merit in committing to a particular quantum, which, by my lights, would be larger rather than smaller, in order to have the maximum effect on markets.  If, as John said, stock effects have been shown to be the principal channel by which effects are transmitted to the market, then presumably you want to give as much certainty about the stock as you can at the outset. With respect to communication, I share in the broad agreement that having the Chairman communicate explicitly and reasonably quickly with the press after the FOMC meetings is a good idea.  I wouldn’t say I’m agnostic about the best form of this communication, but I don’t think we need to decide that now.  I think Kevin identified a good point, namely, that if you have Q&A that’s on the record, the opportunities for off-the-wall Qs that then dominate not just the As, but also the press conference, become pretty significant.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially agrees with Bill Dudley's observation about the importance of giving people a clear indication of how decisions would be made after a further accommodative policy step. However, after listening to previous speakers, the speaker is now almost affirmatively of the view that it would be a bad idea to specify a further objective for monetary policy in the near term. The speaker also expresses opposition to enunciating any inflation target while omitting any reference to the maximum employment mandate.


Passage number 41.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite statement of thanks directed towards Governor Raskin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 42.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As the newest Governor, and therefore the last to speak, we’re at the point where everything has already been said, but not everyone has had the chance to say it.  [Laughter]  So I will make a couple of comments.I would lean towards option 2, the explicit inflation objective, which has two virtues:  one is that it has the goal of anchoring inflation expectations, and the other is that it potentially has greater flexibility as an alternative form of stimulative policy, if credible.  If credible, I think an explicit inflation objective above the current target would raise inflation expectations, leading to a reduction in real interest rates.  As we know, an advantage of this tool is that we don’t run into the lower bound problem because real interest rates can be negative.  Credibility on this policy option is critical.  What is going to happen if there’s a divergence between the targeted inflation rate and the actual inflation rate.  Would we follow through.   For example, if we were in a situation where we had targeted, say, a 3 percent inflation rate, and in two years the unemployment level had miraculously fallen to 5½ percent, and inflation, say, were 2 percent, would we allow unemployment to fall to get the inflation rate at 3 percent, or would we declare victory and say we are now at 5½ percent unemployment, so we can now aim for 2 percent.  So I think the credibility component of using this objective in a stimulative way has some challenges. On option 3, price-level targeting, I think it might be difficult for us to have tight control on inflation on a year-to-year basis, because inflation changes with significant inertia.  Also, as the Cleveland paper points out, there could be a significant degree of overshooting, which also makes tight control difficult. The current approach has a problem, namely, how to keep inflation expectations anchored.  In other words, I think there are benefits in terms of increased demand, but those benefits may be small, and the future costs could be large.  I know this Committee is aware of those costs, which would be related to a post-recovery unwinding.  For example, banks’ excess reserves could fuel enormous expansion in private credit and demand, and unwinding could be practically or politically difficult to achieve.  As an aside, let me note that the unwinding problem itself that’s inherent in thecurrent approach could be helping to stimulate spending today by raising inflation expectations today.  But, again, the problem with this approach is that inflation expectations are not being anchored the way they could be, if we were to move to option 2.  So I prefer the explicit inflation objective, but I think we want to make sure we are dealing with the credibility issue.  Therefore, following through, once a recovery is under way, is important.  The financial markets don’t know if the Fed is going to put on the brakes and start raising interest rates. I also wonder whether there’s any virtue to telling markets explicitly that an inflation target will be maintained until certain events occur, so that the inflation target formulation would be conditioned upon a certain unemployment threshold—or, if there are difficulties with quantifying an unemployment threshold, then it would be conditioned upon certain qualitative features having to do with the maximum employment goal.  Then, once unemployment crossed that threshold, or once certain qualitative features were met, as would be described very specifically, the target would be removed and reevaluated.  This would all need to be laid out ahead of time, so that there would be clarity regarding what the Committee may do in the future.  I’ll stop there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a preference for option 2, the explicit inflation objective, while also discussing the potential challenges and risks associated with option 3, price-level targeting and the current approach. This indicates a difference in opinion and potential contention over which policy option is the most effective.


