Passage number 1.
   Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on November 2–3, 2010   A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 2, 2010, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, November 3, 2010, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James Bullard Elizabeth Duke Thomas M. Hoenig Sandra Pianalto Sarah Bloom Raskin Eric Rosengren Daniel K. Tarullo  Kevin Warsh Janet L. Yellen Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Jeffrey M. Lacker and Dennis P. Lockhart, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Atlanta, respectively John F. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Nathan Sheets, Economist  David J. Stockton, Economist James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Jeff Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, Simon Potter, Lawrence Slifman, Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank Supervision and Regulation, Board of GovernorsNellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of GovernorsWilliam Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Charles S. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director, Board of Governors Seth B. Carpenter and Andrew T. Levin, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael Leahy, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; David Reifschneider, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Stephen A. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz and David E. Lebow, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Mark A. Carlson, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Sarah G. Green, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, Daniel G. Sullivan, and John C. Williams, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, Chicago, and San Francisco, respectively David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, Cleveland, and Minneapolis, respectively Todd E. Clark, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Robert L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 2.
 Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of RichmondTranscript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on November 2–3, 2010 November 2—Afternoon Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  Governor Raskin attended the videoconference, but this is her first in-person, live, face-to-face FOMC meeting, so I’d like to welcome her.  Also, Janet has been to a few meetings [laughter] but not in her current capacity as Vice Chair of the Board.  Congratulations, Janet.  And thanks, also, to First Vice President John Moore, who will be representing San Francisco today. We have no new information on the nomination of Peter Diamond to be a member of the Board of Governors.  As you’ll recall, his qualifications to serve had been questioned.  He has since taken steps to remedy that.  [Laughter]  It’s good work, but whether it will be sufficient I don’t know.  Still, we’re hopeful that he will be reviewed and confirmed.  I have spoken to him, and he remains as committed to joining the Board as he was prior to the announcement of his Nobel Prize. The first item today is an unusual one.  I hope to talk a bit about our external communications, and I would like to limit this discussion to 45 minutes or so.  I mentioned at the videoconference three issues that had been of concern, not just to me but also to a number of people around the table who had spoken to me about it.  The first was leaks to the press, and particularly some leaks that involved characterizations of other people’s views at the meeting, confidential materials, and the like.  We circulated the Program for Security of FOMC Information to remind folks about the rules.  The second issue, which arose a bit later, was prompted by a wire story that raised concerns about inappropriate access to information by outsiders other than the media, including consultants, market people, and so on.  We obviously have important reasons to talk to people like that, and, certainly, there’s some basis forexchanging ideas.  But, clearly, there’s also the possibility that some of these folks could profit from information gained in talking to Federal Reserve principals or staff, and I think there’s considerable risk to us if it turns out that someone improperly used that information.  I think we would all agree that it’s important to manage these two matters appropriately, and I’d like to propose that we create a small subcommittee, consisting of Presidents and Governors, to look at these issues, to talk to people, and to try to come up with some guidelines to help us address them.  Janet Yellen has agreed to chair the subcommittee. The third issue I mentioned at the videoconference is a little more squishy—it may be more a matter of preference and operating procedure than security per se.  It’s the tendency for people to take very strong, very inflexible positions on policy matters prior to the meetings at which those decisions will be made.  It’s a longstanding tradition at the FOMC to try to maintain at least some plausible deniability in order to have a reason for a meeting—otherwise, we could just do notation votes and save all the travel expenses.  Now, this may or may not be a fixable issue.  It may be a function of the difficult circumstances that we are currently involved in.  But I wanted to put that on the table as well.  We circulated Michelle’s memo describing the protocol for public statements, which is given to all new members of the FOMC.  I’d be interested in your views on the substance as well as on whether it would make sense to have Janet’s subcommittee look at this issue as well, perhaps as a project that’s separate from the first two.  Again, it’s possible that nothing much can be done about it, but maybe we could come together and find some basis for a more cooperative solution than what we currently have. As I said, I don’t want to spend too much of the Committee’s time on these issues—no more than 45 minutes or so—and I don’t want to do a full go-round, as there’s no need for that.  But I certainly would be happy to have some comments on the issues, on the subcommittee, onthe charge of the subcommittee, or anything else people would like to talk about.  Janet, did you want to introduce that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a transcript of a meeting where various issues are being discussed.


Passage number 3.
 MS. YELLEN.  Yes.  Thanks, Ben.  Let me just say that I share your concerns.  I think we’ve come in for a lot of criticism of our external communications—we’re getting low grades, and they’re not entirely undeserved.  I personally see them as damaging our credibility and our reputation at a time when the institution is under enormous scrutiny, and we can ill afford it. I think the first issue that you raised on communication should be a no-brainer.  We’re obliged to maintain the confidentiality of FOMC information—period, full stop.  And that includes documents that we look at in the FOMC and information on who said what.  It’s obvious that these guidelines have been breached.  I also know from personal experience over the years that it’s easy for this to happen—it can happen pretty innocently when an experienced reporter lures one into revealing things that end up crossing the line.  But I’m assuming it should be completely noncontroversial that we all need to be more careful and to abide by the Program for Security of FOMC Information.  So I think it’s not going to take long for our subcommittee to look at that—at least I hope not. The second issue you raised is more subtle, and it is an important one for the subcommittee to take up:  How do we ensure that our conversations with market participants and outside consultants don’t create the impression, and even the reality, that well-connected outsiders have access to inside information.  I myself sometimes talk to market participants, and I do value those discussions, but I think we are placing ourselves at risk.  I think the guidelines that Michelle prepared and circulated are a terrific starting point, but maybe we need to go further, and I look forward to hearing your ideas on this.Regarding the third issue—voicing policy views prior to meetings—I believe it’s a long-standing tradition of the Committee to refrain from publicly articulating firm positions on the stance that a member is going to take on future monetary policy moves.  In some ways, I think following this tradition was easier and more straightforward when we were doing conventional policy.  We just had to be aware that we should refrain from speculating about future moves on the federal funds rate or indicating any firm view of our own.  I recognize that, now that we’ve hit the zero bound, the options are a lot more complicated, so it seems natural to weigh in on what kinds of tactics we could or couldn’t support.  But, frankly, I think many of the comments we’ve made are destructive of collegiality and of the Committee process—they do come close to feeling like a situation where we walk into the room having said, in effect, that it doesn’t matter what arguments or evidence one of us around the table musters, because our minds are made up. I think it does more than undermine collegiality.  I think we’ve been generating a great deal of noise and market volatility.  That’s something we’ve consciously tried to avoid in the past.  It’s not that we’re not entitled to independent views—I think we absolutely are, and we have a right to express them.  I’ve always been a firm believer in the notion that it’s important for us to walk in here with independent views, because it helps us avoid groupthink, which is a huge danger, and because it enriches the debate.  But when the Committee actually makes a policy decision, I feel that, when we make public remarks, we all have an obligation to state clearly what the policy is and what the rationale for it is, even if we might think or want to say individually that we have some qualms about it or some disagreement with it. One way to strengthen the voice of the Committee that we’ve discussed a bit would be for the Chairman to speak about policy more frequently and, perhaps, at critical moments, suchas when we’ve made key policy decisions.  This could occur through background press briefings, as happened several times during the crisis, or at periodic on-the-record press conferences.  During our videoconference, I noted that a number of you supported approaches along those lines, and such approaches are getting some thought around here.  At any rate, I look forward to talking to all of you as we move forward, and I hope we can develop some guidelines we can agree to live by.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily focused on expressing concerns about communication practices and discussing potential solutions.


Passage number 4.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, may I make a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a request to make a comment.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided in the prompt to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
 MR. FISHER.  As you know, I feel very strongly about this issue.  In 1977 and 1978, President Carter had a group of three that wrote all of his decision memoranda—Jeff Garten, a supervisor, and I.  By the time we wrote them and got them to him, which was a day after the economic policy group meetings, everything had been leaked to the press.  It was leaked by either principals or staff.  The reason for the leaks was either that they opposed the view or, frankly, that they just wanted attention—they wanted to be big deals.  Now, there were a lot of problems with the Carter Administration, but this problem, in particular, was incredibly corrosive and divisive.  What I saw firsthand as the Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury was that it led to principals literally hating each other at the end of the process. That is not what this institution is all about.  I just want to underscore how divisive and dangerous it can be in undermining the mission of a great institution like this.  I hope that everybody in this room, whether sitting in the back rows or as principals at the table, is most mindful that this is a precious institution.  It is unique in Washington.  We can’t undermine it by this kind of behavior.On the second issue of people that have close relationships with market participants, I think of it as akin to insider trading.  There are people who do profit.  There is one former Governor who recently visited my Bank when I was gone and who told the staff that the Reserve Bank Presidents are of no consequence at all to monetary policy, that their views are not considered, and that this individual—I’ll let you guess who it is—was, in essence, the 18th or 19th member, depending on how many we have, of the FOMC, and the equivalent of a voting member.  He makes money off of us when he talks and sells.  If we can’t solve this, then I think we should seriously look at some kind of firm legal strictures that are equivalent to the prosecution of insider trading.  If people make money off inside knowledge about our decisions, it’s no different from people who make money off inside information trading securities.  In fact, I think it’s a more grievous abuse. On the issue of speaking for others, here’s exhibit A:  In Fed We Trust.  This was a disaster.  Whoever spoke to this writer, David Wessel, was duped by the trick that Michelle carefully warns against and that you refer to in your excellent memo.  I got a call from him a couple of months later saying, “I understand that you changed your vote, that you walked down the hall, that you came back and talked to the Chairman, and that the Chairman announced the decision.”  You’ll remember that was when I dissented and then decided that I just didn’t feel that was an appropriate thing to do and that it would undermine the cohesion of the group.  He knew more about what I had said than I did, and I had said it.  So somebody who was in this room reported, and maybe that person isn’t in this room any longer.  This goes back to the point I was trying to make with the Carter experience:  “Pride goeth before a fall.”  You may get attention at the time by talking to these people, but all you do is create divisive forces within the Committee.On the third matter, I think Janet made a very, very good point.  I think we have to be careful to get the right balance—not to muzzle people, and, at the same time, because we’re no longer dealing with the fed funds rate, to be very careful not to signal specific levels of, say, asset purchases or sales.  We create market expectations that way.  It gets discounted in the market.  We begin to become fearful of disappointing markets, even though I don’t believe this Committee should ever be fearful of disappointing markets.  And we certainly shouldn’t think in short-term consequences.  We are paid to think long-term about the health of our economy.  But I think it could be a worthwhile exercise. I feel most strongly about the first two.  And, Mr. Chairman, I ask you to be very firm on these issues.  There’s no excuse for insider trading—it’s a criminal offense, and it should not occur.  In terms of speaking to others, or leaking materials from this room, it will do nothing but wreak havoc with this institution.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses strong disagreement with the behavior of leaking information and the lack of consequences for such actions. They also argue that these actions undermine the cohesion and effectiveness of the institution.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 8.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One of the difficult things behind all three of these, I think, is that when we speak with individuals off the record, no one knows exactly what was said.  We also get into this issue of signaling with what is done off the record, and that binds us and puts us all in an awkward position going forward. I think that if we don’t address that issue, the other issues will still stay confusing.  For example, by asking different people questions off the record, they get what they think is a signal.  And that puts others in the position of having to speak on the record to modify things and say, “Well, that may not actually be the case,” and so forth.  So I think that’s a major issue to consider.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Hoenig outlining the difficulties and challenges that arise when speaking with individuals off the record. The passage implies that addressing these issues is necessary for clarity and effective communication.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it is incomplete and does not present any clear statement or proposition.


Passage number 10.
MR. HOENIG.  Oh, I have one other thing I was going to say.  On the second issue you raised, I think President Fisher was referring to the idea that some people advertise themselves as in a consultancy role to the Fed, and that’s an issue that’s becoming more predominant.  I had correspondence with, I think, the same individual that President Fisher did, and he also asserted that he was the 19th or 18th member of the FOMC, very important, and so on and so forth.  So how we put strictures on those from whom we get information that we need is a very important consideration as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing additional information and expanding on a point made by President Fisher.


Passage number 11.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 12.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I completely support what’s been expressed here.  I talked about it a little bit at the last meeting, in fact.  I think there’s one other issue that could be explored in a bit more detail.  That issue is not what happened before the meeting, but what happens after the meeting in terms of pulling together behind what the FOMC’s decision is, so that, if someone doesn’t agree with the FOMC decision, it’s not re-litigated endlessly in the press afterwards.  Also, if there are disagreements—and I believe that it’s completely legitimate to have disagreements—they are discussed in a way that doesn’t impugn the motives or intelligence of the people who made the decision in an affirmative way.  I think that’s extremely important.  I think people need to be able to express their views, but, at the end of the day, it’s about the Committee and about the Federal Reserve System, it’s not about any individual.  So, once decisions are made, I think people should pull together and support them to the degree that they can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their complete support and suggests a potential issue to explore further, but they emphasize the importance of discussing disagreements in a respectful way and supporting the decisions made by the Committee.


Passage number 13.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, can I ask a question.  We talked about the blackout period being before the meeting.  I always assumed the blackout period also ran after the meeting.  Can we have some clarity on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is simply asking for clarification or confirmation regarding the duration of the blackout period.


Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, it runs till Friday of the same week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 15.
 MR. FISHER.  Okay.  I don’t know if it’s in your memo, Michelle, but it runs afterwards, and I think that’s worth observing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else.  President Kocherlakota, I saw you first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "President Kocherlakota, I saw you first" simply acknowledges that the speaker noticed President Kocherlakota before anyone else.


Passage number 17.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m new, so I hesitate to speak on this, but I think one thing we want to be careful about regarding the third issue is that the press does tend to exaggerate statements.  They’re always trying to read who’s on what side, and they play that game.  Nonetheless, especially when we face such difficult issues as we face now, I think it is useful to hear reasonable dialogue and discussion about the matters confronting the Committee.  In your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, you laid out certain sets of tools that are available, and, in my view, it has been good to have various members of the Committee speak on it.  President Dudley spoke on it; I’ve spoken on it; President Rosengren and President Evans have spoken on it.  I actually learned from reading these speeches, and I assume that the general public also learns something.  So I think there is a value to that, and we don’t want to kill all of that just because some blog in the Wall Street Journal is counting out who’s on what side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their view that it is useful to have reasonable dialogue and discussion about the matters confronting the Committee, and that various members of the Committee have spoken on it in a valuable way. They also mention that the press tends to exaggerate statements, but this is not presented as a point of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we all agree that diversity of opinion is very important and that the public needs to know what arguments are being made.  I think the issue really is a question of style and tone and those sorts of things.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I think the issue really is a question of style and tone and those sorts of things" suggests that the speaker has a different perspective or viewpoint on the matter compared to the statement made before. While the initial statement expresses agreement on the importance of diversity of opinion and transparency, the following phrase indicates a differing opinion on what the actual issue or concern might be.


Passage number 19.
 MS. DUKE.  First, I just wanted to echo the comment about speaking about specific levels or amounts and creating expectations that we then feel compelled to meet; I think whatever policy agreement we make ought to cover that. On the third issue, I think it’s hard to put into a guideline, but it’s thinking about what it is we’re really trying to do.  I’ve been one of the most vocal over the last two meetings on theimportance of communicating what our framework is and how we’re thinking about it.  During this intermeeting period, I think it has been explained in probably 16 different ways.  If we come to an agreement that you, Mr. Chairman, are going to go out and answer the questions and fill in the holes, then we should respect that in the same way that we respect some of our other official communications.  I think having one explanation out there would be helpful.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Duke is echoing a comment, expressing her own thoughts and concerns, and suggesting a possible agreement.


Passage number 20.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Anyone else.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement expressing gratitude followed by a request for input from someone else. The mention of President Evans does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 21.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking to ask a question.


Passage number 22.
  Vice Chairman Yellen— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions Vice Chairman Yellen without any other conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 23.
 MR. EVANS.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the presence of Mr. Evans and Governor Yellen without providing any information about their interactions or opinions.


Passage number 24.
  Oh, in this Committee— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Your Highness” will be fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation:
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is addressing someone of high rank (possibly a princess or prince) and suggests that using the term "Your Highness" will be appropriate in the Committee.


Passage number 25.
  [Laughter] MS. YELLEN.  Good suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of laughter suggests a lighthearted and positive response to the suggestion.


Passage number 26.
 MR. EVANS.  Regarding your subcommittee, I think it would be useful to refresh our understanding of the blackout period.  I understand that it goes until Friday—it might have even gone through the weekend originally—but I think that many of us have run afoul of Friday because of things like conferences.  For example, I have the greatest respect for former Governor Kohn, but even he could run afoul of this because of some speech that he was asked to give in Europe.  So that would be one topic for your committee—just refreshing that understanding and maybe having a light tap on the wrist for certain types of things like that. Here’s another issue.  To the extent that we’re clearer on what our objectives are and on the framework that we’re using, a lot of these discussions become less important or newsworthy, so that’s something to consider.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is suggesting that refreshing the understanding and clarifying objectives can make discussions less important or newsworthy.


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  What I’d like to propose, Janet, is that you choose some people for your subcommittee—and those who are interested in serving should let Janetknow.  Then I’d like to propose that your subcommittee look at the first two items for sure and think about what additional steps or guidelines we might want so that we make sure that we are not inappropriately releasing information to anybody who is not entitled to it. On the third matter, I’ll be happy to listen if anyone has further thoughts.  Janet, perhaps you and the subcommittee could have some conversations with people around the table on the general issue of our collective communication—whether there should be guidelines of some sort, for example.  Again, I want to be very careful to say that this is not about content—this is about timing and style and those sorts of things.  If there seems to be some kind of consensus, then maybe we can formalize that into a memo.  If there clearly is not, then perhaps you could just report that, and we will just leave it at that.  Thank you. On the matter of communication, let me just say a word about the issue that Governor Yellen raised about my communication.  At the videoconference, some interest was expressed in my giving more on-the-record interviews, press conferences, and so on, and I have been interested in doing that for some time.  I think I mentioned to a few of you that we entertained very seriously the possibility of doing a briefing for attribution tomorrow afternoon after the meeting.  We’ve had some qualms about that.  Michelle Smith has been advising me on this.  We’re a bit concerned that what will amount to an unannounced press conference on a day that is already somewhat fraught would contribute to market volatility.  At worst, I could end up unintentionally distorting the message of the Committee, which, of course, is summarized by the statement.  So, if I may, for tomorrow I’m going to stay in the mode of staying off the record.  I do have tentative plans to put out an op-ed in a day or two that will describe in very general terms what we are doing and what our strategy is, and I’ll be attending President Lockhart’s meeting at Jekyll Island this weekend, which will be also an opportunity to comment.But more substantively, I do think that I need to give press conferences that are on the record, on camera, periodically, and I propose to start doing that with the release of the projections from this meeting, which will be in three weeks.  Many other central banks do something similar.  It would provide an opportunity to describe a piece of news—the outlook of the Committee—and relate that to our policy actions and other issues. So that’s our current thinking.  If everyone’s okay with that strategy, there’s one other matter that relates to it.  We already have to release the minutes a day early because of the Thanksgiving holiday, and I think I would like to do this press conference before the minutes come out so that I wouldn’t have to be interpreting the minutes.  That means that the Survey of Economic Projections would have to be released two days before the normal time.  I don’t know if this would require any formalities, but what I’d like to do is break up those two components and approve them separately, so that the SEP can go out, say, on Monday, and then the minutes can go out as planned on Tuesday, and on Monday or on Tuesday morning I could have this press conference.  That would be my proposal.  I see people nodding.  Is there any concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a proposal and discussion about communication strategies and timing.


Passage number 28.
 MR. LACKER.  Summary first, press conference, then minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the sequence of events - summary, press conference, and then minutes.


Passage number 29.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  SEP on the 22nd, press conference with its release.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no mention of any contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 30.
 MR. LACKER.  With the release.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It seems to be a continuation of a conversation or an interview, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 31.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  With the release of the SEP, and then minutes the next day.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 32.
 MR. LACKER.  Sounds good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "Sounds good" indicates agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 33.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So the only thing that requires from the Committee is that we approve the SEP a day earlier, but the schedule for the minutes would be the same as usual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply explains a request and clarifies that the schedule for the minutes would remain unchanged.


Passage number 34.
MR. PLOSSER.  As you think about starting to do this, have you thought about what the regular interval might be.  Do you envision doing this at about that length of time between the meeting and the minutes.  Is it going to be a regular thing, or what were you thinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and seeking the opinion of the person being addressed.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, at the moment I think we’re committing only to twice a year.  In other words, it’s only twice a year that the projections come out and I don’t have a Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.  So then, maybe based on what happens in three weeks, we might want to have a further discussion around the table about whether additional press conferences would be appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their current commitment and suggesting a discussion for potential future press conferences.


Passage number 36.
 MR. PLOSSER.  So basically what you’re saying is that right now you’re thinking about doing it the four times a year when the SEPs come out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Plosser is simply restating what the other person is saying and seeking clarification. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, maybe only twice a year on those times when I don’t have congressional testimony associated with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or ideas that suggest disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a personal occurrence without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 38.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’ve got it.  I see what you’re saying, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any statements or information that would indicate contention or disagreement. It merely shows Mr. Plosser expressing that he understands or comprehends something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 39.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  One thing I will not do without further consultation with the Committee is hold a press conference right after an FOMC meeting.  I think that will require some discussion, because we would have to figure out how comfortable we are and how we would structure it and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement suggests that further consultation with the Committee is needed before holding a press conference immediately after an FOMC meeting. This implies that there may be differing opinions or potential disagreement about the idea within the Committee, necessitating a discussion to determine their level of comfort and how to proceed.


Passage number 40.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I was just asking how you were thinking about the regularity of this, and you answered my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Plosser asks a question about regularity, and the person being addressed answers the question.


Passage number 41.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Michelle, would you like to say something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question inviting Michelle to speak.


Passage number 42.
 MS. SMITH.  Right.  I just wanted to remind people that you pull these projections together four times a year.  In the winter and in the summer, the Chairman goes and presents theMonetary Policy Report to the Congress with these projections.  So the press conferences would be in the fall and the spring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating the schedule for when the projections are pulled together and when they are presented to Congress. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 43.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s all we have planned so far, but I think the first time will be a big step, and we’ll see where it goes from there.  Thank you very much for this conversation.  I’m glad we can have a frank discussion of what are somewhat delicate matters. Let’s now turn to the business of the meeting and go to the briefing on financial developments, and I’ll call on Brian Sack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and gratitude for the conversation, and then transitions to the next topic of discussion.


Passage number 44.
 MR. SACK.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Financial market developments over the past several months have been dominated by mounting expectations that the Federal Reserve would launch a new asset-purchase program.  Those expectations have prompted a set of asset price changes that have made financial conditions more supportive of economic growth.Nominal Treasury yields generally moved lower since the last FOMC meeting, but the trends over this period are much more pronounced if one focuses on the components of those yields.  In particular, as shown in the upper left panel, TIPS yields declined sharply since the last FOMC meeting, bringing the five-year measure well into negative territory.  In contrast, break-even inflation rates, shown in the upper right panel, moved significantly higher, reversing much of the decline that had taken place since the spring.  On balance, as summarized in the middle left panel, the real yield fell about 50 basis points at the five-year maturity, while the break-even inflation rate rose nearly 30 basis points.  A similar pattern was evident at the 10-year maturity point.  These changes appeared to be driven primarily by expectations that the Federal Reserve will initiate an asset-purchase program to expand its balance sheet further.  As can be seen in the middle right panel, the Desk’s survey of primary dealers places the probability of balance sheet expansion at this meeting at around 90 percent.  The probability of such an action by year-end has been increasing since June, but it ramped up notably over this intermeeting period in response to the September FOMC statement and the active discussion of this issue in communications by individual FOMC members.  The effects of those expectations on Treasury yields and broader financial conditions appeared consistent with a portfolio-balance channel. At the same time that expectations of asset purchases were building, the expected timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate was being pushed further into the future.  As shown in the bottom left panel, market participants now see the first rate hike as most likely occurring around mid-2012—a dramatic shift from the  1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).expectations in place earlier this year.  Moreover, market participants appear to have become increasingly confident in this assessment.  As shown in the bottom right panel, the implied volatility of outcomes for short-term interest rates over the next 12 months has collapsed to very low levels.  The val Other asset prices have been influenced by the policy-induced low-rate environment.  Corporate bond yields moved down by more than the decline in Treasury yields, causing corporate yield spreads to narrow further over the intermeeting period, as shown in the upper left panel of the second exhibit.  Moreover, corporate bond issuance has surged for both investment-grade and high- yield securities, indicating that corporations continue to take advantage of the low-rate environment. Equity prices, shown to the right, advanced briskly, with the S&P index up about 4 percent over the intermeeting period and up about 13 percent from its trough in late August.  These gains were driven to a large degree by the downward shift in the risk-free returns available to investors, which may have encouraged some investors to move into riskier assets.  In addition, both equity and corporate bond markets benefited from stronger-than-expected corporate earnings for the third quarter. The increase in equity prices was even more pronounced in emerging-market economies.  Capital poured into the financial markets in those economies, given the more robust recovery that they are experiencing and the low yields in the United States and other advanced economies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents information about financial market developments and the effects of the Federal Reserve's asset-purchase program on various asset prices.


Passage number 45.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian.  Are there questions for Brian.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and then asking if there are any questions for Brian. The mention of Governor Warsh does not indicate disagreement either.


Passage number 46.
 MR. WARSH.  Brian, given the understandable preference for Treasury purchases in roughly the 3- to 10-year range, what’s your view on the widening gap between 10- and 30-year rates, which flows out of that preference.  Is this a source of concern.  What do we think are the implications for corporate finance more broadly.  That is, given that we’re driving down rates for 5- and 10-year Treasuries, are we changing issuers’ own thinking about where they want to fund and for what sort of term and duration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions asking for the speaker's opinion and analysis on the widening gap between 10- and 30-year rates and its implications for corporate finance.


Passage number 47.
 MR. SACK.  In the first asset-purchase program and in the reinvestment program, we’ve concentrated purchases in the 2- to 10-year sector of the curve.  That decision was based onseveral considerations.  One was that that’s the duration range where most private issuance takes place.  Another was that it’s a big, liquid part of the curve.  Nevertheless, we’ve spread purchases out beyond that sector, and the purpose of doing so was to avoid creating significant kinks or odd patterns in the shape of the yield curve.  So I think that has been largely successful. Now, the 10s/30s slope has gotten a lot of attention in financial markets recently because it has steepened a good amount, and there’s a lot of discussion about whether, if another asset-purchase program were launched, we would consider moving more strongly into bonds in order to offset that.  We don’t feel strongly that we have to do that.  The 10s/30s curve is primarily steepening because the 10-year yield is falling, and the forward rates between 10 and 30 years have risen some, but they’re not unusually high by historical standards.  Having said that, in the proposal the Desk has put together for alternative B, which we’ll discuss in detail tomorrow, we are proposing feathering a small amount of additional purchases into the long end just to make sure that we don’t exacerbate that distortion to the shape of the curve.  So the bottom line is that we’d like to operate in the 2- to 10-year sector, but we’re also cautious about not creating too much distortion in the shape of the curve even out to the bond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the decision-making process behind selecting the 2- to 10-year sector for asset purchases, and also discussing the potential for additional purchases in the long end to prevent distortion in the yield curve.


Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage as it only contains the name "President Lockhart" without any surrounding context or information.


Passage number 49.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, how confident are you that, if circumstances arose and we had to start to drain, we could get a significant amount of draining accomplished over some kind of reasonable time frame, say, six months.  I’m looking for just a really broad-brush sense here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for the opinion or confidence level of another person regarding a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 50.
 MR. SACK.  We do have significant draining capacity today, as the development of the draining tools has progressed largely as we had expected.  At an earlier meeting we had estimated the draining capacity to be something like $900 billion.  I believe that we hadsomething like $500 billion in the Term Deposit Facility and then another $400 billion on the reverse repo side.  On the reverse repo side, I think we’re approaching those capacity numbers, or, at least, we will be approaching them once we get this next wave of money funds on line.  We still think we have $150 to $200 billion of capacity through the dealers, and then the rest is through the money funds.  On the Term Deposit Facility side, as far as I understand it, that is progressing as expected, so I would expect those capacity numbers still to hold. I should emphasize, though, that it’s very hard to judge capacity ahead of time, so those are estimates with wide confidence bands.  One difficult issue is trying to figure out how much the capacity will automatically rise as additional reserves reach the market, as would be the case if the FOMC decided on an asset-purchase program.  Obviously, those reserves will be at banks, so, just by having those additional reserves, one would expect the capacity to be rising, and, even if it doesn’t rise at a rate that’s one for one with the reserves, it would still be at a rate that’s significant.  But, again, it’s difficult to judge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining their understanding of the draining capacity and its progression. They acknowledge the difficulty in judging capacity ahead of time and provide estimates with wide confidence bands.


Passage number 51.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think that’s right.  What Brian just described is consistent with the work that’s been done here.  The big question is the extent to which reserve additions could be drained more or less one for one, and I think the answer is something less than one for one.  Some of those reserves would end up being held by institutions that are not participating in the term deposit program, and there would be some process whereby they could get those reserves to institutions that are participating, but probably there’d be some leakage.  Our sense is that, at an appropriate rate, we could drain very considerable reserves through the Term Deposit Facility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. English is simply expressing agreement with Brian's description of the work done and sharing his thoughts on the extent to which reserves could be drained through the Term Deposit Facility.


Passage number 52.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude towards someone.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are other questions or topics to be discussed, followed by the mention of President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 54.
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, as I think about QE, I can understand how it’s affecting spreads, so I can see why the break-even spread might go up as a result of anticipated QE.  I’ve been puzzling about why real yields have shifted down so dramatically in response—we see this 50 basis point decline in the 5-year real yield and a 40 basis point decline in the 10-year real yield.  This is actually going maybe the opposite of what I would have thought.  What is the staff thinking about that, that is, about why real yields responded so dramatically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification on why real yields have shifted down in response to QE.


Passage number 55.
 MR. SACK.  Well, the view that we’ve been describing is that the asset purchases worked by taking that duration out of the market and, therefore, essentially repricing the term premium.  One view is that it is a portfolio-balance channel—just having less duration risk in the market means that those investors left holding the remaining duration risk are willing to do so with a lower expected return.  Another way to say it is that it’s harder and harder to force people out of holding Treasury securities, so, as we purchase, those most willing to hold them with a lower expected return are the ones that remain. I know that different theoretical models will give very different assessments of how big that effect should be.  Some would point out that, since there are all sorts of asset classes with duration risk, it’s not obvious why this one should have such a large effect.  But, from a practical perspective, the empirical evidence seems to show that the prospect of asset purchases did have a significant effect on the yield curve and on financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting two different views on how asset purchases affect the market and acknowledges that different theoretical models may give different assessments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 56.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It sounds to me that that’s more about the slope of the yield curve, but it seemed like the whole level is falling, although I may be misinterpreting what’s in the data.  It seemed like the levels of real returns themselves are falling, and it’s not just that theslope is getting shallower.  In fact, I think you could argue that the slope has not gotten shallower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota disagrees with the idea that the falling yield curve is solely due to the slope getting shallower. He argues that the levels of real returns themselves are also falling, suggesting that there is more to it than just the slope.


Passage number 57.
 MR. SACK.  Right, but when we look at how longer-term rates have fallen, we do see two components.  One is that policy expectations have repriced, which could be pulling down the short- and intermediate-term yields.  And we believe that the term premium also has been falling; one reason we believe that is that you see these effects on real yields very far out the curve in terms of forward rates, and the other reason is that models that do try to separate those two pieces all suggest that the term premium is coming down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the factors that have caused longer-term interest rates to fall.


Passage number 58.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for Brian.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states that there are other questions for Brian and then mentions President Plosser without providing any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 59.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Brian, do you think there’d be any difference between the duration effects of our purchases that you’re talking about, and those if the Treasury announced a program to quit issuing long-term bonds and issued short-term bonds instead to fund the deficit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is asking a question to Brian, seeking his opinion on whether there would be a difference in duration effects between different methods of funding the deficit.


Passage number 60.
 MR. SACK.  Conceptually, under the portfolio-balance view, those two do have similar effects.  The effects we’re talking about arise from the amount of duration that’s left for the private sector to hold, and that could be changed through debt management decisions just as easily as it could be changed through our portfolio decisions.  But there are two differences to highlight.  First, we can move a lot more quickly than debt managers—obviously, as they change their issuance calendars, that changes duration, but only slowly, as the auctions occur, and we can move faster than that.  Second, debt managers do not have an economic mandate.  They operate under a mandate of being regular and predictable and minimizing their borrowing costs over time, so they don’t really have a clear structure through which they should make debt management changes like that in order to affect economic outcomes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the differences between the portfolio decisions made by Mr. Sack and the debt management decisions made by debt managers.


Passage number 61.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement present in the given passage. It simply states the existence of other questions and mentions President Bullard without providing any specific details or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 62.
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to refer to exhibit 3, panel 17, the implied volatility of longer-term rates, and, in particular, I guess the implied volatility of a 10-year rate three years ahead.  You argued that this volatility has been declining.  Just in looking at this picture, I wonder whether this really does predict volatility three years out very well.  For example, the picture says that in 2006 and 2007 this market would not have expected very much volatility, which has turned out to be completely wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: Mr. Bullard is expressing disagreement with the argument presented by the speaker regarding the predictive nature of implied volatility of longer-term rates. He challenges the accuracy of this prediction by pointing out that the market's expectations of volatility in 2006 and 2007 turned out to be incorrect.


Passage number 63.
 MR. SACK.  That’s a fair observation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Sack simply acknowledges the fairness of the observation made.


Passage number 64.
  [Laughter] MR. BULLARD.  So what’s the forecasting record of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any specific statements or indicators that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 65.
 MR. SACK.  I wasn’t trying to make the point that this is a perfect forecaster of future volatility.  I would argue that, if market participants today saw considerable complications with the Federal Reserve’s exit, then they would likely price in greater volatility of long-term interest rates at those horizons at which we would be exiting.  So, even if it’s difficult to predict what the volatility will be, these data still represent investors’ views today about policy challenges the FOMC can face.  That was the only point I wanted to make—I didn’t want to make any claim about how good a predictor this measure is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they were not trying to make the point that the measure is a perfect forecaster of future volatility. They are simply arguing that the data represents investors' views about policy challenges.


Passage number 66.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay—if this measure doesn’t have that good a track record, then we can’t really rely on it to give us any indication.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the track record of a certain measure.


Passage number 67.
 MR. SACK.  Well, no.  A bad track record as a predictor doesn’t mean this is not an indicator of investors’ views.  It just means that those views don’t turn out to be correct.  It’s fine to say we can’t be reassured because investors are sanguine—that it is no reason we should be sanguine as well.  That’s an absolutely fine point to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that investors' views may not always be correct but agrees that it is valid to be cautious based on their views.


Passage number 68.
 MR. BULLARD.  Fair enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The response "Fair enough" indicates agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 69.
MR. PLOSSER.  Can I just follow up.  It’s not just volatility that matters for our exit, but it’s also the level of the rates that’s going to matter, and this doesn’t really address that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser is simply voicing his concern and suggesting that the level of rates should also be taken into consideration when discussing the exit strategy.


Passage number 70.
 MR. SACK.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sack confirms that the statement is correct.


Passage number 71.
 MR. PLOSSER.  You can imagine that the markets may expect rates will be a lot higher, but they may or may not be more volatile.  So there are both the level and volatility issues, and this only addresses the volatility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing two separate issues - the level and volatility of rates - and is not stating any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 72.
 MR. SACK.  The forward rates suggest that the markets expect long-term interest rates to remain relatively low and that they will gradually rise, but not sharply.  This is a measure of whether the markets see a lot of risk around that forecast, and it suggests not an unusual amount of risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing an analysis of the forward rates and the market's expectations, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 73.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response.]  If not, I need a motion to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 74.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Ms. Yellen is moved by something, without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  They are ratified without objection. Let me just note again that you received memoranda on financial stability.  We’re continuing to ramp up our activities in keeping the FOMC well apprised of developments in financial stability.  In particular, an important step is that the Board has now set up its new Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, which will help to coordinate financial stability research and monitoring around the System.  I’ve spoken to President Rosengren and others about coordination among Reserve Banks and the Board in developing our monitoring capacity.  I think we all agree that this is very important and that we want to have a very broad-based ability to see what’s going on in the financial sector, not only in those areas where we have direct responsibility, but even beyond that.  I’d also like to note that Nellie Liang has agreed to be thefirst Director of this office.  I’m sure she’ll do a great job, and we have a great deal of confidence in her in that position. Let me turn next to the economic situation and call on David Wilcox.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mainly providing information and updates on the establishment of the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research and the appointment of Nellie Liang as its Director.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 76.
 MS. WEINBACH.2  I will be referring to the package labeled “Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.”  On balance, the projections you submitted for this meeting embody appreciably weaker real activity this year and trace a somewhat more gradual economic recovery than you anticipated in June.  Exhibit 1 shows the broad contours of your projections for 2010 through 2013 and over the longer run.  Nearly all of you see GDP growth, the top panel, picking up over the next couple of years, while the unemployment rate, the second panel, moves down slowly, and both headline and core inflation, shown in the bottom two panels, edge up but remain subdued.  Somewhat more than half of you indicated that these variables would likely converge to their longer-run rates within about five or six years, but the rest of you noted that unemployment may still be above or inflation below their longer-run rates at the end of that period.  2 The materials used by Ms. Weinbach are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).Exhibit 2 reports summary statistics regarding your projections for 2010.  As usual, your previous projections, collected in June, are shown in italics, and the memo items note the staff’s Tealbook forecasts.  The central tendency of your current projections for real GDP growth this year, shown in the first column of the top panel, is a narrow band from 2.4 to 2.5 percent, down from 3 to 3½ percent in June.  Looking at the middle column, the BEA’s annual benchmark revisions and second-quarter data that were published after you submitted your June projections showed less rapid real GDP growth in the first half of 2010 than you or the staff had expected.  As shown in the third column, you have lowered your implicit projections for growth in the second half of this year quite a bit; they now exhibit a narrow central tendency centered on 2¼ percent, down from about 3 to 3½ percent in June.  And, as shown in the second panel, the central tendency of your projections for the unemployment rate in the current quarter moved up about ¼ percentage point.  Your expectations for overall and core inflation are shown in the bottom two panels.  The central tendency of your projections of overall inflation in the second half of this year, given in the right-hand column of the third panel, are now somewhat higher than in June, but your projections of core inflation, shown in the bottom panel, have changed little. Exhibit 3 displays the central tendencies and ranges of your projections for 2011 to 2013 and over the longer run.  Most of you see at least a modest pickup in the pace of the recovery next year with real GDP expanding about 3 to 3½ percent, followed by increases of 3½ to 4½ percent in 2012 and 2013.  Nearly all of you retained your assessments of the longer-run rate of GDP growth, leaving the central tendency unchanged at 2½ to 2¾ percent. Regarding the unemployment rate, the second panel, you generally revised up your projections.  Most of you now expect the unemployment rate to be near 9 percent at the end of next year and to decline to about 7 to 7½ percent by the end of 2013.  A number of you appear to attribute some of the increase in unemployment over the projection period to long-lived structural factors.  Indeed, more than one-third of you raised your projection of the rate of unemployment in the longer run, and the upper end of the central tendency of these projections rose from 5.3 percent to 6.0 percent.  The bottom of the central tendency remained at 5 percent. Even though your outlook for both overall and core inflation, depicted in the bottom two panels, has edged up since the June SEP, you generally continue to expect inflation to stay subdued over the next several years.  The central tendency of your projections for total PCE inflation is about 1 to 1¾ percent in 2011 and 2012; it moves up to 1¼ to 2 percent in 2013.  However, most of you see a path for inflation through 2013 that does not exceed your longer-run inflation projections, which now exhibit a central tendency of 1.6 to 2.0 percent, a bit wider than in June. The staff’s outlook as presented in the Tealbook embodies rates of real GDP growth that are at, or a bit above, the top end of the central tendencies of yourprojections for the next few years, and rates of inflation that are at the low end of your central tendencies.  The staff’s projections of the unemployment rate are within the central tendencies of your projections.  Regarding your less optimistic outlook for growth, some of you noted reasons that reflected:  the view that further expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would provide relatively little stimulus to the economy; anticipation of a substantial ongoing drag on growth from the housing sector, perhaps stemming from mortgage documentation problems; and expectations that lingering pessimism and risk aversion would continue to weigh on household spending and business investment and hiring. Regarding your monetary policy assumptions, about a third of you—a somewhat smaller fraction than in June—indicated that your assessment of appropriate monetary policy involved less accommodation than assumed by staff, in the form of less expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet going forward, a faster decline in the size of the balance sheet in the future, or a federal funds rate that lifts off sooner than in the staff’s baseline forecast.  Only a couple of you thought that it would be appropriate to implement a more accommodative policy stance than the staff assumes, by expanding the balance sheet by more or by keeping the funds rate near zero for longer. Turning to your final exhibit, the two left-hand panels show that most of you continue to attach a relatively high degree of uncertainty to your projections of both real GDP growth, the top set of bars, and PCE inflation, the bottom set.  The two right-hand panels summarize your characterization of the balance of risks around these projections.  A majority of you now judge the risks to your current forecast of GDP growth to be balanced, although a significant number of you continue to view the risks as weighted to the downside.  Those seeing downside risks cited the fact that monetary policy is constrained by the zero bound, the limited potential for further fiscal stimulus to help address any future negative shocks to the economy, and concerns that the anticipated recovery of the housing market may take much longer than expected. The bottom right panel shows that most of you continue to judge the risks to your projection of PCE inflation as being broadly balanced, although some of you think that upside or downside risks predominate.  On the downside, some of you were concerned about the degree to which lingering resource slack could weigh on inflation, or continued low readings on actual inflation might show through to inflation expectations.  Those of you who cited upside risks to inflation generally noted uncertainty about the timing and efficacy of the Fed’s withdrawal of policy accommodation, or a concern that the expanded Federal Reserve balance sheet could undermine the stability of longer-term inflation expectations.  Thank you.  That concludes our prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the statements that some participants expect unemployment rates to be higher and inflation rates to be lower than others at the end of the projection period. Additionally, some participants have a less optimistic outlook for growth and believe that further expansion of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet would provide relatively little stimulus to the economy. Finally, there are differences in monetary policy assumptions, with some participants believing that less accommodation is needed than assumed by the staff.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  The floor is open for questions.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Thank you very much. The floor is open for questions" is simply expressing gratitude and inviting questions.


Passage number 78.
MR. FISHER.  I’ll ask a question of Nathan, and then I’d like to ask a question of Gretchen.  Nathan, you report on your surprise at the import numbers.  What was the composition, to the best of our knowledge, or do we know yet.  What does it tell us.  Was it oil or something else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is asking a question to Nathan and then plans to ask another question to Gretchen.


Passage number 79.
 MR. SHEETS.  Let me back up.  In the second quarter, the 33 percent surge was broad- based across all classes of imports, and it was particularly skewed towards automotives and capital goods.  But the third-quarter numbers that we’re getting are somewhat less about automotives, though they continue to be about capital goods.  We’re also seeing some strength in consumer goods, which is a very important piece of information.  But in general, both quarters have been fairly broad-based.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Sheets is explaining that there was a surge in imports in the second quarter, and that the third quarter numbers are showing a similar trend with a focus on capital goods. He also mentions some strength in consumer goods. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 80.
 MR. FISHER.  Gretchen, I have a question about what we sent out yesterday with the SEP.  I thought there was an interesting result to the question about whether one’s view of the appropriate policy differed materially from that assumed by the staff in the Tealbook.  The result was 8 to 10.  Is that unusual, or is that common.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply asking a question about a result from a previous conversation or survey.


Passage number 81.
 MS. WEINBACH.  I believe in the June set of projections, 12 had a different view.  So it has been a higher count at times, if I’m not mistaken.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or contradictory views. It simply states a fact about the number of projections which were different in a specific time period.


Passage number 82.
 MR. FISHER.  So there were 8 yes, 10 no.  Of course, this is a fairly new process, but there’s nothing unusual about that balance, or is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of numbers and a query for clarification.


Passage number 83.
 MS. WEINBACH.  I see.  I haven’t looked back at the history of those responses to see if these are unusual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of observation and a personal reflection without any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 84.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right from the start, I think, a majority of the Committee has always disagreed with the staff outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "a majority of the Committee has always disagreed with the staff outlook."


Passage number 85.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  There’s a more trivial explanation than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is responding with laughter to a suggested explanation, indicating a light-hearted or non-serious tone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 86.
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Until recently, I think the general pattern was that most participants expected monetary policy, the funds rate, to be lifting off noticeably earlier than staff.  That’s been shifting, and some of the disagreement this time is that a couple of you expect policy to be easier.  So now it’s on either side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Some participants expect monetary policy to be easier, while others expect it to lift off earlier.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 87.
 MR. ENGLISH.  So the disagreement was certainly less this time than last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The word "less" suggests that there was disagreement, but it was reduced compared to a previous time. Therefore, there is a disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 88.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  That’s all I wanted to know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any form of contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is expressing gratitude and stating that he has received the information he desired.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in the passage since it is not provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
 MR. EVANS.  When you fill this out, it says if you disagree, please explain why.  The only way you can explain or provide any color is to disagree.  [Laughter]  So it’s biased towards saying that you disagree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker claims that the form is biased towards encouraging people to disagree.


Passage number 91.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Actually you probably could write something even if you didn’t disagree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that it is possible to write something even without disagreeing.


Passage number 92.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, you could.  I think I encouraged my staff to do that this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 93.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 94.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It looks to me as if one could say that the main effect of the asset-purchase program on real growth for the U.S. acts through the value of the dollar.  I say that because the effect of the program on, for example, 2011 economic growth is 0.3 percent.  That’s about the amount by which the forecast changed from the last Tealbook to this, and you sort of invited us to equate those two; the change in the contribution of net exports to real growth is 0.3 percent, and, for all the other components of GDP, the contribution changes by a tenth of a percent or less and they all net out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a presentation of facts and calculations, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 95.
MR. WILCOX.  In our judgmental forecast, we decompose the effect as due about two-thirds to the dollar effect, with the remaining one-third being split roughly equally between the lower bond yields and the higher stock values.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents a forecast and breaks down the effect into different factors.


Passage number 96.
 MR. LACKER.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 97.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a statement about President Bullard without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 98.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is for Nathan Sheets.  I just wanted to see if I could clarify something.  You said that, regarding the emerging market economies, you saw no first-order risks.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and confirming information provided by Nathan Sheets.


Passage number 99.
 MR. SHEETS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: While the passage is not provided, it can be inferred from the response that there is contention or disagreement indicated by the word "Yes."


Passage number 100.
 MR. BULLARD.  So, even though we’re hearing a lot about dollar depreciation and the consternation that is causing in the rest of the world, you’re not really seeing too much danger there.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question seeking clarification.


Passage number 101.
 MR. SHEETS.  I would say that we’re certainly hearing a lot of hue and cry, and that over the last couple of months we’ve seen a significant pickup in capital flows to EMEs.  But, at this point, we don’t see widespread problems with currencies being overvalued, we don’t see widespread problems with asset bubbles, and we don’t see widespread problems with inflation and economic overheating.  If flows were to continue at this significant pace for an extended period of time—and I don’t know how long that is; I don’t know if that’s 6 months or 12 months or 24 months—certain problems might emerge. That being said, it’s also important to put all of this in a broader context.  As I emphasized in my remarks, I see a lot of this happening independent of any decision that this Committee makes.  It’s true that these flows are partially in response to interest rate differentials and policy differentials, but also, independent of what we’re doing, the emerging markets areenjoying a very strong cyclical rebound, and the data over the intermeeting period were, if anything, a bit on the stronger side for them.  Beyond the near term, these countries structurally are very attractive targets for investment.  So, given the cyclical and structural challenges, I think there is an increased burden on the emerging markets to put in place robust policy responses to capital flows, and I think they’re moving in that direction—they’re responding in a variety of different ways with a variety of different policy tools.  There’s no simple answer, but I feel that they’re making progress.  At this stage I’m not pushing any panic buttons, but we’ll continue to watch very closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents the speaker's observations and opinions without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 102.
 MR. BULLARD.  Would you extend that analysis to Japan, where the yen has been a lot stronger in the last few weeks and months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 103.
 MR. SHEETS.  I would put Japan in a much different category and a much different situation from these robust, dynamic emerging-market economies.  My feeling about the present valuation of the yen is that it is high if looked at from a two- or three-year perspective.  When you look at the real effective yen relative to where it has been over the last 10 or 15 years, it’s very close to the middle of the range, and Japanese exports this year have been reasonably strong.  I think that the dynamism in Asia is a much more important issue for Japan and its external competitiveness than whether the yen is at 85 or 90 or 82 or whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the author's opinion about the valuation of the yen and the importance of dynamism in Asia for Japan's external competitiveness. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 104.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having access to the actual passage. "President Fisher" alone does not provide enough context to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
 MR. FISHER.  Nathan, you mentioned two countries that are sort of leaning towards an accommodative mode besides us:  Japan and the U.K.  Are there others.  Canada.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question for clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
 MR. SHEETS.  Well, Canada tightened during the intermeeting period, but our best guess now is that Canada is going to stay put for a year or so—that’s what’s incorporated in ourforecast and that’s what we’re hearing from the Bank of Canada.  I would be surprised, as I said in my remarks, if the ECB moved.  Regarding the Bank of England, I personally put more than 50–50 odds on it implementing further accommodative measures over the next six weeks or two months.  And I think that, once the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England moved, there would be intense pressure on the Bank of Japan to do something more.  It comes out every few months with incremental measures that are slightly more accommodative, but I think there would be pressure on it to do something in a significant fashion.  I can’t think of changes at any other major central banks.  The Sveriges Riksbank also tightened over the intermeeting period but emphasized uncertain global conditions, so it seems that it may be in a “stay put” mode; and the Reserve Bank of Australia actually just tightened, which I take as a very positive signal about conditions in Asia.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sheets, predicts that the Bank of England will implement further accommodative measures, but there may be other views or opinions that differ from this prediction.


Passage number 108.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you" by Mr. Fisher is a polite expression of gratitude and does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 109.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are no more questions and then mentions President Lacker.


Passage number 110.
 MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman, this was useful information about the effect of LSAPs on the outlook.  I’d just note the contrast between the two-page box we got and the wealth of detail we get about alternative scenarios that vary by things we can’t control, and I would appreciate fuller information at future decisionmaking meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing a desire for more information in the future, but there is no disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Okay. President Kocherlakota" does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing views.


Passage number 112.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a question that I hope will prove helpful in preparing for our discussion in January about structural unemployment.  One piece of information that crossed my desk recently was that the percent of the labor force that had been unemployed for more than 52 weeks was about 0.4 percent in 2007, and now that number is 2.9 percent.  So, when we’re talking about the modeling of the NAIRU, how do youthink about that group in terms of the kind of downward pressure they’d be putting on wages.  Is there some special attention paid to them.  Well, I guess I’ll just throw that out as a general question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply presenting information and posing a general question.


Passage number 113.
 MR. WILCOX.  The part-time or unemployed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions Mr. Wilcox and his employment status, without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 114.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m referring to the people who have been unemployed for greater than 52 weeks.  The reason to include them one for one in the NAIRU would be that you’re thinking they’re the same as somebody who’s been unemployed for four weeks in terms of what kind of downward pressure they’d be putting on wages.  Presumably you don’t think about them in the same way, but then how do you distinguish across these groups when you’re thinking about modeling the NAIRU.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is asking a question about how to differentiate between different groups of unemployed individuals when modeling the NAIRU, but there is no evident disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 115.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think it’s pretty hard to distinguish these various categories of underemployment and detachment from the labor force.  They have a lot of coherence across groups.  Permanent job losers is one category that I mentioned in my prepared remarks.  There’s presumably a high degree of overlap between the permanent job losers and those unemployed 27 weeks and longer; part-time for economic reasons is another group.  We attempt to discern differences in the amount of pressure that these various groups are putting on the evolution of inflation.  It’s really hard to get even a first-order effect, and to go to the kind of second-order distinctions that you’re pointing to is yet another level more difficult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 116.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m not as convinced as you are that this is second order.  It is a very novel experience for the United States, fortunately, to have so many people unemployed for so long.  It just seems to me intuitively that that group would exert different kinds of downward pressures on wages, because when employers make hiring decisions, they will view those candidates very differently from those who have been unemployed for only 10 weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, states that he is not convinced that the situation being discussed is second order. He disagrees with the other person's belief that the group of long-term unemployed individuals will exert different downward pressures on wages compared to those who have been unemployed for a shorter period of time.


Passage number 117.
MR. WILCOX.  To be clear, I am not disagreeing with you—I am expressing frustration because, in our experience, it has been difficult to get the data to speak clearly to the issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states that they are not disagreeing with the person they are speaking to, but rather expressing frustration about the difficulty of obtaining clear data on the issue.


Passage number 118.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  This is, in part, why we raised the NAIRU.  We assumed that, during the crisis, the fairly persistent component of the NAIRU went up a full percentage point, and we think that the extended duration of unemployment is one of the factors behind that.  Implicitly, in our longer-run forecast, we’re not telling a European hysteresis-type story—one in which these people will never be employed again.  We are implicitly saying, though, that reemployment is going to take a number of years—some of these people will have a hard time getting back to work, but they do get back to work.  So we’re assuming that they have not given up, that they’re actively looking for jobs, so, in that sense, they will be putting downward pressure on wages.  As David said, it’s very hard to say whether it’s the same amount of downward pressure as someone who has been out of work only for 12 weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their assumptions and thoughts on the extended duration of unemployment and reemployment prospects.


Passage number 119.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s difficult because the disinflation effects are the strongest in deep recessions, which, of course, are the situations when you have the most long-term unemployed, so there are a lot of corollary things going on—discouraged workers, part-time employment, and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply explains that disinflation effects are strongest during deep recessions, which are also the times with a high number of long-term unemployed individuals, leading to various related issues such as discouraged workers and part-time employment.


Passage number 120.
 MR. WILCOX.  But, again, it is precisely with the kind of rationale that you articulated that led us to move up the NAIRU by a percentage point from 2007 to 2009.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement or response without any opposing viewpoints or disagreements expressed.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there are no further questions and mentions Governor Yellen without any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 122.
 MS. YELLEN.  Can I just make a brief point on that.  I think we’ve seen that one of the reasons that the duration of unemployment has become so long for so many people is that the quit rate is unusually low at this point.  That means that people who are employed and have jobs aren’t getting out of their seats looking for new jobs—if they did, they’d be creating vacanciesfor people who are unemployed.  So, one reason that it’s so hard to get a job if you don’t have one is that nobody who has a job seems willing to move.  That could be interpreted as a measure of great fear in the labor market that people not only are not getting outside offers, but they also don’t want to take the risk of moving to another city, looking for a job when they get there, and so on.  So existing employees who are unusually fearful could be putting more than the normal amount of downward pressure on wages; that would counteract what you’re saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an explanation for why the duration of unemployment has become long for many people. There is no conflicting view or opposing argument being presented.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement "That's true." It is a simple agreement with a previous statement or claim.


Passage number 124.
 MR. PLOSSER.  It seems to be working for bank examiners, though.  They’re getting lots of outside offers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about bank examiners receiving offers.


Passage number 125.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking if there are any other questions, and the inclusion of "[Laughter]" indicates a lighthearted or humorous tone, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 126.
 MR. TARULLO.  See, now that you don’t come to these other meetings, you miss these jokes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a lighthearted comment about missing out on jokes due to not attending other meetings.


Passage number 127.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right, I think we are hitting diminishing marginal returns.  [Laughter]  Are we ready for the economic go-round.  Seeing no objection, let’s start with President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 128.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will start with the national outlook and speak the obvious, because it has been talked about here already.  The recovery continues to improve steadily, even though we are undergoing some pretty major rebalancing—and those have to see their way through, as I have said before.  But over time I do expect the expansion to pick up, with GDP rising slowly but steadily from its current level as the recovery gains some momentum. Since the end of last year, consumer spending on durable goods has risen nearly 6 percent, and industrial production is up nearly 5½ percent.  Since December, the economy hasadded 860,000 private-sector jobs.  That is not a level that anyone is satisfied with, but it is positive, and it is moving forward.  More to the point, temporary jobs are growing fairly robustly. The inflation outlook, obviously, remains low in the near term, but I suspect over time that it will increase as demand picks up and as our monetary policy has its effect.  We see that in commodity prices today, and I think we can anticipate it somewhat in the declining value of the dollar.  We did talk with some of those who do the Blue Chip survey, and, for the first time, they do have a 100 percent positive response that the FOMC will engage in quantitative easing at this meeting, which is fairly significant from that survey’s point of view. Let me turn just briefly to the District economy and say that conditions in our region are certainly consistent with developments at the national level.  The District economy is growing at a moderate pace, with a little bit of variance among the states, because those states with relatively large energy or agriculture sectors are doing the best and remain the strongest.  District energy firms have extended the expansion in hiring and capital spending that started this year.  They’re shifting employment from natural gas to higher-priced crude oil, and that shift is going fairly rapidly right now.  In some areas in energy, in that sense, there’s a real boom going on in our region. In agriculture, obviously, we’re seeing a big crop, and high crop prices have spurred a lot of further increases in capital spending and gains in farmland values.  Again, we’re seeing farmland auctions move up to where fairly good land in parts of our region and in parts of Iowa are being auctioned off at better than $8,000 an acre, which is a pretty dramatic increase over the last year.  One of our contacts, who is in a widely diversified multinational company, has observed that the company’s businesses are seeing strong growth in a number of places aroundthe world, especially Asia, and also noted that conditions in Europe are stronger than expected last spring.  One interesting indicator of economic activity the contact mentioned is the usage of diesel and jet fuel, especially in their Alaska operations, which is fairly large because of the traffic between here and Asia:  It’s up in the last quarter about 30 percent in terms of the traffic that is going back and forth. Contacts noted that companies with access to capital markets have all the money they can use.  The cash-accumulating firms were seeking places to deploy it, with many choosing to invest abroad rather than in the United States, and we heard something similar today from Nathan.  They noted that today’s market provides a solid spread for borrowing at low rates in the United States and investing elsewhere, and they’re doing it at a fairly significant pace and level.  One contact acknowledged that access to capital was not an issue for his firm, its 20,000 customers, or its competitors.  And, to avoid bad business decisions otherwise encouraged by ready access to cheap money, his company has implemented an interest rate floor for internal use of capital, well above the firm’s unusually low cost of funds, and that is global. Finally, I will just say that business contacts that we have talked to around our region generally agree that an exceptionally uncertain business climate—particularly around health-care costs, tax policy, and environmental issues—is a major concern for them and has caused them to hold back.  Otherwise, they are kind of waiting in the wings to see how things go, and they certainly do have the capital and wherewithal to move forward when they choose to do so.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's perspective on the national and regional economy.


Passage number 129.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude and acknowledgment to someone named President Rosengren.


Passage number 130.
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My forecast for the economy in the near term is much like the Tealbook’s.  I, too, have the unemployment rate ending the year where it began, at 9.7 percent, and falling only to roughly 9 percent by the end of 2011. Over the past two years, we have been experiencing gradual disinflation, and, with the likelihood of continued weakness in labor markets, my forecast expects this disinflationary trend to continue.  I would highlight that the disinflation we have experienced, and are likely to continue to experience, is most unwelcome, in part because it increases the short-term real interest rate.  In December of 2009, the year-over-year core CPI was 1.8 percent.  In the most recent release, the year-over-year CPI was 0.8 percent.  The decline in core PCE has been smaller, but still the most recent PCE release shows a continued deceleration.  With the short-term interest rate pinned at zero, falling inflation has increased the real fed funds rate, creating an unintentional tightening of monetary policy.  Thus, even if one assumes that the risk of deflation is low, preventing any further disinflation is important.  In fact, I believe that we should be working harder to return inflation to 2 percent over a reasonable horizon. In terms of labor markets, I recently had a meeting with my Academic Advisory Council, which includes a variety of economists from Harvard, Yale, and MIT.  They are generally a rather unruly bunch—[laughter]—but they were unanimous in their view that most of our current unemployment is the result of inadequate demand.  In fact, their biggest concern was that remaining at this elevated rate of unemployment would create a structural unemployment problem, which only further emphasized the need, in their view, for more aggressive fiscal or monetary policy actions.  Two members of my Research Department, Chris Foote and Richard Ryan, have further investigated one possible source of structural unemployment.  Some have posited that the fall in housing prices has made homeowners much less willing or able to move. If this were true, one would expect the duration of unemployment would diverge between homeowners and renters, with renters more willing to relocate to obtain employment.  Using the Current Population Survey, they examined whether unemployment duration varies between homeowners and renters after controlling for worker demographics, workplace skills, and the strength of the home-state housing markets.  They find no statistical difference between homeowners and renters.  Instead, they find that long-duration unemployment spells are ubiquitous and are not confined to construction, to lower-educated, to lower-skilled, or to housebound workers.  These findings seem consistent with inadequate aggregate demand being the main source of unemployment duration. I’ve also met with a variety of asset managers over the past month.  Those discussions indicate that even the possibility of quantitative easing is having a significant impact on their expectations of interest rate and exchange rate movements.  They do not seem to have any doubt that our actions could alter financial market conditions materially.  However, there is a wide range of views on the likely impact on the economy of easier financial market conditions. My own view of the ability of quantitative easing to affect financial market conditions is not unlike that of the Tealbook.  However, I would say that the effect of quantitative easing, through the exchange rate channel, may be of a larger magnitude than I had previously thought.  I would also highlight that movements in interest and exchange rates over the past month associated with the perceived changes in the probability and magnitude of quantitative easing seem to confirm what I am hearing from market participants, namely, that adjustments to a quantitative easing program can have a meaningful impact on financial market conditions.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Lockhart.


Passage number 132.
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic activity across the Sixth District appears to be steadily trending positive but is still quite lackluster.  Expectations, while somewhat uneven by sector, are more positive than negative.  Among our directors and business contacts, there has been a small but discernible improvement in sentiment about the future.  However, nothing in the regional reports during this cycle would cause us to alter our slow-growth outlook.  Business leaders in the Southeast pretty uniformly report that their investment spending relates to share capture, continued productivity gains, necessary equipment replacement and maintenance, and meeting regulatory imperatives.  There is still little spending premised on domestic demand growth. Turning to the national economy, the glide path of the overall national economy also seems to be upward, but at a moderate pace and still from a low base.  The third-quarter GDP report last week provided some encouragement in the private demand components of personal consumption expenditures, business investment inventories, and nonresidential structures.  These modest improvements are consistent with the outlook that my staff and I have projected for quite some time.  My submitted forecasts for economic growth have been on the low side of the spectrum over the last year and outside the central tendency of the Committee.  In the context of this rolling outlook, the softening experienced in the middle months of this year hasn’t so much constituted a falloff from expectations and a worsening of the outlook as much as it has the playing out of substantial quarterly variability along a path of slow, gradual recovery. We’ve been testing our basic narrative in a variety of ways and have come up with little reason to change it.  My view of the economy and the one represented in the alternative scenario entitled “Lower Potential” are nearly identical.  A key attribute of this outlook is the existence of constraining elements that can be described as headwinds or structural factors or simplyprocesses that are slow to work themselves out.  The Committee is familiar with the litany of headwinds.  These include a cautious and restrained credit environment; ongoing deleveraging, especially in the household sector; a housing sector that has not yet achieved stable and growing prices, and, therefore, uncertainty regarding house-related wealth; a commercial real estate sector with much painful restructuring and debt resolution ahead; productivity gains by firms that have been “banked,” so to speak, and thereby give these firms a new standard for “normal” long-term operations; and, finally, persistent uncertainty connected to the country’s fiscal, tax, health-care, and regulatory considerations.  Because of this convergence of factors tending to retard the pace of growth, my forecast remains subdued even with the assumption of appropriate monetary policy that implies further stimulus. I admit to some ambivalence on the question of how effective more quantitative easing can be, given my view of the world we’re in.  To my way of thinking, there are two prominent considerations relevant to the questions we’ll deal with in the policy round.  First is the structural character of current and prospective unemployment.  I’m finding it increasingly difficult to achieve much clarity by using the terms “structural” and “cyclical.”  It’s easier for me to think in terms of those features of the employment picture that are likely to abate with further stimulus or not.  Both analysis of the trend of new business formation, to cite one important driver of job creation, and anecdotes from business contacts and various industries suggest to me that there are material structural impediments at work. Second is the direction of inflation expectations, particularly since this is a time to be watchful for moves in either direction.  The other side of the inflation expectations coin is, of course, deflation probabilities.  There has been some action in this arena recently.  Break-even rates in the TIPS market declined from May through August and have since retraced much ofthat decline.  The recent run-up of TIPS break-evens rates coincides with speculation about a second round of quantitative easing.  Factoring in survey measures as well as conversations with business contacts about price pressures, I conclude overall that expectations are relatively stable and appear not to be moving outside historical bounds.  That said, my staff has recently done work to derive deflation probabilities from TIPS yields.  Our estimate of the probability of deflation rose from about 14 percent in April to a peak of just over 30 percent at midsummer.  We place the market’s current assessment of the probability of deflation over the next five years at about 20 percent—elevated, but a clear improvement since last summer. Connecting all of this to my outlook narrative, I come to the view that the slow-growth trajectory implies persistent slack that will put pressure on wages and prices for at least the medium term.  In weighting my balance of risks, I have to treat the prospect of unwanted disinflation that possibly leads to deflation as a tail risk to be sure, but not one that can be prudently dismissed.  So I see the balance of inflation risk currently to the downside.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a detailed analysis and outlook on the economy from the perspective of Mr. Lockhart.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply contains a courteous expression of gratitude from President Pianalto.


Passage number 135.
MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chairman, could I just ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question.


Passage number 136.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 137.
 MR. EVANS.  President Plosser, I didn’t hear—what was the inflation objective you stated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply includes a question and a statement from Mr. Evans.


Passage number 138.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I didn’t state one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Plosser simply states that he didn't state one, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 139.
 MR. EVANS.  Oh, I thought you did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Oh, I thought you did" is a response to something that was previously mentioned, indicating a shared understanding rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 140.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I said the current rate of 1 to 1½ percent was near my inflation objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Plosser is expressing his opinion that the current rate of 1 to 1½ percent is near his inflation objective. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement present as it is just a statement of his perspective.


Passage number 141.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges and appreciates the speaker's response.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer without a specific passage or context.


Passage number 143.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a number of opportunities to hear from business contacts throughout my District since our last meeting.  In general, business leaders have become more positive about their own situations, but they remain wary about the overall outlook. My projections for output are broadly in line with their sentiment that the recovery in business activity will be slow and unemployment will remain elevated.  Specifically, my GDP forecast is similar to the Tealbook’s in 2011, although it is somewhat lower in 2012 and 2013.  What’s really striking about both my outlook and the Tealbook is how weak the second half of 2010 looks compared with our forecast in June.  I’m still expecting to see economic growth, but I’m concerned that the slow growth rate in my outlook leaves the economy susceptible to another slump. My business contacts continue to tell me that lending to small and medium-sized enterprises remains constrained, and the very slow return to a more normal lending environmentis holding back economic growth.  Last week I spoke with an industrial builder who owns and leases out a large number of his own industrial facilities.  As his loans come due, he’s finding that the properties are being appraised at lower values and that the banks will only finance 65 percent of those lower valuations.  Consequently, even though the cash flows from these properties are still intact, his company will have to put up more equity to refinance the loans.  His company has been building cash balances as a precaution against just this kind of event, but that limits his ability to put his capital to work for his own use.  Several CEOs from large companies in my District have also expressed concerns about the ability of some of their suppliers to obtain bank financing.  The CEO of a major steel company, whose orders are growing rapidly, told me that his company is financing one of its suppliers who couldn’t obtain bank financing to meet his orders.  I think these stories illustrate that banking conditions still have a way to go before we can say that they have normalized. On unemployment, I project only a moderate decline in the unemployment rate over the next few years, moving down to just under 8½ percent by the end of 2012.  This result is consistent with research being done at the Cleveland Fed that uses labor market flows to estimate the longer-term unemployment rate.  Estimates generated by this method predict a higher longer-term unemployment rate than is contained in most of the projections submitted for this meeting.  An interesting implication of this research is the conclusion that labor markets have been less dynamic over the last 10 years than they were over the rest of the postwar period, particularly in terms of job-finding rates.  My business contacts corroborate these findings, citing many reasons for their slow hiring.  Nonetheless, they generally tend to expect that this slowness will be an ongoing feature of their hiring process, rather than just a cyclical response.  This result tends to support our recent research indicating that progress on the unemployment rate will be slowerthan in past recoveries.  However, this does not imply that nothing can be done about unemployment, as the job-finding rate would still improve with stronger growth in demand. Turning to inflation, my projection continues to agree with the Tealbook that the disinflation process is most likely not yet finished.  My staff has been looking into the growing distinction between the CPI and the PCE price index, and the results are not very reassuring.  The core CPI has run 0.4 percentage point below the PCE over the last year.  A little more than half of this difference is due to the prices of the nonmarket components included in the core PCE.  It’s interesting to note that the PCE median that the Dallas Fed reports looks much more like Cleveland’s median CPI, because it deemphasizes the nonmarket components in the PCE that are running higher than most of the market components.  This leaves me concerned that the ongoing disinflation process may be materially understated in the PCE inflation rates.  On a more positive note, as Brian mentioned in his report, market measures of expected inflation have moved up during the intermeeting period, and break-even rates from TIPS show a similar pattern.  The acceleration was particularly pronounced after the release of the FOMC minutes on October 12, which, I think, underscores the importance of our policy decision at this meeting. In sum, the risks to my outlook for inflation and output remain to the downside.  My projection for only moderate economic growth and very low levels of inflation leaves the economy susceptible to shocks.  And I continue to be concerned that our options for responding to falling inflation are more limited than our options for responding to rising inflation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 144.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of gratitude.


Passage number 145.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Reports on economic activity in the Fifth Federal Reserve District remained mixed in October, suggesting not much of a change in theoutlook on net from the previous report.  The manufacturing index moved back into positive territory last month, with shipments, new orders, and employment all ticking up.  Several individual manufacturers tell us that they are operating at or near capacity after having sharply reduced capacity in 2008 and 2009.  And a few of these are indicating that they are nearing the point at which they will need to add workers.  Our service sector survey remains a bit more downbeat; although the indexes have not deteriorated further, they remain in negative territory.  We did see some improvement in shopper traffic in big-ticket items, however, and the responses to our expectations questions improved significantly last month as well.  We continued to hear complaints about policy uncertainty, but uncertain demand prospects are also clearly a factor.  We actually did hear a couple of contacts say they are hanging on until after the election, so, perhaps, some economically relevant uncertainty is dissipating as we speak.  [Laughter] The data on the national economy since the last meeting also suggest little change in the outlook.  Consumer spending keeps advancing, perhaps as rapidly as can be expected, given the balance sheet repair that many households have undertaken.  On the softer side, the rebound in manufacturing has clearly slowed, which could lead to questions about the sustainability of business investment.  But I still think the fundamentals for business investment outside of structures look reasonably promising, particularly in the information processing category.  On balance, I think the erosion in the outlook that occurred over the summer appears to have come to a halt, so my outlook hasn’t changed much since September.  I continue to expect slow economic growth, about 2 percent in the second half of this year, gradually rising to about 3½ percent by late next year, bringing the unemployment rate down to about 9 percent then. The most striking macroeconomic development since the last meeting was that the general public has become fairly firmly convinced that we are going to initiate another programof sizable asset purchases at this meeting.  This has resulted in a dramatic fall in Treasury yields, as Brian Sack noted, and that has brought inflation compensation back up to a range that might be characterized as more towards the center of the range it has been in over the last five or six years. Other news on the nominal front includes a pickup in nominal GDP growth to 4.4 percent year over year for the third quarter, from 3.9 percent the previous quarter.  You cited nominal GDP growth at the last meeting, Mr. Chairman.  And there has been a pickup in M2 growth to 8.3 percent over the last two months.  So I think the overall inflation picture provides even less reason to ramp up stimulus right now than it did a month or two ago. On the real side, the Tealbook estimates that a $600 billion asset-purchase program will only make the unemployment rate 0.3 percentage point lower at the end of 2012.  This is a strikingly small number, in my mind, and it makes the benefits of such a program look really small relative to the risks.  But I’ll wait until the policy round to talk about risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing a summary of economic activity and outlook, without any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of thanks.


Passage number 147.
 MR. FISHER.  When Bill English stands up, it’s noticeable, because he’s so tall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a physical characteristic of Bill English without expressing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 148.
  [Laughter] MR. ENGLISH.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of one person apologizing for something, so there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 149.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  Even though you’re kneeling now, you’re taller than the rest of us.  [Laughter]  Mr. Chairman, last Wednesday’s Wall Street Journal quoted you describing the calibration of monetary policy as akin to putting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of a lighthearted comment, followed by some laughter.


Passage number 150.
  As a golfer—although, I must say, not as good as Governor Warsh or President Lockhart or President Plosser, but much better than President Evans [laughter]— MR. EVANS.  I’m very glad that’s on the record.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a lighthearted comment about the speaker's golfing skills compared to other individuals.


Passage number 151.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I notice you’re discussing golf and not baseball.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states an observation and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 152.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 153.
  On that subject— MR. MOORE.  Be patient, Mr. Chairman.  Be patient.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply telling the chairman to be patient.


Passage number 154.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  Our Vice Chairman owes me a beer, and I owe several cases of beer to the First Vice President of the San Francisco Fed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about beer owed between individuals, but there is no indication of any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 155.
  [Laughter] MR. MOORE.  We’ll defer that until later, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that a discussion or decision be postponed until a later time.


Passage number 156.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement involving President Bullard.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  It is 3:30.  Coffee’s ready.  Debbie, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the time and informing someone named Debbie that the coffee is ready, while also asking if they have the correct information ("is that right?").


Passage number 158.
 MS. DANKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without further context or information, it is not possible to determine whether there is disagreement or contention in the passage just based on the mention of "Ms. Danker." To identify disagreement or contention, we would need more details about the specific content of what Ms. Danker is saying or the context in which she is mentioned.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s take 20 minutes for a break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is a straightforward suggestion to take a break for 20 minutes.


Passage number 160.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I guess we’ll get going.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement indicating that the speaker will be leaving.


Passage number 161.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only expresses gratitude and introduces the First Vice President Moore. Therefore, the answer is no.


Passage number 162.
 MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When the staff was briefing me late last week for this meeting, they mentioned to me that it might be appropriate to say something about the World Series, or, if not, to do something related to Halloween.  Thank goodness the Giants gave me some good results to work with, because I’m not sure how well my Lady Gaga costume would have gone over with this particular crowd.  [Laughter]  I’ll say something about the Giants in a while.  By the way, I asked our research director if everything goes into the transcript, and he told me that certain things could be redacted, if necessary.  [Laughter] The evidence from our contacts in the Twelfth District is consistent with a weak recovery.  The District has been struggling to climb out of a very deep hole, and the pace of expansion has been disappointingly slow.  Following modest gains during the first half of the year, private payrolls contracted in the third quarter.  Our retail sector contacts report disappointing back-to-school numbers.  Households in the Twelfth District are burdened with poor balance sheets, caused in part by the decline in home values, which have fallen as much as 40 to 60 percent in the hardest-hit areas.  The technology sector has been one of the few bright spots.  District IT manufacturing and service firms have been creating jobs at a healthy clip in response to sustained demand growth.  But even this sector has shown signs of slowing recently.  Our contacts in this sector expect further slowing over the balance of the year, as the hardware industry’s inventory replacement phase comes to an end. My views on the national outlook are generally similar to those of the Tealbook.  I expect a gradual recovery held back by households working to repair balance sheets badly weakened byequity and housing losses and the slow normalization of financial intermediation.  Still, monetary stimulus and improvements in banking and financial market conditions should push economic growth somewhat above its potential rate in the next few years and slowly bring unemployment down.  Nonetheless, I am struck by the fact that, in the Tealbook forecast, even with an additional $600 billion of Treasury purchases, we won’t get back to full employment until 2015. Although my point forecast is for steady improvement in the economy, I admit that the subpar economic growth during the past two quarters has shaken my confidence.  One source of greater uncertainty going forward is the degree to which the banking sector will suffer further damage from past mortgage securitization activities.  While lax processes around foreclosures pose some risk, even more concerning is the growing trend of put-backs of poorly performing portfolios from investors to banks.  Although recent declines in the stock market value of some of the large banks most affected by these problems suggest that the market sees the risks as manageable, some worst-case estimates present substantial problems for these institutions, which could damage financial conditions and set back the recovery. Turning to inflation, I expect significant slack in labor and goods markets to keep PCE price inflation around 1 percent for the next few years, but well-anchored inflation expectations should help avoid significant further disinflation.  Of course, if the economy can’t shift into a little higher gear than the 2 percent growth we’ve been seeing, I worry that further disinflation could lie ahead. I close with one reason to be optimistic.  The San Francisco research team has studied what happens to the U.S. economy based on which franchise wins the World Series.  The results are rather startling.  The average growth in real GDP has been 10.2 percent in the year following each World Series won by the Giants.  [Laughter]  The staff tells me that the relationship isstatistically significant, and they point out that the slowest growth in the year following a Giants win was still a robust 6 percent.  Now, not knowing for certain how the Series would turn out when presented with these data last week, I asked the staff what the effects of a Rangers win would be.  I was told there was—how do I put this.—insufficient data—[laughter]—to conduct such an analysis.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the state of the economy and his own views and experiences.


Passage number 163.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The given phrase is not a complete sentence, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 164.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 165.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Normally, I don’t comment much about prospects in the New York region, but I did spend three days in upstate New York last week, so a few observations might be in order.  First, there’s no meaningful change in the debate between smaller businesses and bankers.  Small businesses see the banks as continuing to constrain credit sharply.  In contrast, the bankers view themselves as awash in liquidity, with large deposit inflows, plenty of funds to lend, and a willingness to do so.  I’m not surprised by this.  Given the current uncertain economic outlook, I’d expect us to be in a situation in which borrowers who are creditworthy don’t want or need credit, but those who are less creditworthy do need funds but are unable to get them easily. Second, the mood in upstate New York can be summed up in two words, and I think this probably applies more broadly:  “hunker down.”  In other words, most businesspeople are waiting for others to move first.  I take this as evidence that even a modest amount of additional stimulus could have outsized effects over the longer run by changing the dynamic from the current stasis to one in which additional demand growth led to employment gains that improve confidence.  I think an improvement in confidence might cause businesses to loosen up a bit, and all of a sudden we’d be in a virtuous cycle.  I also think that, in this respect, the models that we use don’t really capture that kind of “tipping point” concept. Third, we were received quite warmly, despite many questions about what we do and why we do it.  The questions ranged from our unusual interventions during the crisis to understanding why some of us might think that another round of large-scale asset purchases might be in order.  People generally do want to understand what we’re trying to accomplish and the tools that we have available to do this.  Therefore, to the extent that we can explain our goalsand actions clearly, I see this as helpful in boosting confidence and in supporting our own credibility. Fourth, among the community bankers, there was considerable angst about profitability, both from the forthcoming regulatory burden of the Dodd-Frank Act and from the effect of an extended period of low short-term rates on net interest margins.  My view is that we need to be smart about how the Dodd-Frank Act is implemented; in particular, we don’t want to inadvertently create a competitive advantage for larger banks that might have scale economies in dealing with that increased regulation.  On the issue of the low level of short-term rates and the effect on bank profitability, I think the answer here is to do all we can to get the economy moving, so that the low level of short-term rates does not extend beyond the next year or two. In terms of the national outlook, I don’t see much change from the last meeting.  The economy is currently on a growth trajectory of about 2 percent, which is not sufficient to generate enough employment growth to push down the unemployment rate, and I think that’s really the key to boosting consumer and business confidence and generally a more favorable dynamic for the overall economy.  Some data were a bit stronger—in particular, the consumption data and the durable goods orders data.  But against that were more disappointing things, like the trade performance and the renewed weakness in home prices and uncertainty about how the foreclosure problems will be resolved.  A double dip still seems unlikely to me, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York forecast continues to anticipate that the economy will gradually strengthen in 2011 and 2012.  But, to my mind, the economy remains vulnerable to negative shocks at a time that we’re not that far from outright deflation.  So, despite an okay baseline view—in the sense that the economy is going to grow faster—I think the case for furthermonetary policy stimulus, implemented with care, especially on the communications side, seems compelling. Finally, I have a few thoughts on financial stability.  There really do remain a number of important issues outstanding for some major U.S. financial institutions.  For several, there are significant housing-related issues—the poor documentation standards accompanying foreclosure filings and the potential for private-label security holders to put back to the issuers mortgages that do not comply with the warranties of the original securitizations.  At this juncture, the put-back issue appears to be potentially more serious because of uncertainty about how the state courts will rule on these matters—in other words, how significant must the error be to allow the mortgage or security to be put back to the original mortgage issuer—and because there’s a potentially large magnitude of dollars involved.  Although the put-back issue will undoubtedly take many years to resolve, there’s a risk that an adverse judicial decision for the mortgage originator could pull the time frame forward and lead to renewed safety-and-soundness concerns for those institutions that securitized a large amount of private-label mortgages. A second issue is the risk that the combination of bank holding companies with poor earnings and the diminution of government support as a result of the Dodd-Frank Act could lead to downgrades in credit ratings—I’ve talked about this in the past.  If this occurred, there could even be funding issues for certain institutions.  For now, the rating agencies appear to be patient, but this situation could change during the first half of next year, especially if lackluster earnings persist, which then leads to questions about the sustainability of individual firms’ business models. Third, I think market participants may be a bit too sanguine about the effects of the Volcker rule implementation on bank profitability.  The major banks are trying to define theVolcker rule very narrowly as only pure proprietary trading.  But the intent of the legislation suggests a wider application, and that could have more far-reaching effects for banks’ trading businesses, and I’m not sure this is fully incorporated in market prices or market expectations.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement. It is a presentation of observations and opinions on various topics.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage contains a thank you note, and there is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 167.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data we’ve received during the intermeeting period reinforced my view that the path to recovery will involve a long, slow slog.  I expect unemployment to remain elevated for years to come, and inflation, as far as my eye can see, to run below the 2 percent level I consider most consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.  The reports from our business contacts strike me as consistent with such a forecast.  Outside of housing, where conditions are dismal, they describe an economy that is growing, but only at a snail’s pace.  Businesses remain focused on productivity.  They are reluctant to hire and invest.  They have little pricing power. The heartening news during the intermeeting period is that financial conditions have eased meaningfully, as markets have become increasingly convinced we intend to resume our LSAP program.  Market views on the odds and magnitude of such a program have shifted back and forth over the past several weeks, and that has provided us with real-time readings pertaining to its likely impacts on longer-term yields, equity prices, and the dollar.  And, thankfully, the implied policy multipliers look to be nontrivial and in line with earlier staff estimates. The forecast I prepared for this meeting assumes that the FOMC will ultimately ratify the expectations concerning LSAPs that are currently embedded in markets.  In contrast to the Tealbook baseline, I assume that we will ultimately add about $1 trillion of Treasuries to our balance sheet, although any purchases beyond the $600 billion initial tranche would becontingent on future economic developments.  My assumption about monetary policy involves a bit more accommodation than the Tealbook, but I still anticipate a path for GDP, unemployment, and inflation that is broadly similar to the Tealbook baseline.  By the end of 2013, I foresee an unemployment rate around 7 percent, still meaningfully above my longer-run NAIRU estimate of around 5¼ percent, and core inflation that is still in the vicinity of 1 percent. With respect to risks to the forecast, I continue to judge the uncertainty attached to my projections as unusually high.  An especially large source of uncertainty pertains to consumer spending.  The Tealbook assumes that the personal saving rate will stabilize around 5¼ percent, and a forecast along these lines appears roughly consistent with the life-cycle consumption equations relating spending and income and wealth.  But I remain concerned that the process of balance sheet repair in the aftermath of the financial crisis could involve more significant deleveraging by households and a rise in the personal saving rate above the Tealbook baseline, resulting in outcomes like the weaker recovery alternative in the Tealbook.  Household debt and ratios of debt service to income were exceptionally high at the outset of the financial crisis.  They have declined over the last two years, thanks in part to defaults.  But the household debt–income ratio is still well above historical norms.  Many households now face borrowing constraints that are likely to impede their spending.  And, along the lines that President Evans mentioned, debt is eroding less rapidly in real terms in the current low-inflation environment than it would if inflation were running closer to our target and to the inflation expectations that households had when they borrowed.  Stated differently, many households that borrowed during the boom are now experiencing wage increases that are notably lower than they must have anticipated.  The bottom line is that further deleveraging poses a real risk to the expansion, and this risk is exacerbated by very low inflation.  In fairness, though, I think the risks relating to consumerspending are two- and not one-sided.  By now, there appears to be considerable pent-up demand for autos and other consumer durables, which could trigger more rapid growth in spending if the job market improves and uncertainty about future income abates, similar to the stronger recovery scenario. The second factor that creates abnormally high risk to the outlook pertains to the financial system.  It appears to be healing but remains highly vulnerable to shocks.  We saw last spring how rapidly credit conditions could tighten when European sovereign debt concerns mounted, and renewed turmoil in connection with sovereign debt cannot be ruled out.  As several of you noted, there remain risks associated with the large-scale put-back of mortgages to the banking sector, and the excellent financial stability memos prepared by the staff for this meeting highlight evidence of asset price bubbles in some markets.  Abrupt shifts in global capital flows could trigger asset price movements posing risk to the financial system. On the issue of risk skew, I see the risks pertaining to GDP growth as weighted asymmetrically to the downside and for an important reason.  Monetary and fiscal policies in the United States and other advanced countries have ample latitude to respond if aggregate demand proves too robust, but little or no scope to respond to downside shocks. Turning to inflation, my forecast is that it will remain in the vicinity of 1 percent for the duration of the forecast period.  The data we have received during the intermeeting period confirm that core inflation remains extremely low, and disinflation has been broad-based.  Incoming data reveal that wage trends are extremely subdued, and, even with some slowdown in productivity growth, unit labor costs are barely rising.  My concern about the possibility of deflation is tempered by my belief, bolstered by survey evidence, that inflation expectations continue to be well anchored, creating an offset to the downward pressure on inflation resultingfrom enormous slack in the labor market.  But we cannot completely dismiss the risk that inflation expectations could follow actual inflation down in the years to come.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of thanks followed by a mention of Governor Warsh.


Passage number 169.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple acknowledgement and expression of gratitude, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.   There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There’s been no significant change in my outlook since the September meeting, and, actually, there was no significant change between the August meeting and the September meeting.  That’s not really good news for the economy insofar as my outlook is, I think, at the very bottom of everybody’s projections, but you might have thought it was good news for you, at least, because I wouldn’t have anything more to say.  [Laughter]  No such luck. What I’ve been thinking about the last few weeks was actually prompted by some discussions that I had with some of my counterparts from foreign central banks during the Bank/Fund meetings a few weeks ago.  The discussions started on the topics of a double-dip recession and deflation, but they gravitated fairly quickly to considering the potential outcomes in industrial economies, such as the continental European economies and the U.S., if they face an extended period of very tepid growth, that is, growth at or slightly below trend.  In particular, the discussion focused on the degree to which such a period of growth could have some self-replicating characteristics, thereby producing some losses that would not necessarily be apparent just from extrapolation of a growth rate like that over time. So I asked myself:  Well, what are the prospects for growth.  And every single one of you is somewhat more optimistic than I am, though not a whole lot more.  There may well be some momentum building up over time simply because things will get better after a period of time when they stop getting worse, and it’s for that reason that I actually have a little bit of upside risk on my own otherwise gloomy forecast.I also did try to look systematically at what are arguably leading economic indicators.  And I looked not just at those formally noted by the Conference Board, but also at other indicators drawn from the data that people here aggregate for us—both objective ones, like housing permits and capital goods orders, and subjective ones, like consumer confidence and business sentiment.  Most, although not all, of those pieces of information are positive; most, although not all, are only mildly so, particularly considering the low baseline against which even positive data are being measured.  And I certainly didn’t see a case for a pattern suggesting an acceleration of growth.  So it seemed to me not unreasonable to hypothesize that a relatively tepid pace of growth continues for some period of time.  Clearly, the handoff from one stage of recovery to another hasn’t been smooth.  The period late last year and early this year of stimulus, inventory replenishing, and relief that the cataclysm had been avoided, has not led smoothly to a more self-sustaining growth supported by consumer demand.  That fact, too, seemed to me to reinforce the prospects for quite contained levels of economic growth going forward. What do I worry about under those circumstances.  Well, first, we’re clearly in a liquidity bog, if not a liquidity trap.  And in the absence of an increase in aggregate demand, there doesn’t seem to be any real prospect of pulling ourselves out of that mire.  Second—and Eric alluded to this—at some point we’re likely to see some hysteresis effects taking hold in the labor market.  While I think that, to date, the evidence is fairly limited on whether skills mismatches have led to increasing structural unemployment, a high enough level of long-term unemployment will almost surely produce just such a result over time.  Third, while we know that firms are adding very little additional productive capacity in the face of weak demand, they may also be taking capacity off line or allowing their ability to increase production quickly to atrophy.  This phenomenon is probably the hardest of the three to document, in large partbecause we simply don’t have data on capacity in the 80 percent or so of our economy that’s not industrial.  But one suspects, or at least I suspect, that some of the firms that have been able to maintain rising profits in the face of sluggish sales have done so not just through increased efficiencies, but also through cost reductions effected by de facto capacity reductions. Now, each of these three factors would surely be reduced by sustained increases in aggregate demand, but, again, in the absence of prospects for increased employment, it’s hard for me to see where that aggregate demand comes from.  So I think it’s not inconceivable that we’re facing a recovery even slower than the modest pace expected in the aftermath of a recession induced by a financial crisis, even slower than that reflected in the Tealbook, and even slower than the central tendency of our own forecast for this quarter.  But worse still, the economy could see a greater increase in the NAIRU and a lower level of potential growth because of the kinds of effects I mentioned a moment ago.  In that case, there would be a longer lasting impact of the slower period of growth, one that would stretch out for years even beyond those that we now anticipate.  So, in short, my concern is that a reluctance to provide further stimulus on the grounds that structural constraints limit growth at present could itself become a self-fulfilling prophecy. That kind of thought is overhanging my forecast, and it’s also the way that I’ll be thinking about policy tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, expresses a more pessimistic outlook for the economy compared to his colleagues. He mentions that his outlook is at the very bottom of everybody's projections and that he sees a relatively tepid pace of growth continuing for some time. He also expresses concerns about a liquidity bog, hysteresis effects in the labor market, and firms reducing capacity. These views indicate a disagreement or contention with the more optimistic outlook of his colleagues.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any sign of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


Passage number 173.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My projections are roughly consistent with those described in the Tealbook.  The economic recovery remains quite gradual.  Aggregate demand remains inadequate, and I’ll underscore two ways in which I believe this is manifest.  First, weakness of aggregate demand is reflected in the fading effects of the federal stimulus spending and the fact that local and state governments are shedding tens of thousands ofemployees.  In particular, in the state and local sector, budget pressures are projected to ease only slowly, as any expected rise in tax collections from the recovering economy are partially offset by the unwinding of the federal stimulus grants.  So real spending in this sector is anticipated to increase only about ½ percent next year and 1¼ percent in 2012.  Further weakness is evident in the housing sector.  The level of housing prices is down by roughly 1 percent since August.  Housing demand remains weak, and foreclosure volumes are sizable.  Anecdotally, the slowdown in home sales now exacerbated by foreclosure documentation issues impinges on labor mobility; in other words, people’s ability to move to new cities to look for jobs is being hampered, exacerbating unemployment issues. In sum, the latest growth numbers for GDP of 2 percent cannot produce the demand needed to reduce our 9.6 percent unemployment rate.  Indeed, the unemployment rate is not expected to fall below 9 percent until 2012, and inflation remains below levels that are consistent with the FOMC’s objectives for quite a bit longer.  Being this far from the dual mandate goals presents problems.  If high unemployment continues, our country risks losing human capital, as the skills of the unemployed erode, and this very low inflation could heighten the risk that adverse shocks could lead to deflation and a protracted period of extremely poor economic performance.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 174.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 175.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Contention or disagreement can arise depending on the perspective of the reader, as they may have different interpretations of the passage or conflicting opinions on the topic discussed.


Passage number 176.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m sorry to interrupt, but in terms of the equivalency you’re describing, my understanding is it’s about the expected stock of purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining a personal understanding of a concept.


Passage number 177.
 [Meeting recessed]November 3—Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We made an awful lot of progress yesterday—FOMC productivity is up.  [Laughter]  We’re ready to begin the policy round.  Bill English will lead it off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply informs the reader about the progress made and sets the stage for the policy round to begin.


Passage number 178.
 MR. ENGLISH.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the package labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”  The package includes the four draft policy statements and the associated draft directives.  You will note that we made some modest changes to alternatives A and B relative to the versions that were distributed in the Tealbook; those changes, which were distributed to the Committee on Monday, are shown in blue.  In putting together the alternatives that were included in the Tealbook, the staff read the Committee’s discussion at the October 15 videoconference as indicating no consensus for a significant change at this time in the description of the Committee’s objectives, such as the adoption of an explicit numerical inflation goal or establishment of a price level target.  Accordingly, alternatives A and B retain a qualitative description of the Committee’s objectives, while aiming to provide somewhat greater clarity about those objectives, as well as the link between them and the Committee’s policy decision. Turning first to alternative B, page 3, the Committee may think that it is appropriate to provide additional policy accommodation at this meeting in order to strengthen the recovery and move inflation back toward levels that it sees as consistent with its dual mandate.  Such a decision could reflect three judgments: First, that the economic situation is not likely to improve sufficiently without further policy action; second, that additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities will help support the recovery; and third, that the benefits of additional purchases outweigh the possible costs. The first paragraph of alternative B summarizes current economic conditions.  The incoming economic data have been about in line with expectations, as a number of you noted yesterday, so this paragraph is not greatly changed from September. The second paragraph starts by pointing to the Committee’s statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices, and then goes on to note that unemployment is elevated and inflation somewhat low relative to levels consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.  The statement then observes that progress toward the Committee’s objectives has been unacceptably slow. Against this backdrop, the third paragraph indicates that the Committee will maintain its current reinvestment strategy and will increase the size of the SOMA  3 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).portfolio by $600 billion by purchasing additional longer-term Treasury securities at a rate of about $75 billion a month through the middle of next year.  The fourth paragraph reiterates the “extended period” language that the Committee has used for some time.The final paragraph retains some of the tilt that was in the September statement, but also suggests a more incremental approach to future asset-purchase decisions by stating that the Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information and will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.  A statement along the lines of alternative B would be roughly in line with market expectations, as Brian described them in his briefing yesterday, and so would probably have little impact on asset prices beyond those that have already occurred.  However, I would note that market expectations appear to be more diffuse than usual, so some market reaction, either positive or negative, is certainly possible. If members were inclined to take more aggressive action at today’s meeting, the Committee could announce the purchase of another $1 trillion of longer-term Treasury securities, as in alternative A, page 2.  Such an approach might seem attractive if policymakers were not confident that the headwinds holding back the recovery would ease as quickly as assumed in the staff forecast.  Alternatively, members may be concerned that the current low level of inflation heightens the risk that adverse shocks could lead to deflation and a protracted period of extremely poor economic performance.  And some members may simply see the economy as likely to fall short of the Committee’s dual objectives for too long to be acceptable, even with the purchase of an additional $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities. Other than the description of the size and length of the purchase program, the first three paragraphs of the statement under alternative A are identical to those under alternative B. The fourth paragraph changes the forward guidance about the federal funds rate to be more explicit about the likely duration of the current period of very low interest rates, indicating that the target range for the federal funds rate will be maintained at least until mid-2012, so long as:  The unemployment rate remains elevated; the Committee continues to anticipate that, with such a policy stance, inflation in the intermediate term will not exceed levels consistent with its mandate; and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. The final paragraph of alternative A is similar to that in the September statement, indicating that the Committee will monitor the outlook and is prepared to provide additional accommodation as needed.A decision to announce a purchase of $1 trillion of additional Treasury securities at this meeting and to provide more explicit forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate would come as a surprise to market participants.  Combined with the language at the end of the statement, these announcements could lead investors to mark down their expected policy path and would likely lead them to anticipate additional securities purchases before the program comes to an end.  As a result, interest rates would presumably fall, stock prices rise, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar decline.   Alternatively, the Committee may have read the incoming data over the intermeeting period as generally mixed, and so members may remain uncertain about whether additional policy accommodation is appropriate at this time and want to leave policy on hold and await additional information on economic developments before making a decision on the need for further securities purchases.  If so, the Committee might want to issue a statement very similar to that issued in September, as in alternative C, page 4.  Such a decision would seem particularly attractive if the Committee was not confident that the possible benefits of additional policy accommodation outweighed the risks that additional securities purchases could entail.  For example, some members may be worried that a further increase in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could undermine public confidence in the Committee’s ability to exit smoothly from the current very accommodative policy stance, and so contribute to an undesirable increase in inflation expectations and actual inflation. A decision to take no additional policy easing steps at this meeting would come as a considerable surprise to market participants, and much of the improvement in financial conditions that has occurred over the past couple of months would likely be unwound, with longer-term interest rates rising, stock prices falling, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar increasing. Finally, if the Committee feels that the economic recovery is continuing and sees a gradual recovery as the best trajectory that can be expected in current circumstances, then it might be inclined to leave policy unchanged at this meeting and signal that it will likely be appropriate to begin removing policy accommodation before long, as in alternative D, page 5.  Members may believe that much of the current elevated level of unemployment reflects unavoidable lags in the reallocation of labor across sectors and regions and so cannot be effectively addressed by additional monetary stimulus.  Some members may also be concerned that keeping policy rates at very low levels for a long time and providing additional stimulus through asset purchases could lead to the development of macroeconomic or financial imbalances that could prove costly in the future.   The statement for alternative D revises the forward guidance for the federal funds rate to suggest an earlier increase in short-term interest rates and implies that the reinvestment policy could be reversed soon. An announcement along the lines of alternative D would come as a great surprise to market participants.  Interest rates would rise significantly across the yield curve, equity prices would decline, and the dollar would appreciate.  Draft directives for the four alternatives are presented on pages 7 through 10 of your handout.  Brian Sack will continue our briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 179.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any questions for either Bill or Brian.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" does not indicate any form of disagreement. Similarly, the subsequent sentence "Any questions for either Bill or Brian" is a neutral invitation for questions, without any indication of disagreement. The mention of Governor Warsh does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 180.
 MR. WARSH.  Thanks, Brian.  I have a couple of questions.  First, the way you describe the 35 percent cap seems a little different from what’s in the statement you distributed.  As I understand it, you don’t anticipate going above the cap, but you’re saying it might happen on occasion, in which case you just want to make sure you have the flexibility to deal with that.  The statement says that we’re suspending the per-issue limit and that some holdings will be allowed to move up “only incrementally,” and I’m not sure that conveys the same thought.  Can you help me understand how you and the Desk will act on these Treasuries so that you’re not restrained, yet you also don’t signal to markets that there is no longer a cap.  That is, can this language be toughened.  For example, could you say in this statement, “We are going to suspend the 35 percent limit.  We still expect, by and large, to comply with it, but we have asked for and received flexibility as needed to move above it for the following reasons.”  I worry a bit that this could get misperceived and the Desk might be seen as entering these markets and in some ways threatening to be more of a price-maker than a price-taker.  Maybe you can help me understand what you think your practice will be and whether this language can be made less open-ended and still let you do your job.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Warsh, is expressing his concern about the language used in the statement and suggesting that it be toughened to avoid any misperception or misunderstanding. He is questioning whether the language can be made less open-ended while still allowing the Desk to perform its job effectively. This indicates a disagreement or difference of opinion regarding the clarity and potential implications of the statement.


Passage number 181.
 MR. SACK.  Let me start with the practice that we intend to implement, and that practice will be described in more detail in the FAQs that would accompany the statement, if you agree to it.  What we intend to do is only to allow SOMA holdings to move above 35 percent in 5 percentincrements per operation—we would restrict accepted offers at any individual operation to that limit.  The reason for doing that is to avoid unexpectedly and suddenly taking a large amount of outstanding supply.  We do believe the auction mechanism will guard against the Fed owning too much of any individual CUSIP as long as the market understands where our holdings are and how they’re increasing.  We just want to avoid running into a situation where, for example, four dealers happen to show us a lot of the same CUSIP and we end up buying them and increasing our holdings of them too quickly. In terms of the more flexible approach that you describe, we find it difficult to figure out how to implement that.  If we said we’re going to honor 35 percent but may go above it in some cases, that would require us to have some criteria for deciding when to breach that limit, and we couldn’t settle on a clear, explicit set of criteria.  So we prefer this approach, which will allow us to go above it based on the offers that we’re shown from the market, and we would do so cautiously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their intended practice and the reasoning behind it, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements presented.


Passage number 182.
 MR. WARSH.  This is all about operations, and I honestly don’t mean to be litigating the policy question now, which we’re going to come to later.  Is there a way to describe this that still seems to put bounds as well as to communicate your expectations to the market.  That is, suppose you said something like, “our expectations are to be consistent generally with the 35 percent limit,” which markets have long understood, and then put a semicolon or comma and then describe ways in which you have been given license from the FOMC to go above it in certain cases.  I think that would give the notion that this is not a grand change in practice, so that markets wouldn’t feel as though New York is unconstrained.  I just worry that, as written, it looks as though the Desk will, frankly, use more liberties than you anticipate necessarily needing to and wanting to use.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Warsh is expressing his concern and suggesting a way to address it. He is not directly disagreeing with anyone or creating conflict.


Passage number 183.
MR. SACK.  Well, I think the question is whether you’re comfortable with the practice that I described.  That information will be available to the markets in the FAQs.  We can work on the language of the statement so it doesn’t sound so extreme—perhaps the language on suspending the limit reads too strongly—but the content will be available to the market.  May I say two other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear or explicit contention or disagreement. It seems to be a discussion about adjusting the language and content of a statement or practice.


Passage number 184.
 MR. WARSH.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "Yes" because Mr. Warsh indicates that there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 185.
 MR. SACK.  One concern was that suspending the limit would lead to a lot of inference about where on the curve we’re buying, because this limit is more binding in certain sectors, including bonds with outstanding maturities between 10 and 20 years.  That’s one of the reasons we felt it was important to publish the distribution of our holdings in the statement also, because it avoids any confusion about what the suspension of the 35 percent limit meant for the distribution of our purchases.  The other issue is that we did contemplate setting a higher limit, but the problem we faced there is that, no matter what number we chose, it would lead market participants to calculate how much capacity that was giving us, and we worried that that would be seen as a signal about the potential ultimate size of asset purchases.  So we felt the best approach was simply to suspend it, but to do so in this cautious way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the concerns and considerations they had when deciding to suspend the limit.


Passage number 186.
 MR. WARSH.  Again, I just encourage you to think about the language in the statement.  Think about the FAQs, and see if you can’t constrain yourself with the language in a way that gives you the flexibility you need to take whatever judgments the Committee comes to.  Just as an open point, and I’m happy to be helpful. Second, on the listing of the purchases as $110 billion per month and a total size of $850 to $900 billion in the statement, I have one cosmetic suggestion.  I understand that that is a function of two things:  your expectation of what the Committee will authorize today, along withthe reinvestments.  But the numbers that are in the FOMC statement and the numbers here are different, that is, the FOMC statement just talks about the additions.  So in your statement I encourage you to disaggregate it into the two pieces.  My suggestion would be simply to break down the $110 billion per month into its two constituent components and to break down the $850 to $900 billion into its two constituent components, just so that people see the connection between what we are authorizing and what you’re doing and so that it doesn’t look as though the FOMC is giving one message and the Desk is giving a separate message to dealers who have expectations closer $1 trillion than to $500 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making suggestions and offering assistance in improving the language and presentation of the statement.


Passage number 187.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think that’s in the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The first paragraph says $600 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The first paragraph states a specific amount, $600 billion, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It says $600 billion in the first paragraph and $250 to $300 billion in the second paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the first paragraph, the passage states that the amount is $600 billion, while in the second paragraph it mentions a different range of $250 to $300 billion. There is a discrepancy or disagreement between these two amounts.


Passage number 190.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  They’re taken together, the two parts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The provided passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the two parts are taken together without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 191.
 MR. WARSH.  Yeah, but I think the $75 billion doesn’t show up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Warsh agrees that the $75 billion does not show up.


Passage number 192.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states "President Fisher" without providing any additional context or information.


Passage number 193.
 MR. FISHER.  First, I wish to weigh in with Governor Warsh regarding the 35 percent.  I think you can handle this, by the way, by saying “up to” when we talk about the amounts we’re going to invest; for example, “up to an additional $600 billion,” “up to $850 to $900 billion,” “up to $110 billion,” and then you can also say that, on occasion, the Desk might move above 35 percent.  There’s a way to word this other than by waving a red flag in front of people.  Echoing Kevin’s last point, it doesn’t take an agile mind to take $110 billion, multiply it by 12 to annualize it, and, voilà, it comes out to $1.3 trillion, which is the amount of the deficit.  So it looks as if we’re monetizing the deficit, and I think you have to be mindful of that.  Sophisticatedpeople may be able to sort this out, but it’s not only sophisticated people who are going to read it. Second—and you were very conscious of this; you and I talked about this off line—you have to be extremely careful that people don’t “front run” our intentions.  Even though we may not give a specific number, by saying we’ll move above 35 percent, the game is going to be trying to figure out where we’re going to move above 35 percent when you do.  I think there’s a way to editorialize this, and we can talk about that a little bit later. I have a question, Mr. Chairman, and I have a statement disguised as a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is offering his thoughts and suggestions on how to frame the discussion around investments and potential deficit monetization, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 195.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  I just want to understand this in plain English—I’m referring to panels 4, 5, and 6 in Brian’s handout.  Let’s say the Chairman is called before the Senate Banking Committee at the end of 2012 and is asked, “Do you have a loss or do you have a gain on this portfolio.”  What’s the answer.  Under the assumptions given here, did you make money or did you lose money with the strategy that your Committee has adopted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and asking for a straightforward answer.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 196.
 MR. SACK.  Do you want me to answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide much context to determine the exact nature of the contention or disagreement, but the response from SACK suggests that there might be some disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 197.
 MR. FISHER.  Go right ahead.  You’ve laid out the sensitivities.  Let’s assume that rates are up 100 basis points under alternative B.  What’s the answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that someone has laid out sensitivities and asking for an answer based on a specific scenario.


Passage number 198.
 MR. SACK.  I think the answer is that we made money, because the additional coupon income is outstripping the increased cost of the reserves under that scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 199.
 MR. FISHER.  So rates have gone up 100 basis points.  We have an unrealized loss, but the income outstrips the loss—is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation of their understanding.


Passage number 200.
 MR. SACK.  Right, under that scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the person agrees with the mentioned scenario.


Passage number 201.
 MR. FISHER.  By how much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks a question.


Passage number 202.
MR. SACK.  The additional net income stream over the 10 years was $27 billion, and the additional loss coming from the 100 basis point shock to short rates was $15 billion, so it’s the net of those, which is around $10 or $12 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents two numbers and calculates the net result.


Passage number 203.
 MR. FISHER.  And, of course, if rates go up higher than 100 basis points, it’s less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Fisher without any contradictory or conflicting information.


Passage number 204.
 MR. SACK.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Sack is correct without presenting any opposing views or disagreements.


Passage number 205.
 MR. FISHER.  Got it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage doesn't contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone understood something.


Passage number 206.
 MR. SACK.  Clearly, additional asset purchases put more risk onto our balance sheet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is making a clear statement about the risk associated with additional asset purchases.


Passage number 207.
 MR. FISHER.  Sure, particularly where we’re further out on the curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply expressing certainty or agreement by using the word "sure."


Passage number 208.
 MR. SACK.  And we are compensated for that because we’re buying at market prices, but that compensation is reduced to the extent that we’ve collapsed the term premium.  Conceptually, the term premium is that expected excess return that market participants get for that risk.  So there’s some compensation, but clearly there are risk scenarios where it will be negative for net income.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that while they are compensated for buying at market prices, that compensation is reduced when the term premium is collapsed. They acknowledge that there may be risk scenarios where this reduction in compensation leads to a negative impact on net income.


Passage number 209.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "Thank you" indicates gratitude or appreciation, rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without more context. The statement provided only mentions "President Lacker" without any additional information or context.


Passage number 211.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have three questions—two for our Manager, and one for the staff.  Brian, when you were discussing panel 2 and the proposed distribution of the purchases under alternative B, I think you said that you wouldn’t necessarily exactly hit these, depending on what offers were shown.  I wanted to find out a little more about what you meant.  The base case would be that we’d go to the market with a certain amount of buys in each CUSIP, and that’s what we’d buy, and we’d let the market determine the price.  You obviously have something else in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and more information.


Passage number 212.
MR. SACK.  Sure.  We specify a maturity range, which is actually shown in that panel.  We do an operation across all CUSIPs in that range, and we choose the securities based on two criteria:  how the prices come in relative to the market, and how cheap or expensive they look relative to a smoothed yield curve.  Therefore, there is a relative value judgment that could determine where within each maturity bucket we purchase.  The point is that, depending on the offers we’re shown, say, for the bond, we could end up buying at the shorter end of the 18- to 30-year sector or at the longer end—it depends on the offers.  That’s what introduces some variation in the average duration of the securities that we purchase.  The question is:  If, at some point, there’s enough variation, how do we compensate for that.   I think the way to compensate for it is to start to shift how much we’re buying in each bucket.  The point I was trying to make is that we’ll seek to keep the average duration around 5½ years, and if we get enough variation from that, we’d probably make changes to the distribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an explanation of the process and decision-making criteria used in purchasing securities based on their prices and relative value. The speaker suggests making adjustments to the distribution if there is enough variation from the target average duration of 5½ years.


Passage number 213.
 MR. LACKER.  I know how you do it with triparty RP operations across the three tranches, so you’re going to have some similar mathematical construct about the yield curve to tell you how to judge prices and offers across the yield curve, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 214.
 MR. SACK.  Correct.  We think it’s prudent to look at the offers we receive and make a judgment about which of those securities offers the best value to the taxpayer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states a viewpoint about making a judgment on the value of securities offered to the taxpayer.


Passage number 215.
 MR. LACKER.  The great achievement of the 1951 Accord was to free prices in the government market from our fixing them.  Do you feel like you might be in danger of kind of pegging the yield curve spreads.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Lacker about the achievement of the 1951 Accord.


Passage number 216.
 MR. SACK.  We’re not pegging the overall shape of the curve, but it is true that, within each maturity sector, our operations will tend to compress variation around our spline.  The bigger the Treasury purchase program is, the more relevant our spline becomes, because we’re abig participant in the market, and we’re buying based on evaluations around our spline.  But this is an issue about small differences in relative value across CUSIPs as opposed to the bigger question about the overall shape of the yield curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 217.
 MR. LACKER.  But the two are intertwined in your methodology, right.  I assumed that, in some sense, the idea of alternative B was:  here’s an amount and here’s how we’re going to buy it across the curve, and we don’t know how the yield curve is going to react.  There are a lot of empirics about that, and for a couple of years we’ve been wrestling with the question of what effect these things have on 10-year securities versus 2-year securities.  You’re supplementing the Committee’s choice with some judgment, and you’re saying that the broad program is going to have its effect, but you’re just going to tweak it around the margin.  How do you draw the line there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to be seeking clarification and understanding from the person they are speaking to.


Passage number 218.
 MR. SACK.  Regarding the 2-year versus the 10-year, our actions are completely represented in the red bars in the upper right.  That’s the decision about what sectors we’re purchasing, and that’s why this is presented to you to make sure you’re comfortable with it. If we used our spline or some theoretical measure of fair value and then bought across the whole yield curve based on that, then I would agree with you—we would be making a judgment that the 2-year sector is too cheap and the 10-year is too rich, and we’d have bigger effects across the whole curve.  But that’s not what we do.  We divide these up into relatively limited maturity buckets so that that assessment of relative value occurs only, say, within the 5½-  to 7-year bucket, so we’re just slicing the yield curve up into these buckets where we’re making a relative value judgment but only within that maturity range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the process of dividing the yield curve into maturity buckets for making relative value judgments within specific ranges.


Passage number 219.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So across the boundaries there’s no linkage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that there is no linkage across the boundaries. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 220.
 MR. SACK.  No.  Across the boundaries you’ll get the red bars shown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement of fact.


Passage number 221.
MR. LACKER.  So 5.4 year maturity versus 5.5, you’re not going to make a relative value judgment across that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement of fact.


Passage number 222.
 MR. SACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions "Mr. Sack" without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 223.
  We do if they’re in the same bucket, but — MR. LACKER.  Yeah, I know, but they aren’t, see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 224.
 MR. SACK.  That’s right.  We’ll do one operation that will include the 5.4 and we’ll do another operation that will include the 5.5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement or plan being presented by Mr. Sack.


Passage number 225.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay, so you’re not going to make that judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any indication of conflicting opinions or disagreement.


Passage number 226.
 MR. SACK.  That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or contradictory statements. It simply states that the statement made by Mr. Sack is correct.


Passage number 227.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay, and how much of this is going to be transparent to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question and does not express any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 228.
 MR. SACK.  This is going to be more transparent than Desk operations have ever been.  [Laughter]  We’ve never explicitly announced the distribution of our purchases.  In the past we haven’t even announced the size of individual operations when we do them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the upcoming operations will be more transparent than previous ones and that in the past, the size of individual operations has not been announced.


Passage number 229.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, but what about the spline.  The bidders are going to understand after a while that you’re not taking it pro rata, that you’re making judgments, right.  What are you going to explain about how you do this.  The triparty market knows how you do this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about how the bidding process works in a triparty market.


Passage number 230.
 MR. SACK.  They already understand that we have a spline to make this relative value calculation.  And almost every shop on the street has an estimate of what our spline is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely states a fact about the understanding of a spline calculation among individuals and shops.


Passage number 231.
 MR. LACKER.  Why don’t you give it to them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 232.
 MR. SACK.  I think we could entertain that idea—I’m not opposed to that.  I don’t really feel like making that decision today, given everything else we’re trying to implement, but I think that, compared with the past, we are being very transparent in terms of how we’re distributing our purchases across the curve, and, as I said in the briefing, in terms of giving them the prices at which we actually accepted offers, which is something that we’ve never done in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage shows that there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses openness to the idea but also explains their current hesitation due to ongoing implementations. They also highlight the transparent distribution of purchases as evidence of progress compared to the past. Overall, the passage does not show any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 233.
MR. LACKER.  That’s useful.  Here’s my second question for you, Brian.  You said that you thought that the pace in the forecast under alternative B was—I think I heard this right—about at our capacity to make purchases while avoiding disrupting market functioning.  I wondered if you could help the Committee understand what the nature of market dysfunction would constitute if we were to exceed that limit.  If we were to stray accidentally and do too much and it created market dysfunction, what would that market dysfunction look like.  What would it consist of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It consists of Mr. Lacker asking a question to Brian, requesting clarification on a particular aspect of the discussion.


Passage number 234.
 MR. SACK.  Let me start by saying that I think the capacity has to do, first, with our ability to conduct the operations and get them done and then, second, with market functioning.  The market functioning side is very difficult to judge.  I think what we mean by that is:  Could we be buying so much that we would be causing a deterioration of liquidity in the markets.   We want to separate having a price impact, which, of course, is part of the objective of the program, from liquidity conditions.  So the market dysfunction we would worry about is creating too much of a one-sided market, resulting in lower trading volumes between other parties, higher bid-asked spreads, and so on.  It’s very hard to judge where that point is.  At this pace of purchases, essentially we are taking up all of the new net issuance from Treasury for a month, because that will average about $100 billion a month; and if we go further, we have to do more pushing of investors out of the market.  Nevertheless, on the other side, our purchases are actually still quite small relative to the gross trading flows in the market. To sum up, I think it’s a very hard judgment to make.  Looking at our own operations, we feel that, at this pace, we’re pushing quite hard—as I said, we’re operating every day with pretty sizable operations.  The  purpose was just to say that if the Committee wanted to move more rapidly—suppose you wanted to do $1 trillion over that window—we would have to rethink howwe operate and consider whether it can all get done in Treasuries or whether other asset classes, such as MBS, would have to be introduced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the capacity of conducting operations and market functioning and is expressing the difficulty in judging the impact of their purchases on market liquidity.


Passage number 235.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In order to effectively address climate change, we need to shift our focus from traditional energy sources like coal and oil to renewable sources like solar and wind power. By investing in clean energy technologies, we can not only reduce greenhouse gas emissions but also create new jobs and stimulate economic growth. Additionally, transitioning to renewable energy sources would decrease our dependence on foreign oil and improve national security. Overall, moving towards a sustainable energy future is not only necessary for the health of our planet but also for the well-being of future generations.


Passage number 236.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m sorry, I had a third question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, apologizes for having a third question, indicating that he is not challenging or disagreeing with the other person.


Passage number 237.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I cannot provide a valid answer without the passage.


Passage number 238.
 MR. LACKER.  Because we’re talking about policy options, even though the effect of the policy was discussed yesterday by Dave Wilcox, I just want to ask another question about that, and, in fact, this question is inspired by something you said yesterday.  I really appreciated your very extensive remarks at the end of the day yesterday.  It was very beneficial to hear from you in that amount of detail your thinking about a wide variety of issues related to this. I’ve never seen the Committee presented with any analyses of asset-purchase programs that were not accompanied by an equal-sized expansion of the monetary base.  It’s easy to imagine something like that—we did it in the 1960s with Operation Twist where we sterilized purchases of long securities by selling short securities—picking some point at the short end of the term structure, where yields aren’t equal to the interest rate on reserves, and selling there an amount equal to what we buy at the long end of the curve.  You’ve never presented us with an analysis of that.  Moreover, in all of the empirics aimed at assessing the effect of the LSAP, all of them have announcements where it was widely understood that those purchases were going to be accompanied by an increase in the monetary base of equal size.  So I’m wondering what information you could give us to disentangle or differentiate between the effects of asset purchases and the effects of expanding the monetary base and what the staff’s view is about the difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question and request for information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 239.
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One main thing, and Nathan may want to talk about this, too, is going back not to the U.S. experience.  One key thing is looking at the Japanese experience where they, in essence, ran the experiment you’re talking about, which was to increase greatly the monetary base.  Our assessment is that it did very little.  The Japanese, I think, are a little bit more optimistic about what they did, in that they think that did help hold up inflation expectations.  People have debated that one, but the general feeling is that just expanding reserves did very little to bolster the Japanese stock market or that sort of thing. For the United States, we haven’t actually run the experiment you’re talking about, so there’s no way to look at any evidence to judge whether we’d get a different result.  The logic of what we’re doing is that, yes, there would be a difference, and if we just expanded reserves, the assumption we’re making is that we would get very little for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Reifschnieder believes that increasing the monetary base in Japan did very little, while the Japanese have a more optimistic view. There is also debate about whether expanding reserves would have a positive impact on the Japanese stock market. Additionally, Mr. Reifschnieder states that there is no evidence to judge the potential outcome of the experiment in the United States. So, opinions and perspectives vary in this passage, indicating disagreement or contention.


Passage number 240.
 MR. SACK.  We did write a MarketSOURCE piece a few rounds ago that addressed at least part of your question.  We’ve looked at a lot of event-study evidence in evaluating LSAPs, and, as you pointed out at one meeting, those experiments involved not just the change in the asset holdings, but also the concurrent change in reserves.  So can we really disentangle which of those is affecting financial conditions.  The MarketSOURCE piece compared those event studies with event studies around the SFP.  When there have been unexpected changes in the Treasury’s SFP, it amounts to a surprise change in the level of reserves without any corresponding change in the amount of duration risk that we’re taking out.  The analysis made the point that those surprises didn’t seem to have much effect on financial conditions.  So that may be one small piece of evidence that the effects of the LSAPs come more from the assets taken out of the markets than from the change in reserves.  To your broader question, it’s true—we could achieve a sizable change in the duration of our holdings through a portfolio reallocation if you werewilling to sell shorter-term assets and buy longer-term assets, and you could do that without reserve implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing information and discussing findings from different studies.


Passage number 241.
 MR. ENGLISH.  We did some work, if you remember—a little more than a year ago, I think—where we talked to the banks that were holding large stocks of reserves and asked them about their demand for reserves and what they intended to do as their demand for reserves declined.  At that time, the staff’s feeling was that the large stock of reserves didn’t seem to be having the sorts of effects that you would expect to see from a pure QE approach, in the sense that the money stock wasn’t growing rapidly and bank credit wasn’t growing rapidly.  At least some of the banks were telling us that, when it came time to reduce their demand for reserves, they were going to move first into holdings of short- and intermediate-term securities and only later into increasing their lending.  We said at that time that we’d want to focus on looking at the bank credit numbers to see if, in some sense, that seemed to be getting some traction, that is, if you seemed to be seeing a pickup in growth in bank credit, a pickup in growth in loans.  Today loan growth is still negative—it has slowed some—and it does not appear that there is the sort of transmission mechanism that I associate with QE operating through bank balance sheets; it just doesn’t seem to be there at this stage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is presenting information and observations made by Mr. English and the staff regarding bank reserves and their impact on the money stock and bank credit growth. There is no clear contention or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 242.
 MR. LACKER.  I recall those discussions, and I had some discussions with bankers as did other folks at the Richmond Fed.  Did you do this in August or September of last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's recollection and acknowledges that others at the Richmond Fed also had discussions with bankers.


Passage number 243.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 244.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Could I make one other point.  It’s related to this discussion, and I think it’s implicit in what everyone is saying.  You could say, “Wow, we’re swapping T-bills for money,” but one could argue that, at a zero fed funds rate, there really isn’t a distinction between T-bills and money.  Actually, maybe the better way of saying it is that thedistinction between reserves and T-bills is not really existent at that point.  But if you’re buying longer-term assets instead, now you actually are changing something—you’re engaging in an operation that is a swap that is materially different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a point that is related to the discussion but does not contradict or challenge any previous statements.


Passage number 245.
 MR. LACKER.  The discussions with the banks that I’m familiar with indicated that in their liquidity management operations they did view the margin of substitution between reserve balances and short-term Treasury and agency securities.  At the yields during the summer, they viewed it as an attractive option to reduce their holdings of reserve balances and move into Treasuries and agencies.  In the event, we kept increasing reserves.  Lo and behold, yields on Treasuries and agencies fell in the fall, which is what you’d predict would have to happen to make them willing to hold the reserves involved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply describes the discussions and actions of banks regarding their liquidity management operations.


Passage number 246.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Those are short-term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Those are short-term" is a straightforward comment without any conflicting viewpoints or contrasting positions.


Passage number 247.
 MR. LACKER.  Right, but obviously there’s a whole chain of unsegmented markets in those types of securities that would transmit that out the yield curve, so it’s not inconceivable that that could be having an effect.  Governor Duke raised the question of what banks are going to do with all these reserves, so I think it’s legitimate to consider whether the monetary base could be as much of a factor in the effect of this program as the longer-term yield, which is just the point I wanted to explore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their thoughts and exploring a different perspective on the topic.


Passage number 248.
 MR. ENGLISH.  One piece of thinking that we’ve done over the intermeeting period was related to work that you may remember from a year or so ago.  We were interested in the extent to which the increase in reserves could potentially put pressure on banks’ leverage ratios, because it’s making their balance sheets larger.  We had concluded a little more than a year ago that that effect wasn’t that important because banks had enough capital that it didn’t seem to be eating into that cushion very much.  That same calculation today holds true even more, in thesense that bank balance sheets have shrunk, bank capital has gone up, so there’s even less of an effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and providing a comparison between past and present conditions.


Passage number 249.
 MR. LACKER.  I’d mention another thing.  You wouldn’t expect the QE channel to be limited to bank lending, right.   The decrease in corporate yields could just as well occur because you’re pushing people out through a series of markets—you’re making yields such that they want to move out, and that pushes yields down in other markets.  So it might not be bank lending where rates are pushed down.  It could be working in markets where the borrowers are more creditworthy, which tend not to be intermediated in our economy.  And bank security holdings have been going up lately as bank lending has been going down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply presenting a different perspective and possibility to the discussion.


Passage number 250.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the general theory of the liquidity trap is that, once you get to a certain point, essentially the demand is interest-inelastic, and there’s no further effect on short-term rates by increasing the supply of money.  That’s what liquidity traps are about, that’s what the zero lower bound is about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply explains the general theory of the liquidity trap and the zero lower bound.


Passage number 251.
 MR. LACKER.  I just take my anecdotal evidence from the large institution whose liquidity management operation we’ve had a fair amount of interaction with.  There is a meaningful margin of imperfect substitution between bank reserves and other short-term liquid securities that they hold as part of their liquidity management operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a statement made by Mr. Lacker about his anecdotal evidence regarding the substitution between bank reserves and other short-term liquid securities. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this particular passage.


Passage number 252.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Not to continue this, but I think implicit in this is the idea that buying a 5-year or 10-year Treasury note is what you would substitute for a corporate bond, rather than say, buying a T-bill.  So, again, it’s the duration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying his understanding of the situation and seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 253.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me go on to President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 254.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a question about the wording in alternative A and the intention there.  In paragraph 4, you have some forward guidance, and inparticular the phrase, “the Committee continues to anticipate that, with such a policy stance, inflation in the intermediate term will not exceed levels consistent with its mandate.”  What is the intention of this type of phrase.  What’s your expectation.  What are we trying to convey there.  Does this mean that, as inflation begins to rise to the mandate level, there would be a presumption that it would never go over by a tenth, or what.  That’s the issue that I have—the public’s and our interpretation of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is questioning the intention and meaning behind a specific phrase in alternative A. He is seeking clarification on the interpretation of the phrase and whether it implies a limit on inflation exceeding the mandate level.


Passage number 255.
   MR. ENGLISH.  We were trying to convey that the Committee wants inflation to move back to the mandate-consistent level.  We are not aiming to put inflation above the mandate-consistent level.  That’s a possible policy approach, as we know, but this would say that’s not what we are trying to do—what we’re aiming to do is just move it back, in some sense smoothly, to the mandate-consistent level.  Therefore, the Committee would begin to think about tightening policy if its projections of inflation over the intermediate term were above that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement explaining the Committee's goal of moving inflation back to the mandate-consistent level.


Passage number 256.
 MR. EVANS.  So are you supposed to rise smoothly and not overshoot at all, or would it allow some overshooting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about the proper technique for rising smoothly.


Passage number 257.
 MR. ENGLISH.  There’s noise here, but this would be a forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is noise present and then provides a statement about the noise being a forecast. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The word “levels” actually creates some ambiguity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
The use of the word "ambiguity" suggests that there is some disagreement or uncertainty surrounding the meaning or interpretation of the word "levels."


Passage number 259.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I also was going to say that the word “levels” has the ambiguity that Bill is suggesting.  The word “levels” is supposed to connote an interval, I think, of some kind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, supports the idea suggested by Bill about the ambiguity of the word "levels." He then goes on to explain his understanding of how the word is intended to convey an interval.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 260.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Well, it connotes that not all of your views are the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "not" suggests that there is a difference or variation in the views being discussed.


Passage number 261.
   MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
 MR. FISHER.  We’re trying to reassure people we are not going to go hog wild.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "hog wild" suggests a reckless or excessive behavior, and the speaker is trying to assure people that they will not engage in such behavior. Thus, there is contention or disagreement regarding the perception or concern of people about their actions.


Passage number 263.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That was the intent, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply confirms the intent of someone else's statement.


Passage number 264.
MR. LACKER.  We could just say we haven’t adopted price level targeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a course of action without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 265.
 MR. EVANS.  That’s not today’s push.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or opinion without any argument or contradiction.


Passage number 266.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I would rather use “hog wild” somewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Kocherlakota is a personal preference or expression, rather than a disagreement or argument.


Passage number 267.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes the word "laughter" followed by "Governor Duke," which gives no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 268.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.  Brian, just two questions to make sure I understand the capacity constraints.  Are they related to the purchase of Treasuries at the Desk or related to the maturity distribution that you’re looking to purchase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for clarification.


Passage number 269.
 MR. SACK.  We were thinking of it as related to the overall pace of purchases.  It is true that if we shifted the maturity distribution, it would give us more or less capacity—generally, if we shorten the maturity distribution, we can probably buy more quickly.  But that shortening of duration may offset the perceived benefits of the portfolio-balance channel.  So it is somewhat dependent.  I was saying that, under this type of distribution, generally, that’s a pace that we’re comfortable running at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sack is discussing the potential impact of shifting the maturity distribution on the pace of purchases, but he does not express any disagreement or opposition to a particular viewpoint. He simply presents the information and acknowledges the potential trade-offs involved.


Passage number 270.
 MS. DUKE.  Second, I thought I understood you to say that the maturity distribution might be different if you were ultimately aiming to purchase $1 trillion rather than the $600 billion.  So my question is:  If we got to the point where we purchased the $600 billion and wanted to purchase another $400 billion, would the latter purchase look different from the former.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a clarifying question based on their understanding of the previous statement.


Passage number 271.
  MR. SACK.  The approach we’ve taken here is to set out a distribution that we’ll basically stick to over the entire period of the program.  If you decided to do $1 trillion through the end of 2011, I think the best approach would be just to tweak the distribution as we see fit and get it in place today, and then carry it out.  But it wouldn’t be the end of the world, either, if we did this for six months and then reevaluated.  So we could do it either way.  For some sectors,like the 10- to 18-year sector, the farther we go with this, the more of the available supply we take out of the market—we’ll end up with more issues crossing the 35 percent limit, and so on.  So we would want to make some modest modifications, but not dramatic ones.  I don’t want to turn that into a larger issue than it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different approaches to a distribution plan but does not express any disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 272.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any statements or discussion points that suggest controversy or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 273.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage, "President Lockhart," does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply states the title or position of a person named President Lockhart, without any additional details.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 274.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Back to Brian, at the risk of asking you to cover ground you’ve already covered, I’d like to understand a little more your thought process in striking the degree of transparency that you’re proposing in this statement.  Are there arguments that you weighed against this degree of transparency.  And then, to echo what I think President Lacker referred to, what more could you do if you wanted to be more transparent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage suggests a disagreement or contention because Mr. Lockhart asks if there were any arguments weighed against the proposed degree of transparency, indicating that there may be differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 275.
 MR. SACK.  We discussed the pros and cons of this pretty extensively.  I think we’re comfortable conveying to the market our intentions with this amount of specificity.  It does allow markets to anticipate what we’re going to do.  It allows market prices to move in advance of our purchases even, and we see that as productive—it just pushes markets more quickly to the outcome that will be realized from the purchases. The current procedure doesn’t give the distribution and doesn’t announce the size of our operations, so market participants have to infer that and then infer whether that will be maintained going forward.  As a result, after a month or two of the program, under LSAP1 or under the reinvestment program, the primary dealers have been able to figure out generally what we intend to do, but it took two months of watching and uncertainty until they got to that point.  Here we’re just going to accelerate that and let them know up front what we intend to do.  The only potential cost, in our thinking, is that it might be confusing if we have to change thedistribution, but we think we’ve guarded against that by having language in here indicating that we retain the option to change the distribution. A potential risk relates to the individual operations.  If we are announcing sizes, and if something is going on in the market, it raises the risk of not being able to complete an operation of that size.  Right now we don’t have that issue, because we don’t tell the sizes of individual operations, so that risk would be introduced by announcing the sizes.  But we view that as a very minimal risk—the operations have tremendous coverage to date, and if there were some unusual strain in markets that made us worry about completing an operation, we probably would reschedule the operation anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of the pros and cons of the current procedure and the potential benefits and risks of a new approach.


Passage number 276.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I take it you don’t see any concern about stepping up the transparency of your guidance, while, at the same time, alternative B’s statement, to some degree, steps up the conditionality and stresses that we’re going to review this periodically and it could change.  You don’t see that as creating any confusion in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a statement and asks for the reader's opinion without suggesting any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 277.
 MR. SACK.  In the FAQs, we explicitly address this point and say that we will publish schedules based only on announced policy actions and directives from the FOMC, so that, if the directive were to change, then we would publish a new schedule.  We had to be explicit about that, obviously, to avoid signaling.  There may be situations in which an FOMC meeting is approaching and an action is widely expected, but we’ll be publishing a schedule that is out of step with that, and we address that explicitly in the FAQs.  We would just adjust our communications accordingly as the FOMC adjusts its policy action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply explaining the process of publishing schedules based on announced policy actions and directives from the FOMC.


Passage number 278.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the speaker, Mr. Lockhart, is expressing gratitude ("Thank you"), which indicates a positive or agreeable sentiment.


Passage number 279.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is insufficient information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 280.
MR. ROSENGREN.  I just want to follow up on the schedule.  If the Treasury were to change its debt management dramatically, or if foreign purchases were to change dramatically, you wouldn’t be bound to keep the same distribution.  You feel that you have the flexibility to make the adjustment without waiting until an FOMC meeting.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rosengren is simply seeking clarification on whether the speaker has the flexibility to make adjustments to the distribution without waiting for an FOMC meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 281.
 MR. SACK.  That’s right.  The statement says, “The distribution of purchases could change if market conditions warrant,” and we see that as general enough to encompass all of the possibilities you discussed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The usage of the phrase "we see that as general enough" implies that the speaker has a different interpretation or perspective on the statement compared to others.


Passage number 282.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given phrase "President Kocherlakota" does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It simply states the title of President followed by a name. Without further context, it is not possible to determine any disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 283.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.  I was worried about the same point that President Rosengren is addressing, because I think the clause right after that undercuts that ability to adjust, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 284.
 MR. SACK.  That second clause, of course, tries to draw a line between Desk discretion and FOMC discretion.  If the FOMC is content taking it out, the Desk doesn’t have an issue with that.  [Laughter]  Again, it introduces just some flexibility by saying that changes will “not significantly alter the average duration”—that gives us some room.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a clause and expressing agreement with it. The laughter indicates a light and cooperative tone.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did you have another question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 286.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  No, that’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota agrees with the statement or suggestion made by the other person.


Passage number 287.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  This is a livelier Q&A than usual in this round.  We’re about ready for the policy round.  Before we start, let me make one observation.  As President Lacker mentioned, yesterday I spoke quite a bit about the asset purchases, and this, obviously, is an issue that most people are focused on.  There is an alternative or complementary measure on the table, which is the language in alternative A, paragraph 4, giving additional commitments about our policy rate.  Personally, I am open-minded about that and about whetherto do something soon or in the future.  I just wanted to say that, if anyone wants to add comments on that issue or that approach as an alternative or a complement to other approaches, that is, of course, welcome in this round.  Let me start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their openness to considering alternative measures and inviting others to provide their input.


Passage number 288.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I suggested yesterday, my forecast is that unemployment will remain at 9 percent or higher throughout 2011, resulting in continued disinflationary pressure.  Further disinflation is not only inconsistent with my target, but it also would imply a tightening of short-term real rates at a time when I believe we should be easing.  The continuation of large misses on both elements of our mandate through the forecast horizon provides ample reason for further monetary policy accommodation. I am in favor of alternative B.  However, under alternative B, my expectation is that we would complete the entire purchase of $600 billion in securities, unless incoming data indicated that we would achieve both elements of our mandate within the forecast horizon—an event I view as, unfortunately, quite remote.  I also view alternative B as providing an easing bias.  Unless we make significant progress on both elements of the mandate, that is, if the outlook continues to imply slow and meager progress towards both elements of the mandate, I would favor serious consideration of additional asset purchases following the round that I hope we will approve today. A serious mistake made by the Japanese was that they moved slowly and methodically to address, first, the disinflation, and then the deflation once they hit the zero bound.  I do not want our monetary policy to make the same mistake.  We should make clear in both our language and our actions that we are resolute in achieving both elements of our mandate. In terms of alternative A, paragraph 4, I would just say that I wouldn’t want it to be a substitution for the policy; if anything, I would want it in addition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own forecast and opinions on monetary policy, but there is no indication of any disagreement or debate with others.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only states "President Lacker," without providing any information or context that indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 290.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I said, I appreciated your remarks yesterday afternoon.  During those remarks, you noted that many of us, if not all of us, are nervous about this policy, so please count me in the nervous camp.  In fact, count me in the too- nervous-to-support-alternatives-B-or-A camp.  I will explain why I’m nervous and then comment briefly on the language that we might use if we elect to move today. First, as I mentioned yesterday, I don’t believe the benefits of further monetary stimulus would be terribly large.  In a nutshell, I think inflation is not too low, the risk of deflation is quite small, and very little additional real growth would result.  I don’t need to elaborate, because these notions are consistent with points that several others around this table and I have been making for some time, namely, that it looks as if economic growth is slow now for reasons that monetary policy can and should do little to ameliorate.  In addition, I find it disconcerting that, according to the Tealbook, something like two-thirds of the improvement in the growth outlook seems to be attributable to the net export effect of the reduced value of the dollar.  Given the climate of international discourse regarding currency valuations—and I recognize that some around the table are more expert in this area than I—my sense is that it wouldn’t be helpful for us to be seen as stimulating economic growth primarily through currency depreciation.  Moreover, the growth effects in that channel could be dampened to the extent that other central banks adjust their policy in response—a factor that I understand isn’t taken into account in the box on pages 4 and 5. Second, I think the risks of providing further stimulus at this time are substantial.  The fact that the effects are likely to be so small adds to those risks.  While inflation has downshifted over the last two years, to be sure, I seriously doubt whether we would be considering morequantitative easing if it weren’t for the elevated level of the unemployment rate.  So, in that sense, I think it’s fair to say this is mostly about unemployment, and I think that’s how markets are going to read this.  More quantitative easing right now would imply more influence over the unemployment rate than we actually have, and would promise more improvement in unemployment than we are capable of delivering.  The precedent this sets would bias our reaction function toward unemployment, both in our actual reaction function and in the public’s perception of it.  As a result, people are likely to expect increasing monetary stimulus as long as the level of the unemployment rate is disappointing, and that’s likely to be true for a long, long time. This asset-purchase program is predicated on the notion that inflation expectations are stable enough that we have the leeway to provide additional stimulus.  This may look like a pretty safe bet right now, with inflation low and expectations near the center of recent ranges.  But if economic growth doesn’t seem to respond rapidly enough to our efforts, as I suspect will be the case, we inevitably will be tempted to risk an inflation uptick by doubling down on the program size.  Moreover, the path we are taking today could put us in a difficult quandary in the not unlikely scenario that inflationary pressures build up before unemployment is judged to be acceptably low.  Inflation expectations could be much more difficult to restrain then, if we are seen as having tilted towards unemployment. For me, this poses unacceptable risks to price stability and to our credibility.  Those risks might not materialize this quarter, they might not materialize next quarter, or next year, given where inflation is right now, but we know that there will come a time in this recovery when the amount of reserves we are supplying right now would be too much and would set off an acceleration of inflation.  When that time approaches, unemployment could well be higher thanwe and many others would like to see it, and, at that point, I fear today’s decision and the expectations it encourages will come back to haunt us. I have a comment on the language in alternatives A and B, paragraph 2, which I offer up in the spirit of how to provide stimulus, if you must.  It has to do with the second sentence in paragraph 2, which describes unemployment as elevated and inflation as somewhat low relative to levels consistent with the dual mandate.  I think we all agree with the obvious point made by President Bullard at our last meeting, namely, if we’re conducting monetary policy in a way that is ideal, evaluated against our statutory mandates, then it will be the case that unemployment and inflation are at times different from their target values—that is, their long-run average values or the value to which they would converge over time in the absence of further economic shocks.  And that seems like a pretty clear and generally accepted point about how we do policy.  The second sentence in A2 and B2 seems to imply that the current levels of the unemployment rate are inconsistent with our mandates.  I don’t think it’s true that the current levels of unemployment are inconsistent with us conducting a policy in a way that’s optimal vis-à-vis our mandates.  We’re obviously debating what to do to continue to be optimal relative to our mandates, but this isn’t just a semantic point.  This language encourages people to view us as failures or as having fallen short whenever unemployment is even moderately high, and that’s essentially a view of policy as a series of static, one-time problems.  We disposed of that viewpoint several decades ago, as you know.  Instead, the viewpoint that President Bullard was sketching, the modern one, is that economies are hit by shocks.  There are important intertemporal interdependencies, which means that you set policy over time such that the economy responds in a way that is optimal against our goals.  In other words, with no shocks, the convergence back to steady state would be at an optimal pace.  You can debate what an optimalpace is, and that is something that is at the heart of the judgment of what monetary policy is about.  But it’s about the pace of return to those average long-run values or ideal values, it’s not about the level against those ideal values. We should find a way, I believe, in minutes or testimony, to convey the sense of—and here I will use some geeky language—what optimal policy means in a stochastic equilibrium, which is what President Bullard was talking about.  Until then, though, I suggest we end the second sentences after the word “low,” so that it reads, “Currently, the unemployment rate is elevated, and measures of inflation are somewhat low.”  That does the job.  It deletes the clause pulling in our mandate, but the first sentence of the paragraph prominently mentions our mandate.  Moreover, the third sentence is the one that characterizes our assessment of policy in terms of the pace at which we’re getting back to where we want to be, namely, that progress is too slow.  With that suggestion, I thank you and conclude my remarks, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have a comment and a question.  Obviously, we’re not saying that, if at any point in time, we’re not at the mandate, then the policy is wrong—clearly, we don’t want to say that.  The last sentence in the paragraph is intended to capture that point.  It says that we anticipate a gradual return to appropriate levels of unemployment and inflation, but we judge that progress has been unacceptably slow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and explaining their perspective on the situation, but there is no direct contradiction or conflict present.


Passage number 292.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  It does the job.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker agrees with the statement that "it does the job."


Passage number 293.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  That tries to capture the notion you have.  Let me raise another point, and maybe others would want to comment.  One additional way also to address your concern would be to revise the second sentence.  In that sentence, we struck out the phrase “over the longer run.”  We could instead say, “The unemployment rate is elevated, and measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low relative to levels that the Committee judgesto be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate.”  In other words, this is the long-run target in some sense, but not the instantaneous.  Does that help at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering another point to address the concern expressed by someone else and suggesting a revised wording for a sentence. They are seeking clarification and feedback from others.


Passage number 294.
 MR. LACKER.  It just doesn’t seem to me that, given the third sentence, we need to be judgmental in the sentence that talks about levels of unemployment.  “Over the longer run” with the unemployment rate, as I said last time, is kind of problematic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is expressing his opinion and stating that he does not see a need for judgment in a particular sentence.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s why we struck all this language we had in the videoconference, because we couldn’t come to agreement on how to characterize it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there was disagreement among the individuals involved regarding how to describe or portray something in a videoconference, leading them to remove certain language.


Passage number 296.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.  Is this the long-run average.  I don’t think so, right.  In the absence of shocks, it would converge to something that’s at the lower end of its range, so it’s a concept that needs more explanation.  And I’m not sure why you need to talk about the mandate a second time in the second sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and seeking more clarification on certain points.


Passage number 297.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking President Evans if they have a question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 298.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, I just wanted to ask a question and offer a reaction to something that has come up at the last several meetings.  I second the proposal of characterizing what optimal policy is in some way that we could better appreciate.  President Bullard was absolutely correct when he pointed out that, after a big shock, optimal policy could well lead to fairly substantial gaps, or however you want to describe this outcome.  But it’s also the case that bad policy would lead to gaps like that, too, and we need to understand why the current situation should be characterized as optimal and not simply bad.  [Laughter]  I mean, there is just a presumption here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the statement "But it’s also the case that bad policy would lead to gaps like that, too, and we need to understand why the current situation should be characterized as optimal and not simply bad." The speaker is questioning whether the current situation should be considered optimal policy or simply bad policy.


Passage number 299.
 MR. BULLARD.  Can I just clarify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a direct question from Mr. Bullard, requesting clarification. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 300.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement regarding President Bullard.


Passage number 301.
MR. BULLARD.  I just said that merely saying that unemployment is high and inflation is very low doesn’t tell you anything one way or the other about the quality of the policy, so that’s consistent with what you’re saying.  It could be that we are following completely horrible policy, but we can argue that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Bullard and the speaker agree that stating unemployment is high and inflation is low does not provide enough information to judge the quality of the policy.


Passage number 302.
 MR. LACKER.  My point was that we don’t want to lead people to believe that, if unemployment is ever high, it’s because we have failed and are doing bad policy.  You’d agree with that, wouldn’t you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker states a point and asks for agreement, implying that he expects the response to be positive.


Passage number 303.
 MR. EVANS.  I second the proposal for clarity on all of these objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with and supports the proposal for clarity on all of the objectives.


Passage number 304.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions President Plosser without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 305.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, those are included.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 306.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Pick a number for asset purchases, say, $600 billion.  If we believe that that amounts to a move of 100 basis points for the funds rate, then we’ve already done the equivalent of 300 basis points in terms of the funds rate going into this, and this would be lowering it yet another 100 basis points.  The calculations of the Taylor rule don’t make that adjustment.  When you calculate the Taylor rule, it doesn’t tell you that you’ve already done 300 basis points worth of easing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is simply discussing the potential effects of asset purchases and pointing out that the Taylor rule does not account for the previous easing measures.


Passage number 307.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, it does.  The calculations that were done in that memo already take into account the purchases we have made in making that assessment.  In the Leahy memo that was circulated at the videoconference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that the calculations in the memo were already aware of the purchases made in order to assess something. The mention of "Leahy memo" does not introduce any disagreement, but rather provides a reference to a specific document.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 308.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  The October 15 Kiley et al. memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage appears to contain a potential contention or disagreement as indicated by the mention of "Kiley et al. memo." It suggests that there may be differing opinions or perspectives stated in the memo, which could lead to contention or disagreement between the individuals involved.


Passage number 309.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry, the Kiley memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not providing any content or information that suggests contention or disagreement. It only mentions that there is a "Kiley memo," but does not elaborate or provide any further details or context.


Passage number 310.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m sorry.  I was thinking about the numbers in the Tealbook from the Taylor rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentioned Mr. Plosser's thoughts about the numbers in the Tealbook from the Taylor rule. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 311.
 MR. WILCOX.  It was in the framework memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The quote from Mr. Wilcox is simply stating a fact about the framework memo, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 312.
MR. PLOSSER.  I stand corrected, then, if that’s true.  I lost my place here.  In any event, I think we need to think clearly about both the scale that we have already done and how it will affect the economy as we unwind—if we don’t sell assets, then the portfolio-balance effect of that stock of assets is negative. Finally, let me note that I largely agree with President Nutter—I’m sorry, it was President Evans who was talking saying that.  [Laughter]  Excuse me—that just slipped out.  I agree with him wholeheartedly on the importance of an inflation target.  But, like President Kocherlakota, I’m unclear exactly how further asset purchases, which simply increase the amount of excess reserves we have in the banking system, would work.  I have no idea how they would help raise inflation expectations in the short run.  We already have sufficient excess reserves, and if those excess reserves flowed out into the economy as M2 or some other measure of liquidity, we have the kindling that has the potential to create a great amount of inflation.  If we wish to affect inflation expectations, we might be more effective in emphasizing this actuality and the prospects for higher inflation in our communications. Better still, we might think of using other tools to increase the money multiplier and encourage banks to put their excess reserves to different uses—this is related perhaps to President Lacker’s discussion earlier.  For example, we might consider enhancing the transmission mechanism by raising the interest on required reserves to 50 basis points and lowering the interest on excess reserves to zero.  We’ve paid zero interest rates on excess reserves for most of our history.  By creating a wedge between required reserves and excess reserves, we might encourage some of those huge amounts of excess reserves that are in the system to move out into assets of various classes, and let the markets take care of it rather thanforcing us to do something along those lines.  So I think we need to consider other ways of enhancing what we’ve already done. In closing, I agree it would be a surprise if the Fed did not do LSAPs today, given the recent speeches.  But that isn’t a reason, in my mind, to implement an inappropriate policy whose costs may outweigh its benefits.  The Committee should be setting appropriate policy, and the markets will adjust, not the other way around.  Moreover, our focus should be on the intermediate to longer run.  Short-term interests of traders, marketmakers, and the dealers we’re so fond of surveying about our policy choices may well be at odds with the longer-run policy objectives of the broad economy.  After all, isn’t that one of the reasons for our independence, namely, to keep that longer-term focus.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and ideas, agreeing with some points made by others, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument.


Passage number 313.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and I apologize for interrupting you.  Next is President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite and respectful statement.


Passage number 314.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I was confused.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage doesn't indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Plosser was confused.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 315.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I see the additional asset purchases as appropriate insurance during a challenging phase of the recovery.  My baseline forecast hasn’t changed meaningfully since our last meeting.  I still expect output growth to remain weak to moderate and inflation rates to remain well below the levels that I would consider consistent with our price stability objective. On several occasions in the past, after a long sequence of federal funds rate reductions, with a gradually improving outlook, the FOMC still chose to lower the fed funds rate as an insurance policy to reduce the likelihood of worst outcomes.  Although the alternative scenarios for further asset purchases described in the Tealbook suggest limited impacts on the real economy, a decision at this meeting to go ahead with some additional policy accommodationshould help to limit further disinflation.  I think there is some insurance value to be derived from solidifying recent progress and moving inflation expectations higher and closer to our long-run inflation objective.  I was concerned when financial market estimates of inflation expectations appeared to be dipping following the September meeting.  Inflation expectations have since recovered.  I view this as evidence that additional accommodation will help to lock in some of the progress that we’ve made to date in moving inflation expectations up toward our price stability objective. Also, with inflation already so low, particularly for CPI-based measures, I think some insurance against further declines in inflation and inflation expectations is appropriate.  It’s true that not all of the insurance moves exercised by past Committees were viewed as necessary after the fact.  However, it’s also true that some insurance moves taken by past Committees when the economy seemed to be doing better sometimes turned out to have been insufficient.  Determining when to do a little more, or when to stop, is never easy.  But I can support additional accommodation to help stabilize inflation expectations.  Following such a strategy also enables us to do what we can to support an improved employment picture. On the statement language, I am concerned that in the minutes of our September meeting we indicated that we discussed providing a policy framework for further accommodation.  But it was evident during our videoconference call that finding a compromise for a framework is proving to be challenging.  In its current state, I see the language in alternative B as providing only the most general feedback mechanism for guiding policy adjustments. One way to provide a feedback mechanism would be to modify paragraph 4 from alternative A and insert it into alternative B.  I would simplify the language around the inflation outlook and make unemployment the last item in the list.  My proposed language for paragraph 4would read, “The Committee expects to maintain the target rate for the fed funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent at least until mid-2012, so long as the Committee’s outlook for inflation in the intermediate term remains consistent with its mandate, longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored, and the unemployment rate remains elevated.”  Language along these lines helps to link potential policy changes to inflation and inflation expectations, in addition to unemployment, which we all expect will remain elevated beyond 2012.  By providing this feedback mechanism, we can help to stabilize inflation expectations around our price stability mandate while also acknowledging our mandate for full employment in the long run.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker supports alternative B and argues for additional asset purchases as a form of insurance during a challenging phase of the recovery. They also express concern about the language in alternative B and propose a modification to provide a clearer feedback mechanism for guiding policy adjustments. This suggests a disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 316.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 317.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  May I just make sure I understand your suggestion on inflation.  You said “To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery while maintaining inflation within levels consistent with its mandate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a request for clarification or confirmation regarding a suggestion on inflation.


Passage number 318.
” MR. FISHER.  “While maintaining its firm commitment to keep inflation within levels consistent…”  I think that would be reassuring to the marketplace and also reassuring to our critics, who, I think, are going to turn up the volume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents someone's opinion regarding the potential reassurance provided by the mentioned commitment to inflation levels.


Passage number 319.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage consists of a simple statement about President Hoenig without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 320.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  It’s 11:00.  I understand that coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take 20 minutes for refreshments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting taking a break for refreshments since the coffee is ready.


Passage number 321.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s recommence.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply mentions a coffee break and then suggests continuing or recommencing a task.


Passage number 322.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t know if it’s great to be speaking after the break when everybody’s on a sugar high from the doughnuts.  [Laughter]  I support the policy action in alternative B.  I also support the implementation approach detailed in paragraph 3 of alternative B.  I think it’s appropriate at this time to respond to evidence suggesting that the risks of further disinflation remain elevated.  I think risk management is the justification for the action, an insurance policy that has the intent of taking deflation risk off the table. As I said in the economy round, my sense is that the headwinds restraining the economy and the structural adjustments required may make further monetary stimulus through an LSAP program less effective than we would like.  I think it’s important, therefore, to be measured in our expectations about how much further stimulus can accomplish in the current environment.  There’s simply a lot of uncertainty associated with this policy action.I prefer an approach that preserves flexibility and stresses the conditionality of the policy and does not lock us into specific triggers for future action at this time.  I think paragraph 5 serves to make it clear that the pace and size of the program will be continuously evaluated as the economic outlook evolves.  That said, I agree with the suggestion that discussion of the decision framework associated with conditioning would be useful.  I also want to add that, even though it’s not a consideration at this meeting, I remain sympathetic to the idea of using this moment to be more explicit regarding an inflation objective. I am not entirely comfortable with the language in paragraph 2 of alternative B.  It seems likely to me that changing the language to call out the unemployment rate specifically will inevitably invite the conclusion that we have a specific rate in mind and that we are introducing an unemployment target as a guide for future monetary actions.  I’m sensitive to the fact that we are pursuing a dual mandate, of course, but, in my opinion, the language we have been using does appropriately honor the mandate.  Specifically, I think the statement that “Measures of underlying inflation are currently at levels somewhat below those the Committee judges most consistent, over the longer run, with its mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability,” makes it clear that we have a focus on labor markets.  More importantly, it does so without risking overinterpretation of how much we can do about altering the path of the unemployment rate in the near or even medium term.  Most of our forecasts suggest that the unemployment rate will remain above what anyone would call desirable levels, even after the pace of the economic recovery has improved.  I think the current version of paragraph 2 in alternative B may well create issues in exiting from that language.  The September language, it seems to me, still serves us well.  But if the Committee feels the need to put somewhat more emphasis on employment, I would suggest something closer to the language in the initial versionof alternative B that was circulated last week.  A streamlined version of that would say something like, “The pace of economic recovery would likely be too slow to make acceptable progress toward maximum employment, and underlying inflation likely would remain undesirably low for some time, posing risks to the economic recovery.”  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states their support for alternative B and the implementation approach detailed in paragraph 3. They also mention their agreement with the suggestion of discussing the decision framework associated with conditioning. They express some discomfort with the language in paragraph 2 of alternative B, but offer a suggestion for a revised version. Overall, there is no clear disagreement or contention in their statements.


Passage number 323.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you" and "President Evans" do not show any disagreement or contention. They are simply a polite expression of gratitude and acknowledgment.


Passage number 324.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude to First Vice President Moore.


Passage number 325.
 MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  I see two compelling reasons for resuming purchases of long-term securities at this point.  First, we are currently falling well short on both of our mandates, and just as importantly, we’ve made no progress for more than one-half year now.  Moreover, even if we achieve the consensus forecast for economic growth in the upcoming periods, progress towards achieving our mandates will be painfully slow.  As shown in the Tealbook simulations, additional monetary stimulus in the form of asset purchases will help us reach our goals sooner.  Second, I see a strong argument for taking out insurance against downside risks.  For example, at our current levels of unemployment and inflation, further negative shocks to the economy would be very costly.  Even in the absence of such shocks, there is a small but dangerous possibility that the slow trend of disinflation will continue, and we will slip closer to a Japanese-style period of stagnation.  After all, deflation in Japan developed only after many years of grinding disinflation.  I do recognize that further asset purchases carry some risks, but I believe that the benefits of this action, both in terms of meeting our mandate and of managing risks, outweigh those concerns.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Moore, expresses his support and favor for alternative B and provides reasons for his stance.


Passage number 326.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of thanks and an acknowledgement of President Kocherlakota.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 327.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I remain concerned about doing more quantitative easing or doing another large-scale asset purchase.  First, I perceive theexpected benefits of further—I’m going to keep saying “quantitative easing” because that’s what I’ve written here—quantitative easing [laughter] to be small, especially in terms of inflation, but also in terms of unemployment.  The forecasts on pages 4 and 5 of the Tealbook Part A strike me as consistent with this view.  Second, I believe that quantitative easing may well have significant downside risks.  I will not go through these in great detail.  Others have spoken extremely eloquently about them:  President Fisher, President Hoenig, President Plosser, President Lacker, all elaborated on these risks at great length and, I’m afraid, in a compelling way. But I will talk about one risk.  I think this is the most direct risk coming out of a large-scale asset purchase, because it’s what the purchase is all about, namely, to take duration risk out of the private sector and transfer it to taxpayers—that is what the heart of the LSAP is.  We have to be thinking about whom we’re taking risk from and whom we’re transferring it to.  The essence of the LSAP relies on a segmented markets view of the world, where there are some people participating in bond markets and other people who have less access to it.  The people who are participating in the markets are the ones who benefit from this.  The ones who are not participating are the ones who don’t benefit.  This follows up on President Fisher’s eloquent description of the distributional consequences of our policies.  Typically I would think the people who are participating in asset markets are wealthier and more educated, while the people who are not able to are less wealthy, less educated.  In addition, while staff work has been thorough and very compelling on the asset pricing side, the ultimate macroeconomic impact of this risk shift has remained murky to me. Despite these concerns, and given your arguments yesterday, Mr. Chairman, and given the strength of consensus among the voters in the Committee, and I’ll emphasize the word “voters” here, I’m willing to go along with alternative B.  Let me talk about ways alternative Bcould be strengthened.  First, the word “unacceptably” in paragraph 2 seems to imply considerably more control over the recovery process than we actually have—I think we’re taking ownership for slow economic growth through that word.  I would recommend the word “disappointingly” or more simply the word “too.” Second, and more substantively, I would go along with President Pianalto’s recommendation of moving paragraph 4 from alternative A into alternative B, and I liked her rewording of it as well.  In general, it strikes me that an LSAP is not necessarily the most convincing tool that we have available.  I think forward guidance, as in paragraph 4 of alternative A, is a tool whose costs and benefits I understand better.  I think President Plosser’s suggestion of cutting the interest rate on excess reserves also is something that we should study more—again, it could help us achieve our dual mandate.  We’re not competing with huge benefits on the table here—the LSAP is not going to take us down to 5 percent unemployment—so I think we have to explore all the possibilities. My third suggestion relates to paragraph 5 of alternative B.  It says we’re going to do this regular review of the LSAP based on incoming information.  I would like to suggest that, after “in light of incoming information,” we add the phrase “about the rate of progress toward its objective.”  The idea is that, if we were in the lucky circumstances of seeing 1.3 million jobs created over the next six months—which I think is unlikely, I have to admit, given my own forecast—that might lead us not to do further accommodation.  So I want to put the focus on the rate of progress, not the levels. Finally, I really feel that this institution faces a credibility problem if we are not clear that we expect we are going in the right direction, but we expect our movement to be “limited,” “modest,” “small”—I don’t know what word you want to use.  I have not heard anyone aroundthe table suggest that we’re going to be making striking progress toward our dual mandate by adopting this program.  I think we should be clear with the public about that, and the way we can do that is in our communication through the minutes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, expresses concerns about further quantitative easing and its expected benefits. He also disagrees with the view that an LSAP (large-scale asset purchase) is the most convincing tool available and suggests exploring other possibilities such as forward guidance and cutting interest rates on excess reserves. Additionally, he suggests revisions to the language in alternative B, indicating a difference in opinion on how the plan should be implemented.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple phrase expressing gratitude.


Passage number 329.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude followed by a mention of Governor Yellen, which does not indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 330.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  You gave an eloquent, detailed, and very convincing defense of this alternative in your remarks yesterday, so I’ll just reiterate and emphasize my agreement with a few of the points you made. First, the outlook for employment and inflation are dismal.  We will miss both objectives by a country mile for years to come.  Of course it will take considerable time after such a largeshock to attain our objectives no matter what, but optimal policy calculations call for much more stimulus—as you explained in detail yesterday.  The pace of progress is inadequate.  Further, LSAPs are not a panacea, but they can make a meaningful difference.  We’ve seen a significant improvement in financial conditions on longer-term rates, equity prices, and the dollar during the intermeeting period as markets have increasingly built in the expectation that we will act.  The improvement in financial conditions we’ve already seen will help to support a stronger recovery and help to return inflation towards levels consistent with our dual mandate. If one stares at the graphs on page 5 of the Tealbook showing the paths of GDP and the unemployment rate under alternative policies, the benefits do look minor.  But putting numbers on them, as you did yesterday, suggests a meaningful improvement.  You estimated that a $600 billion program would create about 750,000 jobs by the end of 2012.  A similar calculation suggests the program would raise output over the next two years by around $125 billion.  Expanding our balance sheet may entail some risks, but the benefits are nontrivial, and I agree with your assessment that the risks are manageable, especially if we proceed cautiously.  I also agreed with your comments concerning the possible impact of this policy on the dollar.  On balance, I believe that because it has a positive impact on U.S. growth, our actions are not on net harmful to our neighbors.  A stronger U.S. recovery, I believe, is very much in their interests. Contrasting alternatives A and B, I prefer B.  I think it makes sense to commit at the outset to a dose of purchases that we can be quite confident we will want to undertake and to attach greater conditionality to purchases beyond that level, so we can see how economic conditions are evolving once the program gets under way.  My expectation, based on a forecast similar to Tealbook, is that we should and will end up purchasing roughly $1 trillion of longer-   term securities; but the $600 billion initial commitment, which, I guess, is the equivalent of around a 75 basis point cut in the federal funds rate, is a sufficient step for today. The wording in paragraph 5 leaves open the possibility of purchases beyond $600 billion and suggests a bias towards ease, but it doesn’t lean too heavily in that direction.  It also leaves open the possibility that if the data surprises are sufficiently strong to the upside, we might not complete the intended $600 billion of purchases.  But I think the bar for us to stop short of $600 billion should be quite high.  I would not, therefore, want to add “up to” to qualify $600 billion in paragraph 3. I see both pros and cons to altering the “extended period” language along the lines of A4.  On balance, my preference is to leave well enough alone.  A4 slightly improves the clarity around our “extended period” commitment by setting out conditions that would be required for us to raise the funds rate target before mid-2012.  But, because mid-2012 appears to be the modal market forecast for liftoff, the statement will not push out market expectations very much.  And the wording of the conditions around that promise still leave plenty of scope to keep markets guessing how high exactly is “elevated,” and what data would convince us that inflation expectations are no longer well anchored. Of course, it’s hard to be more specific because, as a number of you have emphasized, we haven’t agreed about such matters among ourselves.  I think our current language is working quite well, in the sense that incoming data surprises move market expectations about liftoff in ways that seem appropriate, and those reactions have been working to strengthen the transmission mechanism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. In fact, the speaker expresses agreement with the Chairman's remarks and points out areas of agreement.


Passage number 331.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Warsh.


Passage number 332.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and it is “regularly review” in the current statement.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely thanking someone and providing a clarification about the current statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 333.
MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for taking the time yesterday to lay out your reasoning so completely.  In my time here, I’ve learned to respect and be guided by your reasoning and your instincts, and I’ve also learned to trust your integrity.  So I was pleased to hear your commitment to the notion that, if at any time the costs of these actions are unacceptably higher than expected, we will stop.  On that basis alone, I would probably be willing to support alternative B, but I came in here with a few other reasons to support this action and a few concerns. I don’t disagree with the need for action.  I’m just troubled by the limited projected results from this action.  Given the discussion of pace versus level, when I looked at the graphs in the inset box, it seemed to me that the difference between alternatives was less than one quarter in terms of time.  I may be a little wrong on that because the graphs were small and I didn’t actually have a ruler, but that’s what it looked like.  [Laughter]  Therefore, perhaps the strongest reason that I can find to proceed with LSAPs is the healing effect of low rates.  Understanding that banks and their customers need to heal before they reengage, it may be enough of a reason.  And while I think the benefits are small, I’ve come to view the cost as equally small.  Although still untested on a large scale, our exit tools are at the ready, and inflation threats seem far away.  I’m anxious about the potential for asset bubbles, but I do believe we have a tight enough clamp on the financial system to limit those risks at the moment. However, given that I expect the benefits to be small, I still question what’s next.  It doesn’t feel really right to choose a strategy because I think it’s unlikely to do much harm if I also expect it to be unlikely to accomplish the mission.  While we’re framing this action as state-dependent, I don’t see much actual room to maneuver in reaction to different economic conditions.  With total monthly purchases as a constraint, our actual ability to react to incomingdata going forward seems limited to extending or not extending the time frame and the total amount.  I wholeheartedly endorse President Kocherlakota’s suggestion that we need to understand how we would define good and bad outcomes and what we might do in response to them.  I’m not sure how much scope we actually have, but it sounds like many around the table have different expectations about what comes next. Let me end with two reservations, just in case anyone missed them when I wove them into my comments yesterday.  We’ve talked about the difference between LSAPs and quantitative easing, but the fact is we will be injecting more reserves into the system.  The last time we had large purchases, reserves didn’t grow very much.  They had already grown as banks snapped up much needed liquidity, so, for the most part, our purchases represented a substitution of assets purchased for liquidity facilities’ repayment.  For their size, the LSAPs didn’t really expand our balance sheet or the reserves very much.  But the banking system doesn’t have the same thirst for additional liquidity at this time, so we need to monitor the response to additional reserves.  My second reservation comes from my concern about the mortgage market.  I can’t tell from the staff projections how much of the benefit of this action is expected to come from improvements in house prices or the mortgage market, but I still believe that channel is too broken to work. In summary, I support alternative B with the understanding that we will closely monitor the costs and benefits as we go along and hope that we will also continue to look for even stronger actions or uses of our tools to improve the outlook for unemployment. Turning to the statement, I do prefer “disappointingly slow” to “unacceptably slow.”  And I don’t like the “up to” language—I think that conditions it too much.  As to paragraph A4, I think markets already expect that timing, so I don’t see that it adds anything in terms ofexpectations, and I thought President Fisher’s suggestion, “while maintaining a firm commitment to keep inflation within levels consistent” and so on might signal the same thing and in a more efficient way.  Finally, I do sort of prefer the discussion of rate of progress rather than levels.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Duke expresses concerns about the limited projected results of the proposed action and questions the effectiveness of the strategy. She also raises reservations about injecting more reserves into the system and the state of the mortgage market. While she ultimately supports alternative B, she does so with reservations and hopes for stronger actions to improve the outlook for unemployment.


Passage number 334.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 335.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Raskin. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 336.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given that the economic recovery is too weak to deliver acceptable progress toward our dual objectives, additional monetary accommodation is appropriate.  Although it is appropriate, I believe its effect should not be overstated, and its risks need to be monitored.  The effects need to be viewed as not particularly overwhelming at this point.  FRB/US simulations suggest that the implications for real GDP and unemployment would be small.  Moreover, there currently is not a particularly robust short-term accommodative fiscal policy.  In addition, I wonder about the strength of the linkage between longer-term interest rateson Treasuries and the terms and availability of credit to small and medium-sized businesses.  These businesses, as we know, are an important source of job creation, and I’m uncertain about the extent to which lowering longer-term interest rates will open the spigot further to new lending.  This uncertainty is exacerbated by a supervisory policy that is uncoordinated, either rightly or wrongly, with monetary policy.  Similarly, I view the so-called wealth effect as having minimal further effect.  Equity prices have risen and may rise a bit more, but perhaps not enough to induce households to embark on much of a sustained spending spree. Despite these mitigants, the staff estimates that $600 billion of purchases leads to a reduction in the unemployment rate of approximately 0.3 percentage point.  This is small, but not inconsequential.  Alternatively understood, it’s small but, at this time, is not overtaken by risks that make doing nothing the better course of action.  Incidentally, I cast substantial doubt on the proposition heard around the table this morning that doing nothing here will somehow push and direct fiscal policy in the right direction in a timely and predictable way.  I view fiscal policy as highly uncertain, and, frankly, I believe it disingenuous at best to think that we can pass the buck, so to speak, back to the Congress. Accordingly, I would support the policy action and statement described in alternative B.  As between A and B, it strikes me that it is desirable to maintain flexibility in the timing and extent of any purchases above and beyond the $600 billion.  An even larger purchase program could be necessary, and alternative B signals that possibility.  A more incremental approach gives the Committee the chance to understand with precision the effect of increases in the balance sheet and the chance to incorporate incoming data—in a “regular” if not a “continuous” way—that could permit a more precise determination of the amount of stimulus or withdrawal of stimulus that the economy will need.  In addition, this more incremental approach may help allayany lingering concerns among some members about the Committee’s ability to execute a smooth exit from policy accommodation. Moreover, whether this is desirable or not, public statements by members of this Committee, this so-called stagecraft, have provided financial markets with the strong expectation that the Committee will announce an expansion in the balance sheet at this meeting.  Should we choose to determine that the threshold for undertaking further accommodation has not been met, as in alternative C or D, we would significantly surprise market participants and, as a result, longer-term interest rates would rise more than forecast, which, in my view, would stall the recovery at this point.  Since the time of the Chairman’s Jackson Hole speech, we’ve seen that the prospect of purchases can succeed in lowering interest rates.  Given the magnitude of excess capacity, there’s little risk of inflation today, and the risk of future inflation is minimal, so long-term interest rates should not rise dangerously in response to the interventions because this Committee has a credible record of reasonably anchoring inflationary expectations.  That record is what makes the course of accommodation described in alternative B, to my mind, credible. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that additional monetary accommodation is appropriate and supports the policy action described in alternative B. They also address potential risks and uncertainties but ultimately believe that the proposed course of action is credible.


Passage number 337.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude and identifies the speaker as the Vice Chairman.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I’d like to extend my sincere thanks to the members of the Open Market Committee.  Obviously, we don’t agree on all the aspects we’ve been discussing—although I think that, to some extent, the disagreement is less fundamental and more a sense of weights that are placed on different benefits and costs or risks.  In any case, the views expressed around the table are evidently very sincerely held, very well expressed, and very useful.  We began this meeting by talking about the benefits of collegial interaction, which, as I said, are enormous.  I also can say, quite frankly, that my own views have been influenced by the very careful and thoughtful statements that we have heard yesterday and today.  So I very much appreciate your thoughtful contributions, and I hope everybody understands that I do find this debate very constructive. Let me try to frame this at three different levels to help us think about the nature of the action we’re taking.  In some sense, the most basic level is the one I focused on yesterday, which essentially takes off from the staff forecast and then tries to assess the quantitative impact of these actions, which operate through various channels.  I said that my guess would be that the actions would be somewhat stronger than the staff predicted.  Monetary policy can be surprisingly powerful—I think there’s a tendency to underestimate that.  In any case, at that levelthe case seems pretty clear, because we are missing the two objectives under our mandate in the same direction, and not just now but for what we expect is a long period of time.  So, at that first level, the analysis says that we should be doing what we can to move in the direction of our mandate. A second level, maybe one step up, says basically, “Well, there are likely to be relatively small benefits coming from these actions and a whole bunch of undefined risks.”  A number of people around the table took that approach, particularly those who are most concerned about it.  That has clearly been the line that a lot of the external critics have taken:  “The benefits are small, and we don’t know what’s going to happen, and my personal view is that risk X is really the most serious one.”  I think it’s important that we look at those risks, as we have, including discussing them at some length.  Of course, that way of framing the problem makes it a much more uncertain decision. I’d like to ask you to think about this at yet one higher level—and we all alluded to this—which is that there’s an implication that taking no action is a relatively safe thing to do.  There is no safe thing to do—any action we take or don’t take is going to expose us to the judgment of history if we make the wrong decision.  In particular, taking no action has risks.  It may be true that deflation isn’t one of those risks, although that could happen down the road—currently, I think, the odds of that are relatively small.  But another risk with greater odds of materializing is that the recovery could falter, and we could begin to see unemployment rising, and we could get into a more serious downward spiral.  Therefore, not taking action is a risky step, just as taking action is a risky step.  We’re caught between action and inaction—each has implications, and we need to make an appropriate decision.I’d like to frame our decision today as a very conservative, middle-road approach, namely, we recognize that doing nothing carries serious risks of further disinflation and of a failure of the recovery to meet escape velocity, and, therefore, we’re going to take some actions to try to move us closer to our mandate and to take out some insurance against those bad downside risks.  Furthermore, in doing so, we’re not going to do “shock and awe”—we’re not going to do something extraordinarily large and dramatic.  Instead, we’re going to undertake an asset-purchase program that will play out over a period of eight months, with the purchases equaling $75 billion a month.  This is a substantial period of time—indeed, in some sense, the program has already been in place for two months, since we’ve already seen a lot of the effect on financial markets.  Having such a substantial period of time means that we can be very vigilant about monitoring whether the program is having the effects that we hope it will have and whether other considerations are arising.  I do appreciate Governor Warsh’s comments, and I want to reassure him, and others, that I take very seriously the need to review regularly not only the evolution of the economy, but also the emergence of risks.  So, in undertaking this program, we will review, we will be conditional, we will continue to monitor the risks that do exist.  We will do all of this over a substantial period of time, and, in particular, we will be very careful about inflation.  I want to reiterate that, again, there is no hidden agenda here to drive inflation to a high level.  That will be a very important consideration as we look forward. To summarize, I think that this is the right step.  In the broad context, I think it is a reasonably cautious step.  It hedges us against risks in both directions, and it gives us a substantial amount of time when we can be relatively more passive and observe developments.  Although I don’t anticipate, for example, fine-tuning or small jiggering of the amounts from meeting to meeting, I do think we should be prepared to make significant changes if either thebenefits or the costs prove different from what we anticipate.  Again, recognizing all of the concerns that people have, as well as the issues about impact and the like, I do think this is a conservative action, which, perhaps, seems a bit ironic, given the conversation.  It is one that attempts to take an appropriate step in the right direction, but in a careful and measured way, and it is one that will be reviewed as we go through the next eight months.  My recommendation, therefore, is to go ahead with this program. There were a lot of very good statement suggestions, and, although it always makes me nervous to edit these things on the fly in the meeting, I will propose adopting some of them, and I’d like to just go through and see how they work.  The first thing I would suggest, and I will check with all of you on each of these, is in paragraph 2.  I don’t think this really brought President Lacker along, but are you negative, President Lacker on “over the longer run.”  I thought the benefit of adding “over the longer run,” consistent with what President Bullard said, was that it emphasizes the fact that just because we are not at our targets today doesn’t mean that we are not doing optimal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses gratitude and acknowledges that there may be some disagreement on certain aspects, but overall they appreciate the thoughtful contributions and find the debate constructive. The speaker then explains their own views and recommends a conservative, middle-road approach. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict among the members of the Open Market Committee.


Passage number 339.
 MR. LACKER.  What does it mean arithmetically.  If you had to write it down arithmetically, what would “over the longer run” mean about the unemployment rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification on the meaning of a phrase, indicating a desire for understanding rather than disagreement.


Passage number 340.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we will be calculating that over time, but I think most of us would put high odds that our longer-run natural rate of unemployment is below 9.6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the longer-run natural rate of unemployment is likely to be below 9.6%.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 341.
 MR. LACKER.  You mean the natural rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough context to determine the specific contention or disagreement.


Passage number 342.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The natural rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 343.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, that’s not uncontroversial.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating that something is not uncontroversial, indicating that there is some level of disagreement or controversy surrounding it.


Passage number 344.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  9.6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage, which only contains a number at the beginning, does not present any information or statements that can be disputed or argued.


Passage number 345.
 MR. LACKER.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "No" simply implies a denial or absence of something and does not involve any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 346.
  I’m not saying we’re at the natural rate, but, I mean—CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  So this doesn’t help you at all.  Does it help you, President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of a statement followed by an agreement ("Okay") and a question.


Passage number 347.
 MR. BULLARD.  What are we proposing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is only posing a question about a proposal.


Passage number 348.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m proposing to reinstate the phrase “over the longer run” in the fourth line of paragraph 2, in order to say that these two things are inconsistent over the longer run with the dual mandate.  Is that good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a proposal to reinstate a specific phrase in order to highlight inconsistency with the dual mandate. It does not express any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 349.
 MR. BULLARD.  I support that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. BULLARD expresses his support for something without any opposition or disagreement presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 350.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Others.  Do others have comments.  [No response]  All right, I see a few nods, and President Lacker’s objection is noted.  So we’ll add “over the longer run.” The second one that got some support was from President Kocherlakota and it referred to the phrase “unacceptably slow.”  I would propose getting rid of the phrase “it judges that,” because we wouldn’t judge disappointment, so that the last phrase would be “progress towards its objectives has been disappointingly slow.”  All right.  [No response]  Okay. There are a couple of other suggestions.  One was motivated by President Fisher’s comment—I’m talking now about his comment about inflation and price stability.  There’s a bit of anxiety, I think, about phrases that involve intentional increases in inflation, admittedly.  So here’s a proposal:  In the two places where we have the phrase “to return inflation, over time, to levels consistent with its mandate,” how about changing it to “to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate.”  The revision doesn’t have the sense of having to push it up, and it also finesses the differences among us about what the inflation target is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. President Lacker has objected to something, and there is also mention of anxiety and differences among the speakers regarding the inflation target.


Passage number 351.
 MR. FISHER.  I think that’s better than what we have.  And “to help ensure” is the operative phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher expresses agreement and support for the idea presented, stating that it is better than the current situation. He further provides his opinion that the phrase "to help ensure" is the key aspect to consider.


Passage number 352.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  So that’s in two places:  at the end of the first sentence in paragraph 5 and in the middle of the first sentence in paragraph 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement indicated in this passage. The phrase "All right" is an expression of agreement or understanding. The mention of locations in the text does not imply any disagreement either.


Passage number 353.
 MR. FISHER.  That would be an improvement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that "That would be an improvement." It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 354.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is that an improvement for you.  Okay.  If I’m going too fast, you let me know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if something is an improvement and offering to adjust their speed if necessary.


Passage number 355.
 MR. WARSH.  Or “unacceptably slow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Warsh, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 356.
”  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Lunch has been ready for an hour, I would like to point out, and we started at the second round today.  There was also a small suggestion for the very last sentence—again, from President Kocherlakota.  In the clause that starts “in light of incoming information,” we could insert, “concerning progress towards its objectives.”  Is that what you suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions a suggestion made by President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 357.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  No, I suggested “about the rate of progress towards its objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kocherlakota suggested something without any opposition.


Passage number 358.
”   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  How about “concerning the rate of progress towards.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It simply includes a suggestion for a topic of discussion.


Passage number 359.
” MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota's response suggests agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 360.
 MR. WARSH.  You had “including,” not “concerning” in your version, Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement by Mr. Warsh regarding a word choice in someone else's version.


Passage number 361.
 Chairman, because that’s not the only piece— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, now it’s getting confusing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is confusion expressed in the passage, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement between individuals.


Passage number 362.
  MR. FISHER.  Could you read it, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher is simply requesting that the chairman read something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 363.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  The Committee will review the pace of its purchases and the overall size of its program “in light of incoming information concerning the rate of progress towards its objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests that there could be disagreement or differing viewpoints within the Committee regarding the pace of purchases and the overall size of the program. Different members may have different interpretations of the incoming information and how it relates to the objectives of the program.


Passage number 364.
”MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Sounds good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees or approves of something suggested previously.


Passage number 365.
 MR. WARSH.  Are there things we’re missing that are not included in that new phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking if there are any additional things that are not included in a certain phrase.


Passage number 366.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Would you like to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I apologize, but I cannot generate an answer without a specific passage.


Passage number 367.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You could say “such as.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "such as" is typically used to provide examples or further clarify a point, without expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 368.
” MR. WARSH.  I’m fine with Narayana’s suggestion—I think it’s great.  I just wouldn’t want to limit the range of things the public understands to be part of our reaction function.  We should have our eyes wide open, and, if Narayana thinks it’s prudent, as do you, to reference one of those, that’s fine, but it shouldn’t be to the exclusion of a broader set of issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Warsh expresses agreement with Narayana's suggestion but also adds his own perspective. While he acknowledges Narayana's suggestion as great, he also states that he wouldn't want to limit the range of things the public understands. This does not indicate any contention or disagreement; rather, it shows Mr. Warsh's support for Narayana's idea while offering a broader perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 369.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You could qualify it with the words “such as.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "such as" suggests that there are other examples that could be included, implying that there may be disagreement about what those additional examples might be.


Passage number 370.
” MR. TARULLO.  Doesn’t that undermine what you’re doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple statement or question without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 371.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  What else do we care about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it only presents a statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 372.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we care about the level of risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is straightforward and does not involve any conflicting opinions or points of view.


Passage number 373.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, “objectives” is pretty broad, isn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a question asking for clarification or agreement.


Passage number 374.
 MR. WARSH.  We’ve already said twice in the statement that the objectives are inflation and economic growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that the objectives are inflation and economic growth, without any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 375.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I’m now concerned that we’re leaving out an important set of criteria, namely, emerging risks, side effects, and so on.  So I guess I would propose to leave it as it is, unless you have an alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about potentially omitting important criteria and suggests leaving the situation as it is unless someone else has an alternative.


Passage number 376.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Let me suggest another alternative, which would be to change the word “concerning” to “including.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative wording.


Passage number 377.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Including” what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Including what" does not express contention or disagreement. It simply seeks further clarification or information.


Passage number 378.
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  “The rate of progress towards the objective.”  You had suggested the phrase “concerning the rate of progress towards objectives,” and I’m suggesting changing the word “concerning” to “including.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a suggested change in wording without expressing disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 379.
” MR. LACKER.  We care about risks, because it’s a risk to achieving our objective.  It should be tautological here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact or a logical statement, emphasizing the importance of considering risks in order to achieve their objective.


Passage number 380.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But we could care about things that don’t directly bear on inflation and economic growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply suggesting that there are other things that individuals can care about, beyond those directly related to inflation and economic growth.


Passage number 381.
 MR. LACKER.  Financial stability.  Well, that’s one of our objectives now, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that financial stability is one of the objectives currently being discussed. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 382.
  MR. TARULLO.  I think the issue may be, Jeff, that while we think about financial stability pretty regularly as one of our responsibilities, I’m not sure that everybody externally includes financial stability as an objective.  Everybody else tends to think in terms of the dual mandate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges a potential issue or disagreement with the external perspective on financial stability as an objective.


Passage number 383.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t know what to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their uncertainty about a situation.


Passage number 384.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the speaker's name and title.


Passage number 385.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the actual passage being provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 386.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I think we can be too cute here in trying to frame the conditionality.  I think the original language, just “incoming information,” is enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting that the original language is sufficient.


Passage number 387.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I take the general concern that, through various communication media, we need to have better explanations of what our criteria are.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, President Lacker expresses a general concern about the need for better explanations of criteria in communication media. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 388.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, I’ve changed my mind on this.  This would add yet another reference to our mandate, and I think we mention it, what, five or six times.  We’re perseverating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker indicates a change of opinion, suggesting a disagreement or contention with their previous stance.


Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I think we’re going to stick with the status quo, if that’s okay. On the insertion of “up to,” I agree with the majority of people who spoke about it, in that it seems inconsistent with the notion that we’re going to be reviewing this program—we could conceivably increase it, and we could conceivably decrease it.  So I don’t think that captures the spirit of the program. Kevin, I’m hoping that you would be satisfied if we took the very last sentence, “The Committee will regularly review,” and put it up to the end of paragraph 3—this is something that President Bullard also suggested.  Between that and the language about price stability, we have, I think, qualified that and made it more conditional.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the majority and making a suggestion to modify the language, but there is no indication of conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 390.
 MR. WARSH.  Just one question.  What’s wrong with my proposal, if we’re using the identical words.  Teach me—what’s your hesitation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, MR. WARSH is simply asking a question and expressing his curiosity. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 391.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The problem has to do with the fact that the flow rate is not equivalent to the level of the funds rate.  The way we connect these things is by thinking about the total stock of holdings and what the relationship is to the level of the interest rate.  I don’t think, therefore, that an emphasis on the flow primarily—and I know President Bullard disagrees with me—is enough information.  There needs to be some kind of marker about what our expectation is in terms of the total purchases.  And I’d like to add that, just as it was easy to stop the $300 billion Treasury program you mentioned because we had given a number, so it will be easier to stop this if we have given a number.  If we just have it open-ended, at every meeting it will be harder and harder to make that decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that President Bullard disagrees with their emphasis on the flow rate and suggests that there should be a marker or specific number set for total purchases. This indicates disagreement or differing opinions on how to address the issue.


Passage number 392.
 MR. WARSH.  I don’t really understand.  I’m not suggesting that we exclude putting a number in.  I’m only suggesting that we begin by stating what we are now committing to do,with the same verbiage on intents and expectations; that is, this is what we have decided to do today, and the news is the $75 billion per month.  I don’t really understand why it defeats the purpose of your and the majority’s objective by simply saying “beginning with what we have decided to do today,” with your very expectation of what is going to happen by the end of the second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Warsh, expresses a lack of understanding but there is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 393.
 MR. TARULLO.  Kevin, what does it add from your point of view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question being asked to someone named Kevin.


Passage number 394.
 MR. WARSH.  I think it makes it clear that, should the risks materialize, however remote they may be, the path could change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It shows the speaker expressing their perspective and acknowledging the possibility of change based on potential risks.


Passage number 395.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But that’s why I am suggesting putting this last sentence up into paragraph 3, to make it directly follow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a suggestion or proposal being made by the speaker.


Passage number 396.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think, in particular, the sentence does that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states that the sentence does something in particular. However, it does not mention any contention or disagreement about the sentence or its effect.


Passage number 397.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Bernanke without providing any context or information that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 398.
  “The Committee will regularly review”— MR. WARSH.  Well, I think for all the fights that we’ve had about the right policy, the delta between your ask and my ask is de minimis, so neither of us should be prepared to go crazy about it.  [Laughter]  But I would say it does indicate to me, if I understand the fierce views held by many, a certain lack of comfort with revisiting this, because I’m talking about the exact same words.  I won’t fall on my sword over it, but I must say I’m puzzled by why this would be something that causes concern, with the exact same words and the exact same numbers.  I think it tries to put the emphasis on what I took from your statements yesterday and today, which is that you’re going to review this regularly, and, if the risks arise, you’re going to stop.  Instead, by leading with $600 billion, it says: “It will be $600 billion, and now I’m going to tell you how we’re going to get there.”  I think those are different messages.  I won’t change my vote because of it, but I must say I’m concerned by the fervor on the other side of the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly reflects the speaker's personal puzzlement and concern about a certain issue, but it does not involve a disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 399.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, I propose to leave it.  I think we need to have the marker as the broad expectation, which is the equivalent of the policy move that we’re doing today.  I think that’s an important marker.  I do think, though, that it would be useful—and I hope it helps you some, at least—to put the last sentence up into paragraph 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and ideas without contradicting or challenging any other ideas.


Passage number 400.
 MR. TARULLO.  I’m sorry.  Kevin, would you mind just reading again what you had proposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking Kevin to read his proposal again, indicating a request for clarification.


Passage number 401.
 MR. WARSH.  Sure.  “In addition, the Committee intends to purchase additional long-term Treasury securities at an average pace of about $75 billion per month, which is intended to constitute a total of $600 billion by the end of the second quarter of 2011.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating the intentions of the Committee without any indication of disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 402.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m where the Chairman is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the speaker's location in relation to the Chairman.


Passage number 403.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it conveys too little conviction.  Although I think we all agree we need to monitor the program, I don’t think there is a very strong bias, among those who want to go ahead at least, that the expected amount is going to be significantly less.  That’s an expectation of where we are going to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their own opinion and observations without conflicting with other viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 404.
 MR. WARSH.  I mean, I didn’t change any words, so it’s hard for me to understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their difficulty in understanding something.


Passage number 405.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, if there’s no difference in meaning, then why the concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is asking a question and expressing curiosity, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 406.
 MR. WARSH.  Because I think what we’re trying to announce is what we’re doing, right.  And what we’re doing, by virtue of this action, is this amount.  Again, I’d say there is not a huge difference between us, and I appreciate your moving the other sentence up, but the fervency of the Bernanke-Dudley views on this does strike me as suggesting a difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is not a huge difference between them and appreciates the other person's adjustment. The mention of the fervency of the Bernanke-Dudley views does not directly imply disagreement, but rather suggests that there may be a difference in perspective.


Passage number 407.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No - President Lockhart is a proper noun and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 408.
MR. LOCKHART.  This may be too simplistic a way of thinking about it, but I think there are differences of opinion around the table about how much we want to stress the absolute stock amount.  To cut through that, I’d be consistent with what I remember we did when we announced the first LSAP, which was to lead with the amount.  I think people are going to parse this statement for every nuance more than they have ever parsed a statement, so to add another invitation to misinterpret what we’re saying doesn’t make sense to me.  If the first time around we said we were going to do a program of X, I would stick with that, just to keep it simple.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It might be seen as a suggestion or recommendation by Mr. Lockhart, but there is no explicit clash of opinions or conflicting views stated.


Passage number 409.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s a conceptual issue.  The flow rate is not the choice variable, it’s the expected amount that is, in some sense, the choice variable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is explaining a conceptual issue and stating that the expected amount is the choice variable, not the flow rate. There is no disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 410.
 MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, we would be letting the markets do the math under Kevin’s approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is stating that they would let the markets perform calculations under Kevin's approach.


Passage number 411.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I understand that, you know, multiplication is commutative and everything.  [Laughter]  I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing understanding or agreement with the fact that multiplication is commutative, followed by laughter which suggests a lighthearted tone.


Passage number 412.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, could you read paragraph 3 as it now stands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The request made by Mr. Fisher is a neutral request for the chairman to read paragraph 3 as it currently exists.


Passage number 413.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. “To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery, and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to expand its holdings of securities.  The Committee will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its security holdings.”  The next sentence is unchanged.  Then, get rid of “in particular,” “The Committee will regularly review the pace of its security purchases and the overall size”—and then that sentence goes on just as it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a decision made by the Committee.


Passage number 414.
 MS. DUKE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Additional context or the actual passage is needed to make a conclusive judgement.


Passage number 415.
  I don’t see how “in particular” is— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I got rid of “in particular.”  That’s my proposal.  Are there any further comments.  [No response]  Okay.  Debbie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests removing the phrase "in particular" and there is no response or further comment.


Passage number 416.
MS. DANKER.  The vote will be on the statement for alternative B and the directive that goes with that, as passed out by Bill, except with the four changes, one of them in two places.  In paragraph 2 on the fourth line we are adding “over the longer run” between “consistent” and “with its dual mandate.”  The final line of paragraph 2 replaces “unacceptably” with “disappointingly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions changes being made to a statement and directive. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 417.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And get rid of the “judges that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is incomplete, so it is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 418.
” MS. DANKER.  And removes “it judges that,” correct.  The Chairman just read paragraph 3.  Paragraph 4 is unchanged.  Paragraph 5 consists now of the one sentence which has been changed along the same lines as the first sentence in 3, so that it refers to “support the economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides a simple clarification of the changes made to paragraph 5 and does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 419.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And the last sentence has been moved up to paragraph 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The information provided is simply explaining a shift in the placement of the last sentence in a paragraph.


Passage number 420.
 MS. DANKER.  Correct.  As you read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 421.
  Chairman Bernanke  Yes  Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes  President Bullard   Yes  Governor Duke   Yes  President Hoenig   Respectfully, no  President Pianalto  Yes  Governor Raskin   Yes  President Rosengren  Yes  Governor Tarullo   Yes  Governor Warsh   Yes  Governor Yellen   Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  As I discussed yesterday, I’m not going to do any kind of attribution briefing or anything like that today.  I am going to do a very generic 800-word op-ed tomorrow morning, which will basically say that the Fed thinks that progress is too slow, and we’ve taken this action.  I take the Committee’s discussion at the videoconferenceas allowing me to break the blackout period in that way.  I’ll also have opportunities on Jekyll Island, if comments come up, and, of course, I know many of you have speeches, and so on, coming up. We also agree tentatively—and I just want to make sure it’s okay—that we’re going to vote on the minutes and the SEP separately, so that the projections can be released a day early and I can give a press conference related to the projections.  Any problem.  [No response]  And the Desk is going to release its statement.  Brian, do you have any comment on your statement—are you still working on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention among the individuals mentioned. It is indicated by the multiple "Yes" answers followed by "Respectfully, no" in response to President Hoenig.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 422.
  MR. SACK.  Well, we intend to break the $110 billion per month figure into its two components and list each in the statement.  And we are making changes to the language on the 35 percent limit.  We can’t quite figure out how to handle some of the suggestions—the “if necessary” language or the “on occasion” language—because it suggests different judgment criteria from what we actually plan to use.  We’re afraid that would be confusing, so we’re trying to soften the language that we’re using in the paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they are making changes to the language on the 35 percent limit and express uncertainty about how to handle certain suggestions because they imply different judgment criteria than what they plan to use. This indicates a difference of opinion or contention regarding the appropriate language to be used.


Passage number 423.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any specific context or additional information.


Passage number 424.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’d like to make one point about the 35 percent limit.  That’s being driven not by the Desk actions, but by what people are actually offering.  And so I think it is really important that we understand it’s not the Desk actively seeking to drive the level of securities up, but it’s the offerings of securities that happen to be cheap relative to other securities in the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the cause of the 35 percent limit without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 425.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information given to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 426.
 MR. FISHER.  I trust you to be very careful here in the way you word it, because, again, it can be a spark that incites the people who are quite critical of us.  You mentioned that somevery smart people are concerned about inflation and about whether we’re opening that door.  So just be careful, that’s all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply includes a request from Mr. Fisher to be cautious in the way information is presented to avoid potential negative reactions.


Passage number 427.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The phrase "President Kocherlakota" does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. It could simply be a statement of someone's professional title without indicating any specific context or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 428.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Without trying to get into the business of editing this—I will get into the business of editing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement. The speaker simply states their intention to edit something without any indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 429.
  [Laughter]  I would just suggest that you lead with your second sentence, which is about the justification for why it might go above the 35 percent; that is, start by talking about the reasons for that, and then say explicitly, “in order to help maintain liquidity and avoid dislocations in individual securities, SOMA holdings may exceed, on occasion, the 35…”   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  You have the spirit of the comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a change in the order of the sentences, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 430.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There are also the FAQs that will provide more nuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply informs the reader that there are FAQs available that provide more information. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 431.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You have until 5:00 tomorrow, if you want to make any changes in your forecast.  There is lunch available—there’s no presentation.  Our next meeting is December 14.  Thank you again for a very productive meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides information and instructions but does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 432.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Where is your op-ed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


