Passage number 1.
   Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on December 14, 2010   A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 14, 2010, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James Bullard Elizabeth Duke Thomas M. Hoenig Sandra Pianalto Sarah Bloom Raskin Eric Rosengren Daniel K. Tarullo  Kevin Warsh Janet L. Yellen Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Jeffrey M. Lacker and Dennis P. Lockhart, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Atlanta, respectively John F. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco William B. English, Secretary and Economist Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Nathan Sheets, Economist  David J. Stockton, Economist Alan D. Barkema, James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Jeff Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, Lawrence Slifman, Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors   William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Charles S. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director, Board of Governors David Reifschneider and William Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Andrew T. Levin, Senior Adviser, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Michael G. Palumbo and Joyce K. Zickler, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Fabio M. Natalucci, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Dale Roskom, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Harvey Rosenblum, Daniel G. Sullivan, and John C. Williams, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Chicago, and San Francisco, respectively David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, Cleveland, and Minneapolis, respectively Tobias Adrian, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Satyajit Chatterjee, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Alexander L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply lists the individuals present at the meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Wolman, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of RichmondTranscript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on December 14, 2010 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We welcome back First Vice President John Moore, who will again represent the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.  We’ll have a lunchtime briefing by Linda Robertson on legislative updates, and we’ll get more information there about our Board nominations. Let’s turn to the first item, a briefing on financial developments and open market operations.  Mr. Sack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  This passage does not contain any substantive information or statements that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 3.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you. Let me suggest that we divide the question period into two parts.  Let’s first take any questions on financial conditions, and then, if the Committee is agreeable, we can vote on ratifying domestic open market operations; after that, we can take any questions for either Brian or Nathan on the swap agreement proposal, and then take a vote on that.  Okay.  The floor is open for questions on financial conditions.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a division of the question period into different topics and proposing a voting process for each topic.


Passage number 4.
 MR. FISHER.  Brian, margin debt continues to rise to an extraordinarily high level.  I’m curious as to how you interpret that, from the standpoint of the Desk.  Are we getting a signal that we have excess, or is it just bringing it up to modern times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 5.
 MR. SACK.  Regarding margin debt, or leverage in the financial system more broadly, it has been moving up.  We continue to see the levels of that leverage as not excessive and as not making us unusually vulnerable to a sharp correction, but we also continue to watch those measures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and the speaker's perspective on the topic of margin debt and leverage in the financial system.


Passage number 6.
 MR. FISHER.  The focus has been on the absolute number, but the absolute number—whatever it is, 300 or so—relative to where we are in terms of the depth and breadth of the financial market is not yet worrisome, is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation or clarification on a certain point.


Passage number 7.
 MR. SACK.  Yes, that’s our judgment at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 8.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage doesn't contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 10.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, in chart 3, how tight is the distribution of opinion among survey participants.  Is this a median of a broad spread of opinion as to what we’ll do or what the program will be, or has it tightened up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question and does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 11.
MR. SACK.  The distribution has tightened.  Back in November we saw a considerable range of views about the size of asset purchases, with some participants expecting very large numbers, like $1.5 trillion, maybe $2 trillion.  At this point, the median expectation is, as I said, $600 billion, and there were no respondents with a reading below that.  So we’ve seen the distribution tighten up around that announced size of the program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the distribution of views on the size of asset purchases.


Passage number 12.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 14.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, you wrote us a memo on December 10 about SOMA’s holdings of foreign exchange assets and euro-denominated assets, and among their holdings are these reverse repo investments.  You talked about the six countries whose sovereign debt we accept as collateral for those, which include Italy and Spain.  In a chart you showed that the fraction of collateral we get that’s Italian and Spanish sovereign debt has increased recently and explained that the margin we take is 2 percent across the board, which is comparable with what the ECB does—there’s a table in the back that shows ECB and Bank of England haircut rates. But there’s also a table that shows the London Clearing House collateral rates, and they’re all below 2 percent—well, half of them are below 2—but Italian and Spanish haircuts are above 2 percent, at 2.8 and 3.1 percent.  Do you think that’s why we’re getting more Italian and Spanish sovereign debt.  And do you think it’s prudent for our haircuts to be below the market haircut.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a series of statements and questions seeking clarification and opinion.


Passage number 15.
 MR. SACK.  I do think that is why.  As you know, the regime we have in place doesn’t differentiate across collateral types, by the haircut or by the rates that we accept in theoperations, so there is a tendency for counterparties to give us what may be seen as riskier collateral during times of heightened market stress. This regime was set up at a time when there was not the differentiation that we see today across different types of European debt.  In looking forward, we have started a comprehensive review of the entire framework, including the haircut schedule that we have in place, and we will consider whether to make changes, such as graduated haircut schedules by collateral type.  Having said that, our quick reading at this point is that, even with the elevated volatility that we see in European sovereign debt, the 2 percent haircut appears adequate.  Recall that this is a haircut applied to collateral that is marked to market and updated every day, so the haircut is only intended to cover a daily change in the value of the collateral, and it only is relevant in the event of a counterparty default.  Again, though, as you can see, other foreign official institutions and the London Clearing House do have differentiated haircuts by collateral type and also, in some cases, by collateral maturity, and those are some things we want to look at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 16.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Our exposures are very short term, though, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Our exposures are very short term, though, right?" is a question seeking confirmation or clarification, but it does not express any disagreement or opposition to a previous statement.


Passage number 17.
 MR. SACK.  Right.  That’s what I’ve noted in the memo.  We’re authorized to do repos with tenors up to 36 days, but we tend to do mostly overnight, and I think the average tenor of a repo is three days at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sack, is simply stating a fact and providing information about the average tenor of repos, without any conflicting or contradictory opinions present.


Passage number 18.
 MR. LACKER.  So for the term repos, it’s marked to market daily, and the haircuts are applied daily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the marking to market of term repos and the daily application of haircuts.


Passage number 19.
 MR. SACK.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explain why you chose that answer.  There is contention or disagreement in the passage as indicated by the response "Yes." However, without any additional context or information from the passage, it is not possible to determine the specific nature of the contention or disagreement.


Passage number 20.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  I can appreciate that a daily change is small and that Spain and Italy aren’t Ireland and Greece, which we don’t accept.  But if private sector counterparties thinkthat a higher haircut is warranted, would it do tremendous violence to front run your big framework review with some adjustments to collateral requirements in the meantime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of agreement and understanding.


Passage number 21.
 MR. SACK.  I believe we can do this assessment fairly quickly—that is, I don’t mean to imply that there’s this huge framework review that’s going to take years to complete.  We’re actively looking at this, and, as we go down that path, if it becomes apparent that it would be desirable to have some kind of graduated schedule, then we can go ahead and move in that direction.  It may be advantageous—we just want to do some more analysis before we move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sack is expressing his belief that the assessment can be done quickly and that if it becomes necessary, they can implement a graduated schedule. There is no opposing view or disagreement mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 22.
 MR. LACKER.  Is there any cost to graduated haircut schedules.  Is there any disadvantage to doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a simple question to gather information.


Passage number 23.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, there is a cost whenever official institutions start to pull back, because they can send adverse signals.  So I think you want to make sure that you do that after full consideration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a cautious approach to pulling back official institutions and suggests careful consideration before doing so.


Passage number 24.
 MR. LACKER.  We have market practice to point to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is market practice to refer to.


Passage number 25.
 MR. SACK.  If there’s a strong sentiment that the haircut is going to be changed, there’s no impediment—we can change the haircuts.  But without some kind of analysis or framework, it’s hard to know whether we should change them and, if we should, change them to what.  We need to determine what an appropriate haircut is.  So we need to do a bit of legwork, but I fully appreciate the sense from your question that there’s some urgency to the issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the sentiment of wanting to change the haircuts but suggests the need for analysis and framework before making any decisions. The urgency of the issue is also acknowledged.


Passage number 26.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Other questions on the financial situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about other questions on the financial situation.


Passage number 27.
 MR. FISHER.  Can I ask one more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply includes a request for clarification or permission to ask another question.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 29.
 MR. FISHER.  On Dennis’s point on chart 3:  For what it’s worth, I don’t consider this a bad thing.  You remember, Brian, you and I went through the dealer survey that was conductedin November because I had some questions about whether it provided the right balance, and I can see where people would conclude a larger number of differences to that survey.  But the fact is that we’ve reached a decision, with all the debate that took place and all of the post-meeting commentary, and I’m not surprised that there’s a narrowing of the distribution.  We’re back to $600 billion, which is what the decision was.  My question—and we can talk about this off line—is:  Were any changes made to the way the dealer survey is conducted to reflect a balanced view or to throw them off guard in terms of expectation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fisher is simply discussing his thoughts on the dealer survey and expressing that he does not consider it a bad thing.


Passage number 30.
 MR. SACK.  We certainly didn’t make changes to throw them off guard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about not making changes to throw someone off guard.


Passage number 31.
  We always try to be careful— MR. FISHER.  To keep them guessing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 32.
 MR. SACK.  We always try to be careful with the dealer survey and to keep the questions tracked to policy issues that have been discussed in the public domain.  I don’t think the November survey was misleading or overly suggestive to them.  It did get a lot of attention, but I think that it reflected the environment in the press and in financial markets around the time of that meeting.  And this time the survey didn’t really get any additional attention. As to the point of whether $600 billion is a bad thing, we do think some of the backup in rates has been associated with this revision to the expected size of the asset purchase program.  Certainly before the November meeting, the effects we saw were quite large—a 50 basis point decline in longer-term real interest rates.  That would be very large relative to a $600 billion asset purchase program based on the way we’ve calibrated the likely effects.  I think that the initial market reaction was larger because of the expectation of a much bigger purchase program and the open-ended perception of it.  If that expectation has been scaled down to a $600 billionprogram, it’s not surprising that we’ve seen some backup in rates.  A policy issue for the Committee is whether that’s the right effect on rates, and whether that was the intention or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sack is providing his analysis and explanation of the dealer survey and the effects of the asset purchase program on interest rates.


Passage number 33.
 MR. FISHER.  My point, Mr. Chairman, is that we’ve achieved greater definition, and I don’t consider that to be a bad thing.  We could dispute the cause of the backup in rates—obviously there are many different variables here.  But I just wanted to point out that, since people might refer to this chart in their discussions of policy, this is not necessarily a bad thing from my point of view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their point of view and acknowledging that there are different variables that may have caused the backup in rates.


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, of course it’s not.  Brian was just making a positive statement about his analysis of why the rates changed.  It could be a bad thing; it could be a good thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that Brian's statement is just an analysis and does not convey any disagreement or contention. They also acknowledge that the rates changing could have both positive and negative implications, indicating a sense of neutrality rather than disagreement.


Passage number 35.
 MR. FISHER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states "Mr. Fisher. Right." There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 36.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage, "President Bullard," does not contain any information that can indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states the name or title of a person, which does not inherently imply disagreement.


Passage number 37.
 MR. BULLARD.  Brian, I’m actually more concerned about chart 4, which has the implied federal funds rate path.  I didn’t think we were doing anything that stepped away from the “extended period” language, and I would have expected the message to be that we’re just as committed to “extended period” as we ever were, and in addition, we’re doing quantitative easing, and in some ways we’re strengthening our commitment to stay low for longer.  What do you think is going on in chart 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. MR. Bullard is simply expressing his concern and seeking clarification on the information presented in chart 4.


Passage number 38.
 MR. SACK.  It does appear that financial market participants revised their economic forecast; they did so even in advance of the tax agreement.  We could actually see in our primary dealer survey that the incoming economic data had led to more optimism about near-term growth prospects.  And then the proposed tax agreement was seen as having a fairly significant effect onGDP growth in 2011.  I think the revision largely came from greater optimism about the economy rather than from any messaging about the policy path from the FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents information about financial market participants revising their economic forecast.


Passage number 39.
 MR. BULLARD.  Do you think the private sector is more optimistic than we are about prospects for the economy, and that’s why this curve shifted up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply posing a question and inquiring about the possibility of a difference in optimism between the private sector and "we" (presumably referring to the speaker and others involved in the conversation).


Passage number 40.
 MR. SACK.  Either that or they sense a slightly different reaction function, one that would be more responsive to economic growth prospects. Can I make a couple more comments about the chart, though.  First, we do think the term premiums moved up pretty substantially.  Of course, term premiums are a larger component for longer-term yields, and they tend to get smaller as we move in on the yield curve.  But it’s possible that some of this revision, especially out in 2012, reflects term premiums, because this chart is constructed with an assumption of a constant term premium. Second, the upward shift also reflects greater risk.  As you’ve seen in the Tealbook charts, the modal forecast is much lower than the futures path.  The futures path corresponds to the mean forecast, and, essentially at the zero bound, you just have one-sided risks.  So when the markets have less conviction, you tend to see the futures rate path jump up.  One of the things that was striking ahead of the November meeting was the extent to which the implied volatility measures of the short-term interest rates had collapsed.  The market had gotten to a point where participants were not just seeing policy on hold into the 2012, but they were also feeling incredibly confident about that.  And I think what you see here is just less confidence about that, even if the modal forecast still has the tightening later in 2011 or into 2012.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing some additional comments and analysis on a chart.


Passage number 41.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay, may I have a motion to ratify the domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it just consists of a question and a lack of response.


Passage number 42.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 43.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Without objection.  Let’s turn now to the proposed extension of the swap agreements.  Just for your information, I have received calls directly from the heads of several of the relevant central banks asking us to do this, so there is certainly interest on the part of our counterparties.  But let me open the floor for any questions either to Brian or to Nathan Sheets on the proposal.  Are there any questions.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Although there is mention of receiving calls from central bank heads and the interest shown by counterparties, there is no explicit disagreement or contention mentioned in the passage. The passage simply moves on to open the floor for questions on the proposed extension.


Passage number 44.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a question just about the length of the extension.  Given that the sovereign debt crisis is unlikely to be completely resolved in six months, is there a reason not to have it go out for a longer period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the length of the extension.


Passage number 45.
 MR. SHEETS.  Our feeling was that six months is a good chunk of time.  It gives the Committee ample governance of it so that six months from now we can sit down again and reassess.  But I very much share your view that it’s unlikely that this crisis will be completely behind us after six months, but it might make sense at that point to want to reassess and reevaluate whether you want to extend the swap lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the other person's view but suggests a reassessment after six months.


Passage number 46.
 MR. TARULLO.  What would change in six months.  I understand that the world would change, but are you anticipating, Nathan, that things would be worse in Europe and, therefore, we would not want to extend the swap arrangement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that Mr. Tarullo is seeking clarification on whether things would be worse in Europe in six months, suggesting a desire for more information or understanding.


Passage number 47.
 MR. SHEETS.  My guess is that six months out there will still be a lot of uncertainties, and a lot of the arguments that we’re putting forward today about the swap lines providing a backstop will probably still be legitimate.  But the sense of the staff was that it made sense to give the Committee another “bite at the apple,” so to speak, six months out and make sure that you still wanted to extend it.  Certainly, the staff is not opposed to a longer extension if that’s the preference of the Committee.  We’d be comfortable extending 9 months or even 12 months out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of extending a certain action and is open to different options and preferences.


Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply mentions the name "Governor Raskin" without any context or opinions that might indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 49.
MS. RASKIN.  Nathan, what do you anticipate would be the effects of an announcement at this point of the extension.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. It is a question asking for an opinion or prediction, without any conflicting statements or ideas being presented.


Passage number 50.
 MR. SHEETS.  Our intention is to keep the whole process of the extension as low-key as possible, and our hope is that the announcement will be taken in stride by the markets as something reassuring and as a reminder that this backstop is in place.  During periods of intensified market stress, we’ve come out with announcements coordinated with other relevant central banks using joint language, such as, “we, the central banks, announce today,” etc., etc., in an effort to shift market conditions and increase confidence.  In this instance, at least from my perspective, conditions in dollar funding markets are less roiled than I would have expected, given the stresses that we’re seeing in the sovereign debt markets.  So we’re going to try to remind the markets that these swap lines will still be there, and we’re going to keep the announcement as low-key as possible; our hope is that this would be very reassuring and very soothing to the markets and to market confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their intention to keep the announcement of an extension low-key and is hopeful that it will be reassuring to the markets. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 51.
 MS. RASKIN.  So, from that perspective, you’d like the announcement to occur with a sufficient amount of time before the deadline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a desired timeframe for an announcement.


Passage number 52.
 MR. SHEETS.  Exactly.  That’s why we’re bringing it to the Committee today rather than at the January meeting.  We were concerned that, if we waited until the January meeting, then, as the deadline grew closer, the markets would start to worry about whether the swap line was going to be there or not.  We wanted this to get resolved well in advance of any such concerns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining the reason for bringing the issue to the Committee earlier instead of waiting until the January meeting, in order to address any potential market concerns about the swap line well in advance.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have a two-hander from President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 54.
 MR. LOCKHART.  What would be the interpretation of extending longer than six months.  Is there a risk that that would be interpreted as more alarmist in some way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lockhart is raising a concern about the interpretation of extending longer than six months and suggesting that it may be seen as more alarmist.


Passage number 55.
MR. SHEETS.  It could go either way.  On the one hand, you could say, well, it would give the markets confidence that these swap lines are going to be there for an extended period of time to provide support.  On the other hand, the markets could interpret it as a sign that the central banks are very worried about dollar funding conditions.  So I think that’s more a policy judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting two different perspectives or possibilities without expressing a personal opinion or disagreement.


Passage number 56.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have no objection personally to making it nine months if that’s the Committee’s preference.  We can have a short discussion of that—I don’t want to take too much time on this, but we could do that.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement and openness to making it nine months if that is what the Committee prefers.


Passage number 57.
 MR. BULLARD.  Is there some regular cycle on which we normally review this.  I know at one time it was annually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 58.
 MR. SHEETS.  We’ve done extensions of varying lengths.  Six months wouldn’t be unusual.  So the markets wouldn’t respond to that and say, “Oh, they’re doing something they’ve never done before.”  If we go nine months, that wouldn’t seem unusual either.  If we did a full year, it would be the longest we ever extended or put them in place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing examples of different potential lengths of extensions and stating that each length wouldn't be unusual or unprecedented.


Passage number 59.
 MR. BULLARD.  So if we do six months, it’s kind of in a cycle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating a fact about a potential six-month cycle.


Passage number 60.
 MR. SHEETS.  Six months is a typical approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a common time frame or approach, without any conflicting information or opposing views.


Passage number 61.
 MR. BULLARD.  Like normal business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a common phrase "like normal business."


Passage number 62.
 MR. SHEETS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "No." The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement because it only states that Mr. Sheets agrees or affirms something without mentioning conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 63.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the conversation and giving a response.


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A two-hander from the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information or context to indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a "two-hander" from the Vice Chairman, which does not imply any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 65.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Does the ECB have a preference in terms of the length of extension.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions the ECB's preference in terms of the length of extension, which indicates that there is contention or disagreement on this matter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 66.
 MR. SHEETS.  I’m not sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sheets, expresses doubt or uncertainty about something.


Passage number 67.
MR. SACK.  Our discussions with them focused on the six-month horizon, and they seemed quite comfortable with that.  That doesn’t mean they would object to a longer horizon, but we didn’t pursue that deeply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the discussions with "them" focused on a six-month horizon and that they seemed comfortable with it. It also mentions that the topic of a longer horizon was not explored in depth.


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context about President Fisher that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 69.
 MR. FISHER.  I imagine this will get some—forgive me for mentioning this—political attention.  We just need to explain it in plain English, because my guess is this will be one of the actions that comes out of this meeting that is different from what we have done before.  It might get more attention.  I would rather just pay the price for a nine-month or a longer-term extension, because we are likely to renew it.  Of course, it is obvious we should explain this in the simplest terms to that audience regarding the low nature of the risk that is involved.  So if we are going to get some criticism from some of the people that like to criticize us, I would rather just lock it in now than do it in bits and pieces.  That would be my opinion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It primarily focuses on the speaker's opinion and preference regarding the extension of something, and their desire to explain it in plain terms.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you see any problem with our counterparties if we do nine months today.  Nathan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 71.
 MR. SHEETS.  I wouldn’t.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "MR. SHEETS" could potentially indicate someone's name or title, but it does not provide any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 72.
 MR. SACK.  I wouldn’t think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses their opinion without presenting any opposing viewpoints or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 73.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is there any objection to a nine-month arrangement.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is simply asking if there is any objection to a nine-month arrangement.


Passage number 74.
 MR. LACKER.  I would just speak in favor of the arrangement the staff brought us.  It is a renewable thing.  I doubt the staff has ever given our counterparties reason to believe that renewal was questionable or problematic.  It never has been, but it does give us the opportunity to reevaluate the terms, reevaluate amounts, and retain that flexibility.  So I, for one, would be more comfortable with the six-month arrangement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker expresses support for the arrangement brought forward by the staff and emphasizes its renewable nature and the ability to reevaluate terms and amounts.


Passage number 75.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply asks if there are others.


Passage number 76.
 MR. PLOSSER.  For the same reasons I like what the staff proposed.  I thought that was perfectly reasonable, and I kind of like the six-month cycle.  That’s fine with me, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is expressing agreement and approval of the staff's proposal and the six-month cycle.


Passage number 77.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Other comments.  [No response]  Okay.  Well, we could do parliamentary procedure here, but I think there is a sense, at least around the table, that we are open to renewal if conditions continue to be stressed in European markets.  Okay, any further comments or questions.  [No response]  Perhaps we could have a vote.  Can I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking input and feedback from the group, but there are no conflicting opinions or arguments expressed.


Passage number 78.
 MS. YELLEN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any objections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that "all" are in favor and there are no objections mentioned.


Passage number 80.
  [No response] MS. DANKER.  Just to be clear, that vote is on the resolution that was in the memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Correct, the resolution that was in the memorandum.  Would anyone like to hear it read.  [No response] Okay, thank you.  Let’s go on, then, to item 2, the economic situation.  Dave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 82.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 83.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of questions for Nathan.  The first is a narrow one: To what extent is there an Iberian problem.  That is, if Portugal really gets into serious trouble, does it almost automatically create contagion that draws Spain into it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question being asked to Nathan for clarification on the potential impact of Portugal's trouble on Spain.


Passage number 84.
 MR. FISHER.  Be careful with your answer, because the questioner has a Spanish son-in-law.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the questioner has a Spanish son-in-law, without mentioning any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 85.
 MR. LOCKHART.  But he does have a job.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "But he does have a job" is simply stating a fact without any conflicting opinions or opposing arguments.


Passage number 86.
 MR. SHEETS.  There are several channels.  Let me just highlight two that I think are important.  One is that the Spanish banks have substantial exposure to Portugal.  So if conditions in Portugal were to deteriorate significantly, and credit quality were to decline correspondingly, that would be a further hit on the Spanish banking system.  And it really is the case that the banking system in Spain is the point of vulnerability.  There are two separate issues regarding the Spanish bank vulnerability.  The first is the cajas and their exposure to the falling real estatemarket.  How much more is that real estate market going to fall.  The second issue is just how rock solid are BBVA and Santander, the two biggest banks that compose almost half of the Spanish banking system by assets.  To date, their CDS premiums are somewhat elevated relative to other institutions, but not significantly so.  And if we start seeing signs of significant softness in those two institutions, it would be grave. Second, I think there’s a sentiment channel and a demonstration effect, namely, that, if Portugal comes under stress, that will cause people to be more risk averse and more worried about what else is going on in peripheral Europe and could trigger a pullback.  I think it’s very likely that Portugal is going to need a program, and I think that’s why it’s imperative that the Europeans move now to get the funds in place, so it’s clear that they can support Spain, if necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the potential vulnerabilities and risks in the Spanish banking system, as well as the potential impact of Portugal's economic situation.


Passage number 87.
 MR. LOCKHART.  My second, broader question is, again, for Nathan.  When you did a European recession scenario in the summer, it had a more severe impact on the U.S. economy than the one that is in the Tealbook this time around.  You’ve touched on this a little bit, but could you give a deeper sense of what has changed, and why we see less impact on our economy in the current circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question directed towards Nathan, asking for a further explanation of the differences in impact on the U.S. economy between a previous European recession scenario and the current circumstances.


Passage number 88.
 MR. SHEETS.  If things got bad in Europe, I wouldn’t want to rule any possibilities off the table, including the scenario that we looked at in June.  I’d say the reason that the spillover was somewhat less pronounced this round is simply because, to date, in this episode relative to the spring, the financial market feedback effects have been less.  Maybe there has been some financial market adjustment or repositioning by U.S. financial institutions.  So far, at least, we haven’t seen the same intense effects in the United States.  One particularly notable difference is that in the spring we saw very substantial declines in U.S. equity prices, whereas U.S. equityprices over the intermeeting period are up a little bit.  But that’s something that we’re obviously watching very closely, and the situation could change very quickly to much more intense spillovers and sympathy effects in U.S. markets, similar to what we saw in the spring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is mainly providing information about the current situation in the financial markets and the potential outcomes.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states the title or position of President Rosengren without providing any information or details that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 90.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a question on the house-price adjustment.  As I was reading the financial stability memos, particularly the one on the banking sector, I noticed that it highlighted that the percent of bank assets in 3-, 4-, and 5-rated institutions had become quite elevated, approximately where we were the last time we had “headwinds” in the banking sector.  So, when we think of a house-price decline that’s as large as what you’re talking about, combined with the elevated percent of bank assets in 3-, 4-, and 5-rated institutions, do we still assume that the headwinds in the banking markets are going to subside over the course of the year.  And what are you assuming about securities that are tied to real estate, given your new information on the pricing of housing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Rosengren regarding the implications of a house-price decline and the elevated percent of bank assets in certain institutions.


Passage number 91.
 MR. STOCKTON.  In this forecast, we still assume that there will be some improvement in bank lending conditions over the course of the coming year.  We think the situation in the mortgage market is still going to be very tight—in fact, partly feeding into our downward revision to housing was a view that we weren’t going to see as much improvement there as we thought. Because of the weaker house-price forecast, we’ve upped our forecast of home foreclosures, which implies a hit to banking associated with our more negative outlook for house prices.  I don’t have the specifics on individual institutions in terms of how that plays out, but, as I indicated, we do see the house-price forecast as having more than just a housing effect.  It hasan effect both on consumer spending through the wealth effect and on lending conditions and spending through the banking sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own forecast and view on the situation in the mortgage market and its effects on housing, consumer spending, and the banking sector. They do not mention any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 92.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  If not, we’re ready for our go-round.  And I have President Kocherlakota first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the speaker preparing to start a conversation or discussion.


Passage number 93.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our Public Affairs Department has been gathering information for its 2011 Ninth District forecast.  In doing so, they have found a growing sense of optimism since the end of August.  In general, it seems that businesses are beginning to be more willing to think longer term, three to five years out.  They’re beginning to make plans to hire, increase space, and add equipment. This optimism is widespread across most sectors of the economy.  Mining is strong, due to solid prices and increased demand.  Farmers had a great harvest in terms of prices and yields, and this spilled into warehousing, transportation, food processing, and energy.  More interestingly, both manufacturing and services are looking to expand.  However, the general level of optimism does not extend into construction.  A big caveat, of course, is sustainability.  I’m describing a pattern that has become apparent only over the past three months, and business attitudes certainly remain susceptible to shocks of various kinds. At the national level, I will focus on an issue that preoccupied us a year ago:  How much slack is there in the economy.  Right now, we are following a highly accommodative monetary policy, and this accommodative policy is consistent with typical rules, because current output is so much lower than our typical measures of potential output.  Hence, as we decide upon future monetary policy actions, we need to have good measures of potential output. The Tealbook measures potential output largely by focusing on supply-side issues, and I view it as essentially using a production function approach that tries to gauge maximumsustainable production in the economy, given the existing labor force and capital stock.  So its measures would take account of changes in productivity or changes in the quality of the labor force, but they certainly abstract from shocks to demand.  This approach is definitely a common one—common enough, I think, to be called the conventional one.  But it may not be foolproof.  Consider, for example, a 30 percent to 40 percent fall in home prices, along the lines that this country has experienced.  This shock is going to lower the wealth of many people.  Let’s focus, though, on retired people.  Those people will demand fewer goods, and in so doing they will lower output and employment in the economy as a whole.  Using monetary policy to try to boost output above this level would lead to inflationary pressures.  I want to be clear about a couple of things.  First, the issue I’m raising is entirely distinct from my comments about the possibility of increased mismatch in labor markets, and I’m hoping that we’ll get more clarity on the issue of mismatch at our next meeting.  And I’m certainly not arguing that potential output is always equal to observed output.  Inflation and inflation expectations adjust sluggishly to shocks, and this sluggish adjustment creates a need for monetary policy interventions.  What I am saying is that the right measure of potential output is the level of output that would exist in a hypothetical world in which inflation and inflation expectations were fully flexible.  Once you define it this way, it’s clear that potential output has to move in response to both supply and demand shocks. With this in mind, is there any systematic way to take account of shocks to demand when we measure output gaps.  Many formulations of the Phillips curve provide a linkage between inflation dynamics and output gaps.  And this linkage is an attractive one, because it’s robust—it’s robust to the demand shocks that I mentioned, and it’s robust to the mismatch possibilities that I mentioned.  In Minneapolis, we’ve been trying to use a particular kind of Phillips curve,the New Keynesian Phillips curves, to impute measures of the output gap.  These equations link current inflation to inflation expectations and the output gap, which is really a marginal cost gap.  Then, when we take measures of inflation expectations from the Cleveland Fed, we can compute estimates of the output gap.  We’ve done this using both simple New Keynesian Phillips curves that ignore trend inflation and more sophisticated ones that take account of trend inflation.  There’s certainly some heterogeneity of results, but, in general, the implied measures are less negative than the Tealbook’s estimate of negative 6½ percent.  I’d say that these measures certainly are meant to be suggestive at this point, but my main message is that the measures of potential output that are relevant for a monetary policymaker should take into account demand disturbances, and ones that ignore demand disturbances are likely upwardly biased.  The second message, which I’ll deliver with considerably less force, is that, given the observed behavior of inflation and inflation expectations, it’s possible that these biases may well be large. So as we consider changes to our monetary policy stance, I believe that we should put some weight on these possibilities.  For my part, as I’ll discuss in more detail in the next go-round, these possibilities lead me to shade my estimate of the output gap from the Tealbook’s, which is around minus 6½ percent, up to something closer to minus 4 percent instead.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents information, observations, and opinions without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 94.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you very much" is a polite expression of gratitude and "President Plosser" indicates who the message is being directed to.


Passage number 95.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The news regarding business conditions in the Third District is on balance moderately positive and consistent with a modest recovery scenario.  Residential and commercial real estate and construction, however, continue to lag behind the recovery, as these were the hardest hit during the recession.  Overall, employment in our three states rose in October, especially in Pennsylvania.  Our November Business OutlookSurvey, released just after the last FOMC meeting, indicated a sharp increase in the current activity index—it rose from plus 1 to plus 22.5.  Manufacturers’ orders and shipments indexes also rose in November.  About 40 percent of the firms plan to increase spending on plant and equipment over the next 12 months—that compares with 16 percent this time a year ago. Regional business contacts expect a modest pace of improvement in the months ahead.  Our December survey, which remains confidential until noon on Thursday, gives similar readings to our November results.  The general activity index rose from the 22.5 to 24.3 and is very consistent with values seen in historical recoveries.  And, by the way, the market’s expectation for that number was 10.  New orders also rose significantly in December. As I noted six weeks ago, our regional price data do not raise concerns regarding sustained deflation.  In our November Business Outlook Survey, manufacturers continued to report higher input costs.  In addition, in November, both the future prices paid and the future prices received indexes rose significantly, indicating that firms are expecting prices to be rising, not falling, over the next six months. Retailers generally report that wholesale prices are stable, but many contacts noted that foreign suppliers have raised prices for many products being ordered now for delivery next year.  Again, our December survey, which will be released Thursday, indicates that even more participants are reporting higher prices paid as well as higher prices received.  The prices paid index rose further from 34 in November to 51.2 in December, and the prices received by firms actually turned positive, increasing from minus 2 in November to plus 10 in December.  That is its highest reading since mid-2008. Turning to the national economy, incoming data strengthen my belief that the economy is emerging from the soft patch we encountered this summer.  Third-quarter real GDP was revisedup; manufacturing and business equipment spending have picked up; consumer spending and employment continue to expand and have defied the pessimism of those who saw the economy heading for a double dip. The recent trade numbers indicate that foreign demand for U.S. products has picked up, perhaps boosting fourth-quarter GDP growth more than previously thought.  Thus, I continue to believe that the fundamentals are in place for real GDP growth to accelerate to close to 3½ percent in 2011, even in the absence of any new fiscal stimulus.  I expect the tax package, if it passes, to add only modestly to this growth in 2011, and, because of its temporary nature, to generate a small, but not significant, give-back in 2012. Financial market indicators have attracted a good deal of attention in recent weeks.  However, I would caution against ascribing too much of the evolution of interest rates over the last couple of months to either anticipation of or the announcement of our LSAP program.  Many factors have likely affected the decline and then the rise in yields over the last two or three months.  We’ve had the much anticipated and discussed lead-up to the results of the elections for the House and Senate.  We’ve had a flare-up in the European sovereign debt crisis, which probably resulted in some flight to quality, only to be followed by another “stay” of a restructuring “execution.”  And, finally, we experienced a steady improvement in the economic data, some of which could not have been the result of either the anticipation or the implementation of our LSAP.  Disentangling the influences of these factors on yields is likely to be a very difficult, if not impossible, task. The latest readings on core inflation have come in slightly lower than expected and may raise concerns among some about the possibility of sustained deflation.  But there is no such indication as yet in either market- or survey-based measures of inflation expectations, and thelikelihood of sustained deflation is no higher now than it was at the time of our last meeting.  And survey measures indicate that the probability of deflation is lower now than it was in late 2008 and in 2009.  In addition, I would note that monthly inflation estimates tend to be volatile, and, in particular, the PCE estimates often get revised up.  Thus, I continue to expect inflation readings to be higher, more in line with our objectives, as we go through 2011. In summary, conditions in the Third District, as well as the nation as a whole, seem to me indicative of a modest recovery, which I expect to continue and accelerate somewhat next year.  The economic news we have received thus far does not give me cause for worry about encountering any sustained deflation in the near future.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 96.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude, followed by a proper title.


Passage number 97.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, let me cite my favorite economist, myself.  [Laughter]  I’ll read from my last intervention at the last FOMC:  “My contacts report more things are moving in the right direction than in the wrong direction.  None speak of the double-dip risk in the United States, and none are budgeting to deflation.  Bottom lines are healthy.  Conditions are improving slightly, but continually, and are expected to continue to do so.”  I’m going to spare you a protracted recitation of my soundings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker (Mr. Fisher) is presenting his own opinion and citing his own previous intervention, stating that his contacts report positive developments and that conditions are improving. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 98.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  We all have it memorized, so that’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mentions that "we all have it memorized" without indicating any disagreement or contention among the individuals being referred to.


Passage number 99.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  I am, however, going to say that uniformly there has been a shift in tone.  If anything, I would take out the word “slightly” from the recitation I just gave.  One sector is an exception, namely, the rails, because you always have a downturn at this time of the year—it’s a seasonal adjustment.  But, otherwise, to a person, my interlocutors are seeing improved confidence in final demand.  According to my retailer contacts, airlines, expressshippers, IT firms, and manufacturers of household products, household spending, including discretionary spending, is expanding. One of the key indicators I like to look at is mall traffic.  No one has to go to a mall.  You don’t have to buy anything out of necessity at a mall.  The last seven weeks we have seen growth in mall traffic.  It’s reflected in MasterCard’s internal data, which, again, I like to remind people is confidential, but we have developed a relationship of going through and parsing that data and reading the entrails.  November retail sales, ex-auto, ex-gas, year over year, were up 5.2 percent versus 2.7 percent in October and 1.3 percent in the third quarter.  So there appears to be a pickup in final sales, and that is new data and unlike the slight pickup that I reported earlier.  There seems to be improved confidence.  I fully suspect you’re going to hear that from the Business Roundtable and others who are going to be making these pronouncements shortly. In talking to my interlocutors, none see a real threat of deflation.  While they maintain they do not have the power yet to price more aggressively, they would like to, Charlie, but they don’t yet have it.  We know from the recent data they are even more flush with liquidity than they were before.  They are beginning to put some of it to work, primarily to drive productivity enhancement, though some, Mr. Chairman, are beginning to report and budget for payroll expansion. Anecdotal input from my contacts, triangulated with the work of our research staff, leads me to think that the Board staff is underestimating economic growth for 2011, though unemployment, I think, will remain sticky despite a pickup in the desire to hire.  And it strikes me that we will see growth in the first quarter and second quarter 2011 close to 4 percent, with inflation remaining slightly under the wire of 2 percent.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their observations and projections without contradicting or arguing with any other perspectives.


Passage number 100.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Thank you. President Rosengren" is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Rosengren, without any indication of disagreement or opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The tenor of the incoming data has been positive, though not much different from what was expected in most forecasts, and it is broadly consistent with only a very gradual recovery.  Even with the announcement of both fiscal and financial stimulus, the Tealbook is little changed from our November meeting.  For the final quarter of 2012, the Tealbook forecasts unemployment to be 0.1 percentage point higher and core PCE inflation to be 0.1 percentage point lower than at the November meeting.  Similarly, the Blue Chip forecast is not much different from last month.  Thus, despite the move to more accommodative monetary and fiscal policy, we are still expecting only very slow progress on an inflation rate that is too low and an unemployment rate that is too high. While the inflation forecasts are little changed, the decline in core inflation has continued.  In fact, the core CPI inflation rate for the last 12 months, at 0.6 percent, is the lowest since 1957 when the index began.  As the Tealbook inflation box shows, the diffusion index and a wide variety of inflation measures provide ample evidence of continued disinflation.  While commodity prices have certainly increased, there seems little ability to pass these increases on to final goods prices, given the significant slack in the economy.  Discussions with businesses around New England highlight that they have used productivity gains to offset rising commodity prices, because they see little ability to pass price increases on to their customers.   Our announcement of further large-scale asset purchases has spurred considerable discussion about the potential for them to create undesirable inflationary pressures.  For our excess reserves to translate into future inflation or debt-financed asset bubbles, banks would have to increase lending significantly.  This is not what we see.  In the United States, Japan, and the United Kingdom, lending has remained very weak, despite the infusion of liquidity by central banks in all three countries.In addition, discussions with bankers do not indicate that a significant upsurge in demand in this country is imminent—rather, quite the opposite.  Bankers continue to experience weak demand for loans, particularly among smaller businesses.  While I do not expect these trends to reverse any time soon, if they do, they should be quite observable, allowing us to take appropriate actions when that becomes necessary. With the outlook little changed, it is probably worthwhile thinking about the risks to the forecast.  The Tealbook highlights a much weaker path for house prices.  While I am not particularly confident of our ability to forecast house prices, significant further declines in house prices have the potential to weaken bank balance sheets significantly, further complicate the ability to remove the foreclosure overhang, and cause consumers to retrench as their confidence ebbs along with their housing wealth. A second concern is the increasing difficulties with state and local finances, which some have compared with the problems with peripheral nations in Europe.  While I do not think the analogy to Europe is particularly apt, these problems share one common attribute, and that is that the lack of political will to address problems may make the problems significantly worse. My biggest concern remains Europe.  With announcements in late spring regarding Greece, many hoped that the problem would be postponed for several years, and that Europe would find a way to muddle through.  As events over the last month have made clear, the situation remains fragile, and confidence in banks remains tenuous.  Clearly, the Irish stress test of their banks did not uncover the significant weakness in Irish banks, and concern with other stress tests has contributed to some creeping up of interbank rates.  Should European problems become more severe, I do worry about the transmission through U.S. banks and money marketfunds.  U.S. prime money market funds with $1.6 trillion in assets have European exposures that now account for over 60 percent of their assets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses concerns about house prices, state and local finances, and European problems, highlighting potential risks to the forecast.


Passage number 102.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only contains a thanking statement from President Pianalto.


Passage number 103.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The general sentiment of my Fourth District business contacts hasn’t changed much since our last meeting, and my outlook hasn’t changed substantially either.  Despite the positive tone set by some of the recent data releases, the weak November employment report highlighted that labor markets are still struggling for sustained gains, and the pace of the recovery remains slow. Even though we saw some positive retail sales numbers, my retail contacts noted that they are seeing a problematic pattern.  They suggest that much of the recent progress in retail sales has been in the high end of the market.  In their accounts, relatively well-off households are purchasing more luxury goods.  They say that many of the mid-market households are shopping down in the value chain by sticking to necessities and selecting house brands or other value-priced items.  My contacts note that retail sales growth can potentially look pretty strong with this increased spending by wealthy households, but retailers believe that the longer-run growth in personal consumption expenditures is going to require more progress on the other side of the income distribution, and job growth there remains the key.  This concern tempered several of my contacts’ outlooks in the face of the relatively positive sales figures. Banks in my District report that business lending has not grown very much and that new commercial originations are being driven primarily by companies in the energy, health care, and manufacturing sectors.  Merger and acquisition activities have also picked up and are a growing source of credit demand.  My banking contacts also reported that their credit quality was stable or showed a slight improvement.  But as the financial stability memo highlights, the U.S.banking industry faces a wide range of potential risks.  Nationally, many of the smaller banks have large amounts of nonperforming assets on their books, and, as was noted earlier, a very large number of banks still have adverse ratings. My outlook for employment is also little changed from our last meeting, and my business contacts have tended to corroborate my outlook for sluggish employment growth.  Although there has been some improvement in hiring, especially among manufacturers, employers are inclined to hire on a temporary, part-time, or special project basis.  Employers also seem more interested in hiring recent college graduates, and this is interesting because the unemployment rate, even among young college graduates, is still nearly double its pre-recession levels.  The higher unemployment rate seen in this group seems likely to be cyclical, unless you think that the recent college graduates are less prepared than those who graduated before the recession. My staff’s analysis continues to show that the elevated overall unemployment rate is a cyclical phenomenon.  They also note, though, that the job-finding rate in our economy has been trending downward for the past 25 years, which is going to slow the rate of convergence toward the natural rate of unemployment relative to past expansions.  The lower job-finding trend does increase the implied natural rate of unemployment, but it only moves up to 6 percent. On the inflation front, I have found little comfort in the most recent data that the disinflation process is nearing an end.  At our last meeting I reported that my staff had been looking into the growing distinction between the CPI and the PCE price index, and suggested that the lower CPI figures might be a more accurate indicator.  Over the intermeeting period, the core PCE inflation measures fell sharply, including the median PCE, and they are now more in line with the already very low core CPI number.  On a more positive note, market measures of expected inflation, which began moving up prior to our November meeting, stabilized in acomfortable range.  The expected five-year inflation rate derived from inflation swaps has now settled near 2 percent, and break-even rates from TIPS show a similar pattern. Regarding the risks to my outlook, my view is that the risks for both inflation and output remain to the downside.  I continue to be concerned that our options for responding to falling inflation are more limited than our options should inflation head higher.  And a variety of cautions—from the continued weak banking conditions to the sovereign debt crisis in Europe—lead me to see the risk for output growth also weighted to the downside.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear points of contention or disagreement. It is mainly a report of the speaker's observations and concerns, without indicating any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 104.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 105.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 106.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On balance, the outlook for economic growth seems a bit better than at our last meeting.  I have been heartened by a few more optimistic signals from the incoming data and from my business and community contacts.  In addition, I think the prospect of greater near-term fiscal stimulus is a positive development and helps reduce uncertainty somewhat. Still, in my discussions with contacts, their positive comments continue to have a somewhat special and one-off tone, as opposed to reflecting expectations of sustained strongergrowth.  Automakers expect industry sales next year to be about a million units higher than in 2010, a healthy increase, but perhaps a plateau unless accompanied by a more pronounced improvement in household balance sheets and income prospects.  And, currently, adding workers is not a priority for the auto sector.  Heavy equipment manufacturers are benefiting from global demand for commodities and agricultural products.  But, again, even in this sector that’s doing so well, their hiring intentions are minimal.  Clearly, the economic recovery is continuing, but I expect we will be dogged into mid-2011 by concerns over whether or not the economy is achieving escape velocity. Specifically, escape velocity would ensure a self-sustaining growth path that moves us more assuredly towards our objectives for inflation and employment without a continuing strong push from policy.  Still, I think the economy and policy have made progress since I began expressing stronger concerns last August, although the feasibility of the firewall around Spain in Nathan’s discussion seemed troubling to me. Turning to inflation, I agree with the Tealbook’s analysis that transient price movements probably overstate the degree of disinflation over the past several months and that the current underlying trend in core PCE inflation is likely closer to 1 percent.  Of course, because monetary policy acts with considerable lags regarding inflation, we always need to look at what the forward-looking inflation indicators are pointing to.  Here’s my list.  First, considerable research has pointed to the inconvenient fact that statistical inflation forecasts have trouble beating a simple random walk forecast.  If you accept this finding, then you would say today’s low inflation experience is likely to be around for the forecastable future.  Personally, I don’t find random walk forecasts to be a constructive perspective when monetary policy is either veryrestrictive or highly accommodative, but this finding has been mentioned often in the past, and today it implies very low inflation pressures. Second, are we currently seeing cost pressures that might be forward indicators of higher inflation.  Commodity costs have been in the news a lot.  I recently met with a unique set of experts on commodities when I paid a visit to the headquarters of Caterpillar in Peoria.  This is a large manufacturing company whose business today is thriving on high global commodity prices and the incentives for increased mining that go with those price signals, so they’re really tuned into the commodity price picture.  They’re producing a lot of big machines that people are buying and shipping around the world.  Nevertheless, their business forecasts for U.S. inflation are quite low.  They believe resource slack will prevent high commodity prices from bleeding into our top-line inflation numbers.  In addition, it is difficult to see any general upward inflationary pressure coming from labor costs in the current environment.  After all, unit labor costs have been falling, and unemployment is high, although the coal compensation component seems to be rising.  I thought that was one of Dave’s best jokes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 107.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A total freeze on coal compensation.  [Laughter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The laughter indicates that the statement about a total freeze on coal compensation is seen as amusing or humorous.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
] MR. EVANS.  That is austere.  Finally, what about inflation expectations.  Survey measures of inflation continue to be low.  TIPS break-even rates and inflation swaps have risen over the past several months.  Still, the TIPS increases have only retraced the declines that occurred last spring and summer, and back in April before the TIPS decline, the Greenbook—it was a Greenbook back then—had a core PCE inflation forecast of 0.9 percent in 2010 and beyond.  So, ultimate inflation pressures were quite similar.  In sum, the risks of unacceptably higher inflation are small over the relevant policy horizon, and I certainly agree with your comments, Mr. Chairman, that we could address any unexpected and damaging inflationdevelopments quickly should they occur.  However, at the moment I’m much more concerned that inflation will continue to run below mandate-consistent levels.  In fact, it would be a very positive development if inflation rose more quickly, at least to 2 percent. I just wanted to mention that I disagreed with Governor Warsh’s characterization of the rise in inflation at the last meeting that he referred to as the nominal revenue channel.  You know, that’s more money illusion, and this finding that higher inflation would be beneficial comes out of fully optimizing models where there is no money illusion.  By lowering real rates, such a development would help us to do better on our employment objective.  It would change opportunity costs, and it is difficult to imagine strongly sustained higher inflation without growth in broad monetary aggregates, bank lending, and growth more generally.  So, as of now, in my judgment, the pace of economic recovery and inflation outlook continues to be too weak to be consistent with our mandates for the relevant forecast horizon, but things are better today.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses disagreement with Governor Warsh's characterization of the rise in inflation as the "nominal revenue channel" and refers to it as "more money illusion."


Passage number 109.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite closing statement from President Hoenig.


Passage number 110.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our District is growing and is similar to the nation in many, many ways.  Our manufacturing sector has picked up.  Our retailers are also seeing a pretty good season so far this year, and the responses we get are that things are steady or improving or improving nicely—those kinds of descriptors. Two areas in our region, of course, are doing quite well.  One is energy, and the other is agriculture.  Energy is quite brisk.  They’re switching their activities from natural gas into oil.  We’re seeing many more efforts to bring oil out of the ground in the region, and that has put forward a little bit of a mini boom in parts of our region, which are actually expanding.In terms of agriculture, this is now what I would refer to as a boom.  We’re seeing strong global demand; obviously there have been some shortages.  Prices are moving up.  Commodity prices are moving up well, and farmland values are continuing to climb rapidly.  Across much of our area—and I think nationally as well—we are seeing substantial increases in land values over a year ago.  In our area, the increase has been about 10 percent from a year ago, although obviously, it varies with the quality of the land.  That’s a 60 percent increase since 2005.  Ratios of land values to rents—that’s like a price-earnings ratio for us—in some parts of our region are now at 25, which surpasses the previous high in the 1970s.  The high value-to-rent ratio implies a pretty low cap rate; based on what you assume about continued cash flows coming off that, the cap rates move back down to around 3 percent.  When you speak with these individuals about their choices, they say, “It’s a lot better than what I can get at a bank,” and they certainly don’t want to go into the stock market.  So there’s momentum. The next question is:  Who’s lending on this stuff.  Of course, banks are or the Farm Credit System, and, at the margin on the properties that are selling, they’re lending about 70 percent of value, which is an accelerated value.  They’re saying that’s not a problem because they’re spreading that against other properties owned, but of course, all the properties are going up.  So you get the signal that the loan-to-value ratios are still very modest.  That’s because, of course, you’re moving the values up as you move the loan.  So they are increasing their debt carry, and they are assuming not the highest prices in the commodities, but what they think is a good estimate of an average, which is much higher than historical levels.  So, what do we tell our examiners.  Do you look at land values of five years ago and say “this is too big a loan on it” and get the blowback from that.  You probably won’t.  So this is going to continue to build, I suspect, over time, and it’s a worry of mine.Now, this is only one sector, I realize.  My question is, given that we’re trying to affect asset values, what other assets might we be affecting through our current policies.  The point is that the national economy and the local economy are improving only modestly.  I see inflation also as very low right now and increasing very modestly over time.  But there is an allocation effect now going on as there is an asset value effect that’s going on in different segments of the economy.  I think we should be mindful of that this time around.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a report from Mr. Hoenig about the positive growth in their district, particularly in the manufacturing, retail, energy, and agriculture sectors. He expresses concerns about the increasing land values and debt carry in the agriculture sector, but there is no disagreement presented.


Passage number 111.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and addressing the First Vice President, Moore.


Passage number 112.
 MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  After my unscripted reference to pop culture at the November meeting, my research director coached me on the importance of staying on message.  [Laughter]  I assured him I would do so, but I might have forgotten to disclose that I’d be adjusting the messages accordingly. For the Twelfth District, the economic news is mostly the same.  The high-tech sector, which was hit very hard during the recession, continues to rebound.  Profits at major tech companies have improved, and one global online retailer is dramatically increasing its office space in the Seattle area.  The San Francisco Fed Tech Pulse Index rose 1 percent in November, down from the 1½ percent average monthly increases seen earlier in the year.  Homebuilders in the West remain very downbeat.  One business contact said recently the word that best describes the homebuilding industry is “miserable,” and, unlike the tech sector, no signs of pent-up demand have surfaced.  One change is that retailers seem to be in a better mood.  Our contacts tell us that sales were good around Black Friday and thereafter, but they also note that retailers were much more aggressive in discounting this year, and, of course, they were open for considerably more hours over the Thanksgiving weekend.  So, comparisons with last year may exaggerate the underlying trend just a bit.Turning to the national economy, the incoming data have been favorable.  At the time of our last meeting, I was starting to worry that the economy might slow to stall speed, but I’ve been somewhat reassured by the recent spending data, which show growth in the second half of 2010 to be at or perhaps even a bit above trend.  In addition, consumer confidence appears to be improving as seen in the latest reading from the Michigan survey, which puts us about back where we were in the spring prior to the soft patch.  What’s more, the recently announced fiscal package, assuming it becomes law, should provide a healthy boost to household spending next year. The fiscal situation reminds me of a new piece of apparel that a national clothing retailer told us about recently.  Over the past few years, a huge market has developed for a product called Spanx—there’s an “x” at the end, not a “k-s”—which are body shaping undergarments for women.  This year the product line has been expanded to include men’s Spanx, a tight-fitting undershirt that can slim down almost any male figure [laughter]—present company excepted, I suspect.  Where am I going with this anecdote.  Well, as I observe reaction to the Deficit Commission’s proposal, I can’t help but feel that our country will resort to fiscal Spanx rather than a good, old-fashioned diet in addressing our long-term fiscal deficit. The recent positive news on the economy has been largely offset by the significant tightening of financial conditions over the past month, particularly a jump in real longer-term interest rates.  Overall my views on the outlook for growth and employment have not changed very much and remain reasonably close to those in the Tealbook.  I expect growth to pick up to nearly 4 percent next year and a bit above that in 2012, as uncertainty recedes and confidence improves.  But I don’t think we’ll see a surge in spending or hiring any time soon.  A recurring theme from our directors has been that no business wants to overcommit at this time.  One evencommented that the near-death experience we recently went through is likely to overshadow any expansionary desires for a very long time.  I think the expansion is more likely to play out gradually, with sustained growth in household spending slowly chipping away at the reluctance of businesses to invest and hire.  Like the Tealbook, I do not anticipate reaching full employment until the middle of this decade.  One worrying development in the past month or so has been the escalation of the fiscal crisis in Europe.  Although spillovers to the U.S. economy should be negligible, there is a risk that the crisis could intensify and spread, with more significant consequences for the U.S. economy as discussed in the Tealbook simulations. Although I’ve been heartened by recent data on economic activity, the very low readings on inflation continue to be worrisome.  No matter how you slice the data, whether CPI or PCE, total, core, median, or trimmed mean, inflation is on a clear downward trend, and measures of underlying inflation are running below 1 percent.  Many of our business contacts report rising prices of materials and imported products, especially from China, which could potentially push up inflation here, but the economic climate does not appear to support much pass-through of these cost increases.  The prevailing thought from our contacts seem to be that these cost increases will just put more pressure on margins for suppliers and retailers rather than lead to higher consumer prices. Of course, the bigger problem is that we still have significant slack in labor and goods markets, putting more downward pressure on wage and price inflation.  Indeed, over the past year, unit labor costs fell 1 percent on top of a 2 percent decline over the previous four quarters, and I certainly know of at least one sector in the economy that will have zero wage growth next year.  Given the importance of labor costs for businesses, this downward momentum should offset any upward pressure from commodity and import prices.Finally, longer-term inflation expectations remain relatively stable.  Taking all of these factors together, our inflation forecast is similar to that of the Tealbook, with core PCE price inflation bottoming out around its current level, slightly below 1 percent, but, given the persistent slack in the economy, the risk of further disinflation down the road remains very real.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 114.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Recent reports from contacts in the Sixth District were a little more optimistic about near-term growth prospects compared with what I heard going into the November meeting.  As is appropriate for this time of year, we asked a number of directors and contacts about their early assessment of the holiday retail picture.  We heard that post-Thanksgiving receipts beat retailer expectations, in some cases by a good margin.  One contact with 85 shopping malls in the Southeast and Midwest said that mall traffic and sales through last Thursday were much stronger than expected. I spoke a week ago to the CEO of one of the two leading parcel shipping companies, a company that claims to touch about 7 percent of the country’s GDP daily.  He said they had planned for traffic to be 3 percent over last year, but so far they’re achieving 5 percent with the strongest week still ahead.  He also offered the opinion that if the pace of spending and accompanying shipping carries into January, inventory shortfalls among his company’s retail clients will require a step-up in production. Notwithstanding this upbeat information, we came away from our board meetings and calls with a sense that very few firms are revising up their 2011 business plans.  Contacts still cite a host of uncertainties as justification for their “wait and see” posture regarding new hiring and capital spending.  We heard mixed messages, for example, regarding the proposedinvestment expensing provision.  One buyer of big-ticket transportation equipment indicated that accelerated write-offs would certainly cause his company to shift investment into 2011.  Most others, however, said they would base investment decisions on business fundamentals and in general had not yet factored any substantial effect of the proposed stimulus into their 2011 forecast and plans. Overall, I saw little in the incoming data and heard little in the input from contacts that would require a revision of my November forecast of slightly over 3 percent GDP growth for 2011.  The basic outlook that most here in the room share—moderate and slightly accelerating growth, slowly reducing unemployment, and below desired but gradually rising inflation—still seems appropriate. In our conversations with contacts over the last two weeks, we probed on the question of pass-through of rising commodity prices.  We heard that, for the most part, commodity price increases are being absorbed at various stages of supply chains, some of which may be offshore.  Few firms claimed any pricing power at present.  I think the likelihood of accelerating disinflation, tipping into sustained deflation, has come down quite a bit since last summer.  Measures of inflation expectations have moved back up, and the estimates made by my staff of probabilities of CPI deflation over the next five years have moved back down.  I believe the inflation risks have become somewhat more balanced. As regards the overall balance of risks, I’m not quite ready to abandon the cautious view that risks to the downside outweigh those to the upside, but my overall sense of risk has definitely been moving in the direction of balance.  That said, I see tail risks as having fattened somewhat on the downside.  To back up that statement, I’d cite the European situation and renewed pessimism about the residential housing sector.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a summary of recent reports and giving their own perspective on the outlook for growth and inflation.


Passage number 115.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone addressing President Lacker.


Passage number 116.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our last District survey, which came out in late November, showed gains in manufacturing and services but continued weakness in retail.  Price trend indicators, both current and expected six months ahead, have all moved up notably over the last couple of months.  More recent anecdotal reports also suggest that District economic conditions are improving but are still weak by historical standards.  For example, we’ve seen a few encouraging signs in commercial real estate in the District.  Vacancy rates appear to have topped out for office and industrial space, though the picture is mixed for retail space, and residential real estate sales are declining, but prices seem to be holding up. At the national level, confidence in the economic outlook has picked up noticeably since our last meeting.  Perhaps most important is the steady expansion in real personal consumption expenditures after they bottomed out in the second quarter of 2009 and increased at an annual rate of less than 2 percent over the rest of that year.  Since then the growth rate in consumption has steadily risen.  It has averaged more than 3 percent over the last four months.  The gains we’ve seen in personal income and the stability of the personal saving rate are also encouraging signs.  Of course, the November payroll report was disappointing, but I agree with the Tealbook that it seems inconsistent with the broader array of labor market indicators.  On top of that, consumer confidence readings suggest a return of some of the outcomes we saw last spring.  So unless the holiday season is quite disappointing, I think we should enter the New Year with momentum in household spending, and that should help broaden confidence in economic prospects. The outlook for residential investment still looks bleak to me.  The Tealbook quite notably has slashed its forecast for housing starts in light of the large inventory overhang, and Ithink they have a more realistic path now.  It must have been difficult to keep econometrically based forecasts from returning to recovery patterns much more like history, and I think estimating the magnitude of overhang relative to some sort of desirable stock of housing is inherently difficult.  So I think they have a more realistic forecast right now. Core inflation measures have fallen, certainly, in recent months, but measures of overall inflation, which is what we really care about, have moved in the opposite direction recently.  Moreover, survey measures of inflation expectations remain stable, and TIPS-based measures have reversed most of this year’s decline.  As a result, I still think the downside risk to inflation is relatively small. The Desk added more than $100 billion in Treasuries to the SOMA portfolio since the November meeting.  Let me just say that I find it hard to attribute much, if any, of the increase in the outlook to the quantitative easing at this point, so I agree with others who have made that point.  Part of the way we think about the effect of these purchases involves their effect on the yields of the assets we’re buying.  Longer-term rates have moved up notably over the intermeeting period, but they declined notably before the last meeting, as President Bullard noted, in anticipation of our actions.  As a result, it’s hard to know how many basis points of easing we created or saved through this action. The other way we think about the effects of asset purchases is in terms of Governor Duke’s question from the last meeting, which was, essentially:  What will induce banks to hold a higher level of reserves.  Either yields on alternative liquid assets will decrease, or deposits will be created through lending or asset acquisition or both.  It’s probably too soon to get a quantitative handle on this channel, I think, but it’s interesting to note that our most recent asset purchases began in the midst of a modest revival in money growth.  So I think it’s going to beworthwhile to keep a careful eye on bank balance sheets and monetary aggregates in the months ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I understand coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take 20 minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses a statement and a suggestion. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 118.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we reconvene.  I will turn to the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting reconvening the meeting and indicating that they will turn to the Vice Chairman, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention between the parties involved.


Passage number 119.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


Passage number 120.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data we have received since our last meeting suggest that the economy is continuing to grow, and the mood among households and businesses is improving.  My contacts have been cautious for quite some time.  That hasn’t changed, but more seem cautiously optimistic.  Incoming data on retail sales and consumer confidence have surprised them and me to the upside.  Consumer spending is hardly exuberant, but purchases of durable goods, a typical driver of recovery in the early stages of expansion, have picked up some steam, and I consider that encouraging.  Given the exceptionally high ratio of household debt to personal income, I continue to think that the deleveraging process has some way to run.  But the ratio of debt service to income and the financial obligations ratio have both declined substantially, and this may be creating greater latitude for a rebound in discretionary spending.Of course, the performance of the labor market is critical to consumer spending going forward, and it is disappointing that unemployment ticked up during the intermeeting period.  But other labor market indicators—initial claims, hours, and incoming data on hiring and job openings—suggest some modest ongoing improvement. The fiscal package agreed to last week, if enacted into law, is also a positive for the near-term outlook.  It should boost growth somewhat during the coming year and diminish the risk that fiscal drag could tip the economy back into recession.  All of these factors point to an improved near-term outlook and some abatement of downside risk to the economic recovery.  It seems likely that these developments account for a portion of the extraordinary backup in nominal Treasury and TIPS yields since the November FOMC meeting. In spite of the many upside surprises during the intermeeting period, the news has not been uniformly upbeat.  Two intermeeting developments that particularly concern me pertain to the housing market and the European debt situation.  With respect to housing, as David explained, incoming data have been dismal, and, to my mind, they justified the substantial downward revision to projected residential investment spending in the current Tealbook.  The discouraging tone of recent data accord with the truly downbeat reports we are getting from homebuilders.  A group we met with here at the Board noted that prices in most markets have declined to the point where they no longer cover construction costs.  So from a supply perspective, new homebuilding is largely unprofitable.  Moreover, incoming data suggest that house prices remain under continued downward pressure due to the bloated supply of new and existing homes for sale, plus the huge shadow inventory reflecting foreclosures and seriously delinquent mortgages.One of the most striking and worrisome revisions in this Tealbook pertains to house prices.  A further 8 percent decline in house prices, as Tealbook now assumes, will affect consumer spending via wealth effects and negatively affect the ability of households to borrow.  Such a large decline in house prices will also significantly increase the already large fraction of homes that are underwater on their mortgages, likely precipitating additional foreclosures and re-defaults on modified loans.  Financial institutions remain quite vulnerable to losses related to real estate.  Such dynamics could restrict the availability of credit, feeding further house-price declines in a worrisome adverse feedback loop. Like Nathan, Vice Chairman Dudley, and others, I also see the European debt situation as very worrisome and posing significant risk to the recovery.  The crisis has intensified in recent weeks.  It now shows signs of spreading beyond Greece and Ireland to Portugal, Spain, and other euro-area countries.  Strains have been evident in short-term funding markets.  The pricing of sovereign debt suggests that markets now assume that restructuring for some countries, particularly Greece, is almost inevitable.  And debt dynamics calculations for Ireland and Portugal suggest that the fiscal responses required for these countries to avoid restructuring are, frankly, draconian.  Fiscal contraction on the scale needed would severely undermine their prospects for economic growth.  Moreover, restoration of growth seems likely to require wage cuts to restore competitiveness, and such cuts, if they occur, would make the burden of the debt yet more onerous. The European response thus far strikes me as inadequate to stem contagion, and I am concerned that these developments have the potential to precipitate a broad-based pullback from risk-taking, with spillovers into domestic asset prices.  For example, we have seen negative co-movements between U.S. equity prices and peripheral European CDS premiums in recent weeks,similar to the pattern that prevailed last spring.  The alternative simulations in the Tealbook suggest that an intensification of the crisis could have significant implications for the outlook. Finally, turning to inflation, the data on core inflation have once again surprised to the downside, and wage increases remain very well contained.  Even if temporary factors are partly responsible for the very subdued inflation readings in the past few months, the pace of core inflation still seems to be moving downward, and, by any measure, the deceleration is broad-based.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker, Ms. Yellen, providing her analysis and evaluation of various data and factors affecting the economy.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it simply expresses gratitude to Governor Warsh.


Passage number 122.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t think the most important development since we last met is the improvement in the real economic data, though that is certainly significant.  I also don’t think it’s the continuing strains in Europe, which many of us have talked about for a long time, though that also is significant.  I think the most important development since we last met is the change, level, and uncertainty with respect to longer-term Treasuries.  The 10-year Treasury, the benchmark security, seems to have awakened from its slumber, and I suspect that we will be talking about the uncertainty in the rate increasingly going forward. Now, for those of us who were supportive of the last round of policy action, it is tempting to say that all that has happened is all to the good and was perfectly predictable.  For those of us who were uncomfortable with our last policy action, it is tempting to ascribe all bad facts and circumstances to it.  I think that we all, myself included, need to resist that temptation.  The move in Treasuries is difficult to disaggregate, but, in my view, it is most likely a mix of both benign and possibly less benign circumstances, and it bears significant watching. Let me try to make three objective, dispassionate assessments about why the level and uncertainty of long-term Treasuries matters.  First, I think it matters because it is the mostimportant asset anywhere in the world, and this value, this price, this uncertainty impacts every price everywhere in the world.  Second, I think the value of the 10-year Treasury has a significant impact on other sovereign costs, particularly other stronger advanced foreign economies—I’m thinking about Germany, France, Britain, and others.  There’s a huge correlation between movements in our own sovereign rates and theirs.  As we think about the funding costs for the periphery, it’s not just the spreads that will bear watching, but also the all-in funding costs. Third, and probably of most import to all of us around the table, the move in Treasuries matters because central banks’ ability to control, to impact, to manipulate, to influence, rates along the Treasury curve, now appears more limited than the world had grown accustomed to over the course of the last several years.  At least some market participants thought that we would be able to have a huge bearing on these rates in the next several years, and I think that notion is likely to be revisited in real time.  We can push asset prices around for a while, but ultimately markets are going to determine these prices, and, I suspect, in the world of Treasuries, markets are increasingly going to be setting those prices, and we will be observing them.  So I think it’s that development which bears watching.  Markets and real economic actors will have to adjust to the fact that the Fed’s actions are less determinative of this 10-year rate, and it bears watching by all of us as we think about policy, both today and in the coming meetings.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion on the importance of the change in longer-term Treasuries and the impact it may have on the economy and policy decisions. They acknowledge that different perspectives may interpret the situation differently, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 124.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 125.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we’ve had a mixed picture since the last meeting, and there have been a lot of those recently.  But this is a different kind of mixed picture, one in which the medium-term real economy prospects seem clearly to have improved. However, at least from my point of view, the downside risks are actually greater now, but they are predominantly financial rather than from within the economy itself. With respect to the real economy, as many of you have already discussed, things have improved, even since the last FOMC meeting.  At that time, I thought we were likely to see only tepid growth for some time, although I carefully and, it turns out, wisely hedged by saying that I thought that the risks to the real economy were on the upside, particularly if there were some sort of unanticipated policy action.  I think we’ve gotten the unanticipated policy action in the form of a fiscal package that exceeded general expectations.  They may not be the most efficacious additional stimulus measures in the world, but the payroll tax reduction and the full investment expensing seem to have had a psychological as well as an anticipated real effect.  Having said that, though, I don’t think that the economy is likely to get carried away by optimism any time soon, and neither should we. And now I have to say in recognition of yet another Navy win over Army, my next couple of metaphors will be maritime in nature:  While the instinct to “stay in port” has receded considerably, it seems to have been replaced by an “ahead one-third” attitude rather than an “all ahead full.”  I think we see that in several respects.  One, the mountains of cash on which major corporations are sitting are probably a testament both to a lack of confidence in the payoff from new investment and to a desire to self-insure against some economic or financial ill winds that might blow across the Atlantic or maybe blow east from some of the states with particular financing problems.  Housing, as many of you have pointed out, remains in the doldrums.  Even though affordability looks good, demand remains low, probably in part because people are waiting to see if prices will go down yet more, and, presumably, also because the rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages is now increasing.I focus again, as I often do, on the labor market, in substantial part because it seems hard to imagine a sustained or increasingly strong recovery without a significant decrease in unemployment, unless you expect another really big spike in productivity, which I don’t think anybody is forecasting.  Labor market prospects are obviously mixed—there are more encouraging indications in surveys of employers about future hiring plans, but those have yet to materialize in strong net hiring.  One useful labor market indicator reflecting continued caution is the quit rate, a metric that Janet Yellen has mentioned a number of times when we have talked about labor markets.  First, I should note, as Janet has in the past, that a fairly high number of quits reflects a healthy labor market, because people have opportunities and they have confidence to leave current jobs.  Looking at the JOLTS series, which admittedly has a short life, quits had always exceeded layoffs and discharges by a minimum of about 20 percent on average, and sometimes by as much as 80 or 90 percent.  That changed in the fall of 2008 when quits dropped precipitously.  Late that year, as layoffs rose especially steeply, the two lines crossed on the JOLTS graph for the first time.  And then, for nearly a year, layoffs exceeded quits by about 20 percent, and sometimes more, before quits finally stabilized and layoffs declined in the latter part of last year.  Since then, layoffs have been near the levels seen in pre-crisis years.  Quits, on the other hand, have only inched up since that time—they’re still nearly 20 percent below previous levels and, while the quits rate has now edged ahead of layoffs, it has bounced back and forth a little bit over the last six months.  Until the gap grows a good deal more, it will be hard to conclude that the labor market is returning to some semblance of normality. With respect to the financial risks, I think Bill covered those well.  I would just add a couple of things about the euro zone.  I think, first, we’ve seen what happens when you try to do crisis management and structural reforms at the same time—you massively confuse investors andmarkets, and the Europeans are still paying the price for that.  Second, a number of you have mentioned the supposed Spanish firewall.  I, for one, don’t see any evidence that anybody is building a firewall.  At this point, it just seems to be a forest fire effort which is spread across all of the periphery.  If they really mean to have Spain being a firewall, one would hope to see a more concentrated Spain-specific set of measures, internally and externally provided. In sum, I will end where I began by saying that, oddly in a sense, the real economy here in the United States looks still to be improving only modestly, but with more traction than before.  But, somewhat counterintuitively, the downside risks are now greater, in the sense that they are external, which is to say, I think, in financial markets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Tarullo is providing his own analysis and assessment of the current state of the economy and financial risks. He does not express any disagreement or contention with the statements or opinions of others.


Passage number 126.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any information or statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Raskin.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe the state of the recovery is more promising than it was at the November FOMC meeting, but I see considerable continuing downside risks in terms of both price stability and unemployment.  Information we have received for this meeting suggests considerable reasons for optimism.  In particular, private domestic final purchases are looking stronger, business purchases of equipment and software are increasing, and wholesale inventories and merchandise trade have been marked up.  Since the last meeting, equity prices are higher, the yield curve is steeper, and risk spreads have narrowed.  I read these financial indicators as implying that financial markets could be recovering from their nervous conditions of this spring.  Given these stronger indicators and the additional confidence provided by our latest program of large-scale asset purchases and by the likelihood of more fiscal stimulus, I think there are some reasons for cautious optimism that the recovery is on a path to becoming stronger.There remain, however, significant downside risks.  Specifically, in addition to the continued weak housing market, problems in Europe, and weaker banks, the recent decrease in measures of core inflation, I believe, bears continued attention.  While I don’t think that we’re in serious danger of deflation, I hope that the continuing decline in core inflation does not eventually affect inflation expectations and, thereby, lower wages as well as raise real interest rates.  While break-even inflation rates have been stable since our last meeting, professional forecasters, as measured by the Livingston survey, appear to be revising their forecasts downwards, and the level of economic slack continues to be substantial.  If inflation continues to fall, becoming difficult to reverse, inflationary expectations could become unanchored, and I worry that rising real interest rates could offset the added monetary and fiscal expansion.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains both positive and negative statements about the state of the recovery and the potential risks. The speaker mentions reasons for optimism, such as stronger financial indicators and the likelihood of more fiscal stimulus, but also highlights downside risks, including the weak housing market, problems in Europe, and the decrease in measures of core inflation. The speaker expresses concern that the decline in core inflation could affect inflation expectations and raise real interest rates.


Passage number 128.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Bill.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrases "Thank you" and "Are there questions for Bill" are polite and neutral statements. The mention of President Lockhart does not indicate any disagreement either.


Passage number 129.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Bill, looking at alternative A, is it your sense—and I don’t want to put words in your mouth—that the market might see this as a sequence of steps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for Bill's opinion or sense regarding how the market might perceive a specific alternative.


Passage number 130.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I’m not sure they’d see it as a sequence of steps, but I think they would see it as certainly opening the door to additional increases later on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the possibility of future increases in relation to opening a door.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response]  Seeing none, we’ll start the second go-round.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 132.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  With our announcement of the large-scale asset purchase last month, and with some additional fiscal stimulus likely to be approved before the end of the year, this is probably an appropriate time to assess the impact of these actions and to gauge whether the slow recovery embedded in most of our forecasts unfolds as expected.  With little change to our forecast, which envisions substantial misses on both elements of our mandate through 2012 and beyond, it is difficult to imagine why we would not purchase all $600 billion of government securities.  Moreover, I remain concerned that disinflationary pressures may not abate quickly given the significant excess capacity in the economy and given that the recovery, such as we have experienced it to date, remains quite fragile.  With core inflation estimates currently getting close to estimates of the inflation bias, I can easily envision circumstances in which we would want to expand our large-scale asset purchases next year.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The speaker expresses his support for alternative B and provides reasons for this support. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of President Lockhart do not imply any form of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 134.
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B.  I believe some patience in letting the effects of the new LSAP materialize is warranted.  I would also say that in my view the reversal of the summer’s downward trend in longer-term inflation expectations represents an early sign of the success of our current policy course. Though I don’t feel any adjustment of policy is needed at this juncture, and though I am comfortable with the statement language as presented, I would favor in the coming meetings a more thorough discussion of the broad policy framework the Committee believes it has adopted and how it should be conveyed in the statements going forward.  In that regard, I would like to comment for a second in more detail about the language in alternatives A and C.  Like others on the Committee, I think the policy concern of the moment is communication.  The reason I asked Bill English the question about the $200 billion change signaling potentially a sequence of adjustments on a more open-ended path is that it strikes me that A and C could be interpreted as a first step in a sequence.  In that light, the language seems to signal a move toward an approach to policy that resembles the funds rate targeting approach when the zero lower bound did not pertain.  In alternative A, for example, it has already been mentioned that an additional $200 billion might be viewed as roughly equivalent to a 25 basis point cut in the fed funds rate. In my mind, this asset purchase analogue to funds rate targeting adds two characteristics that the Committee might consider beginning to convey in statements.  First, a sequence of similar moves is likely unless economic conditions change in some significant way.  And, second, the total value to which the sequence of moves accumulates is left unstated, because that quantity is conditional on economic conditions.  If this is not the policy framework we intend to communicate, then the language needs to be carefully constructed to avoid any confusion about our policy strategy.  So I’d like to advocate that, whatever action we take next on the assetpurchase program, we convey it choosing language that more openly reflects a deliberate Committee choice about our policymaking framework for the foreseeable future.  I hope, therefore, that at the next meeting we might devote a little time to discussion of our policy framework options and the content of communications that would convey them and support the effectiveness of the chosen approach.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Lockhart expresses his support for alternative B, but then raises concerns about the language in alternatives A and C. He suggests that they could be interpreted as signaling a move toward a different policy framework, and argues for a more thorough discussion of the Committee's policy framework and communication strategy. This indicates disagreement or disagreement within the Committee about the best approach to take.


Passage number 135.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, by “framework” are you thinking about the broader issues we talked about in the teleconference, like an inflation target.  Or do you have a more narrow idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
  MR. LOCKHART.  I have, in some respects, a more narrow idea.  I think some of the debate over time has been about a discretionary versus rules-based approach, so it’s that tension that I have in mind.  To explain what I mean, I describe our approach today as involving meeting-by-meeting reviews that result in decisions around a fairly large asset purchase program that is closed-ended, in the sense that a final cumulative target for purchases is explicitly stated.  In contrast, it has been suggested before that the Committee adopt an incremental approach with the cumulative purchase target left open.  So that’s what I am trying to convey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, presents two different approaches to conducting asset purchase programs, one involving a closed-ended approach with a final cumulative target and the other suggesting an incremental approach with an open cumulative purchase target. These two approaches represent a tension or disagreement within the debate.


Passage number 137.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I understand.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing understanding and gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage consists of a simple expression of gratitude and a signature from President Lacker.


Passage number 139.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I still oppose the asset purchase program we decided on at the last meeting.  So I personally would favor scaling the program back as in alternative C.  However, I can understand why those who supported the asset purchase program at our November meeting would be reluctant to back off right now.  The economic outlook has improved somewhat since the last meeting, but probably not enough to convince many of you to switch camps.  So I won’t bother trying to persuade you to do so. What I would like to do is to make some comments in anticipation of discussions we may face at upcoming meetings in the new year in light of what’s happened in the last couple of weeks to the long rate, and this is by way commenting on essentially our reaction function.  An intermediate objective of our asset purchases was to reduce longer-term rates.  So the recent increase in those rates presents us with something of a problem, which we may face fairly often going forward, namely, how should we react to increases in long rates.  The answer depends on just why long rates go up, obviously.  As a general matter, if long rates are driven up by a rise in inflation expectations to levels above those consistent with price stability, I think we would all agree as a matter of principle that monetary policy should shift to a less accommodative stance.  In the present case, obviously, the rise in nominal Treasury yields since the November FOMCmeeting has been virtually all real.  Inflation expectations haven’t risen much over that time frame, although they did rise between September and November. If long rates are driven up instead by a significant strengthening in the economic outlook, we should applaud that strength and simply point out that higher expected growth requires higher real interest rates.  If we got enough strengthening, that would indicate that monetary stimulus should be scaled back, but, in any case, I don’t see a reason why additional economic strength would warrant additional stimulus.  As I said before, I think the strengthening in the outlook has been modest so far.  So it is unlikely to have been the only reason for the run-up in yields. A third possibility is a little more disturbing, and it is that long rates are driven up by increasing fears about long-run fiscal balance, in other words, that future debt issues are expected to crowd out private investment and drive up real rates.  The rate response to the announcement of the tax deal certainly suggests that anticipated fiscal implications could have contributed to the recent rate increases.  In this case it would be clearly inappropriate for us to try to counteract the increase in rates with an expansion in our purchase plans or by avoiding a reduction in our purchase plans that we would otherwise have been inclined to make. Now, I believe we would want to be clear that we will not alter policy to accommodate a deficit-driven increase in Treasury rates.  I think there are dangers in the other direction, as well.  In the perhaps unlikely event that the Congress and the Administration move forward next year to substantially reduce the path of future federal deficits, we may be pressured to keep federal financing costs down.  Moderate long-term interest rates, after all, are one of our three supposed mandates.  Obviously, we would want to resist that, but we could find ourselves being perceived as thwarting the Congress’s attempts to resolve the nation’s fiscal problems.I want to point out that the broader point is essentially the one that Eric Leeper was making at the Jackson Hole conference.  Eric and Chris Sims and many others have been making the same point for many, many years, and it’s about the danger of letting monetary policy slide into a stance of passively accommodating fiscal policy, which, in our current case, is at significant risk of being dysfunctional.  Eric Leeper argued that even before we switch to a sort of passive mode, expectations that such a switch might occur in the near future or even several years down the road could well have inflationary consequences today.  Indeed, the story of monetary policy in the late 1960s, a period when inflation drifted upward unchecked, is largely about monetary policy becoming subservient to fiscal policy.  I think this could be a real problem for us soon if the public perception of a politically weakened Fed leads markets to question our willingness to act independently of fiscal policy.  I know these dangers are well understood by this Committee, but I think it’s going to be useful to try and anticipate how we would respond publicly should that challenge face us in the future.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. It is primarily expressing the speaker's own views and understanding of the current economic situation. There is no indication of disagreement or opposition from others in the passage.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you for the comment.  I think I’m being only partly facetious if I reply to you and President Plosser that if our goal is to curry political favor, we’re not doing a very damned good job of it.  [Laughter]  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 141.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have argued that the financial market effects of asset purchases were substantial prior to the November meeting.  I expect that the effects on real variables, such as consumption and investment, will follow with a lag of one-half to one year.  This would be similar to the real effects of monetary policy easing estimated, for instance, by Frank Smets and Raf Wouters, or possibly Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans.  The 2011 outlook is indeed improving, but it’s too early to come to any policy conclusion based on that.  Inflation expectations have increased, according to the five-year TIPS measures, as manyhave discussed in the run-up to the November meeting, and remain higher today than they were during the summer.  One thing about the five-year measure is that I think we should be able to hit our implicit inflation target over a period as long as five years—that has usually been a goal of the Committee, so I think that’s a reasonable expectation. Still, actual core inflation measures are low, as many have pointed out—measured from one year ago, nearly all inflation measures are below 1 percent.  This is a concern to me—I would like to see this disinflation trend turn around.  Until it does, I would advise remaining with the current course of asset purchases.  Therefore, for today I support alternative B.  I suggest one minor change.  I would omit, as I have argued before, explicit reference to the $600 billion figure.  We could interpret the $600 billion as a form of forward guidance based on current forecasts of the Committee, but I think it’s an inferior way to give forward guidance and unnecessary.  I think that a big figure like that lumps us in with other types of stimulus programs that have been enacted over the last couple of years, when, in fact, this is ordinary monetary policy, the purchase and sale of Treasury securities.  So instead I would simply state that the pace of purchases would be at $75 billion per month and that we are likely to continue this pace of purchases through the second quarter of 2011, and then I would let the financial markets do the math—they’re supposedly good at doing the math. In a way, that would be no real change, but it would have, to me anyway, some advantages going forward.  We can and probably will adjust the program on the dimension of the pace of purchases, that is, we might slow or increase the pace of purchases, and we might adjust the program along the dimension of its length, so that we could say, for example, that we’re going to continue through the third quarter or only through April or something like that.  So those are the two dimensions we’re likely to change, and we can do so without putting the bignumber in the statement.  I think that might be a bit helpful at this juncture.  I think it would also help to reinforce that the program is, indeed, adjustable and state-contingent and, above all, that monetary policy is a continuous process, not a series of temporary actions.  I think it would also help to eliminate the talk of QE3 and QE4 that is reverberating around financial markets and instead get markets to think in terms of a policy rule for the Committee.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Hoenig.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I listened to the discussions today during the first go-round, it does appear that many have revised up their forecast, as I have.  I also expect inflation, as others have said, to start low, but I do expect it to increase slowly over time.  I join those who would like to see immediate stronger growth and lower unemployment.  I continue to judge that additional monetary stimulus carries more long-term risk than short-term advantage to our economy. The economy is undergoing a major and necessary rebalancing that includes the deleveraging of consumers, financial institutions, and state and local governments.  The process will take time, and shortcuts are costly.  With the amount of stimulus in place and the extended size of our combined balance sheets, the effect on expectations, confidence, and asset prices will be significant once we initiate or hint at initiating an exit involving even the most modest steps from our current highly, in my opinion, accommodative policy.  Thus, the process of exit from an accommodative policy will be a major challenge, far more so than we’re willing to acknowledge today, in my opinion.  It starts from the very fact that we are easing into an improving economy because unemployment is too high.  Then there would be the obvious concern that, as we start to raise interest rates, the initial downward effect on asset prices andfinancial activity will be outsized.  The markets will despair.  As a result, I suspect pressure for the Committee to delay its exit from current policy will be significant. I suspect the challenge will only increase for the Committee going forward from here.  I’m already hearing today that we can’t change because we’ve set this path for ourselves.  The funds rate is near zero.  Our balance sheet is growing, approaching $3 trillion, and excess reserves are approaching $1.5 trillion.  Accordingly, the longer the Committee delays in preparing for exit, the greater the difficulty of doing so in a timely manner, increasing systematically the likelihood that it will inadvertently invite future imbalances in inflation impulses because of the delay. Mr. Chairman, you mentioned 2003, and I remember it well.  We talked a lot about not wanting a repeat of Japan, being afraid of deflation and not having enough inflation.  So the Committee delayed, held back.  Unemployment was too high at that time, at 6½ percent.  I worry about our focus on unemployment even though I’m as concerned about it as you are. And when we exit, we’ll require time, I realize.  Nonetheless, we should begin that long process now.  We first should adjust talk of the need for further monetary stimulus.  We should indicate that sufficient stimulus is in place to attain over time long-run potential growth for the economy.  It won’t come quickly, but it will come.  We also need to reopen our dialogue about an exit strategy so that we don’t shock the market as we move forward from here. Of the options presented, I would take some combination of C and D, but I won’t go into that, because I know that’s not on the table today.  But I will, in summary, say that I believe that our current highly accommodative monetary policy is inconsistent with our long-run mandate in an economy that is recovering and shifting from transitory, I think, to sustained sources of growth and picking up some speed.  To maintain such a highly accommodative policy in thiseconomic environment increases the risk of imbalances developing in the longer term and the risk of longer-term inflation expectations necessarily rising over time. We need to begin shifting our language to regain policy flexibility and avoid locking ourselves deeper into a long-term policy position that is becoming in my opinion, of course, increasingly difficult to reverse in a timely fashion with each additional step over the next six months.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of additional monetary stimulus and argues that maintaining a highly accommodative policy increases the risk of imbalances and inflation expectations rising over time. The speaker also disagrees with the idea of delaying the exit from current policy and calls for a shift in language to regain policy flexibility.


Passage number 144.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude from President Evans.


Passage number 145.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  Nothing has changed sufficiently since our November meeting to suggest any other course of action.  Inflation is too far below our mandate and resource slack remains very large, and I don’t see either of these conditions changing very soon.  Risk aversion is still holding back spending.  Businesses continue to accumulate cash rather than undertake expansionary investment activities or increase staffing.  Households remain cautious in their spending plans and are further reducing debt. Lower real interest rates would reduce incentives to save and expand demand.  However, we can’t get there now through lower nominal rates because of the zero lower bound.  We continue to be mired in what I refer to as a liquidity trap.  Reducing real rates now would require inflation moving up closer to our mandate levels.  It is disappointing that longer-term Treasury rates have risen so much since we last met, but it seems clear that these increases reflect nonmonetary events as well as reduced expectations for monetary accommodation.  Others have spoken on this, so I’ll let those comments stand.  It seems clear that reducing our intended Treasury purchases now would only add to these negative influences in an unhelpful manner.  So I do support alternative B.With the risks that we face and the magnitude of our shortfalls, it will be important to continue evaluating our current programs and policies.  So I certainly agree with other comments on this matter.  As I look at 2011, I see we have several tools that could provide additional monetary accommodation if that proved to be necessary, and we are using two of them now.  I think the most powerful one is the FOMC’s commitment to keep short-term interest rates low for an “extended period” of time.  Stating that commitment more explicitly with a likely calendar date could be a helpful boost, if that were necessary, as in alternative A.  A second tool is our larger balance sheet.  It also signals a firm commitment to low interest rates as necessary relative to our dual mandate objectives.  We can add a third tool:  Strengthening our commitment to an explicit inflation objective would be an additional instrument to signal the future path of policy.  President Plosser’s concerns about too much emphasis on the unemployment rate could be addressed in part by stating our inflation objective more explicitly.  I think it would be easier for us to navigate how much weight we’re putting on those two channels.  We would still disagree, perhaps, on where we stand, but I think that that would be, on balance, beneficial.  And fourth, it would be helpful to be willing to entertain having inflation at times come in slightly above our mandate.  This would be a natural feature of an unbiased policy based on symmetric losses about our inflation objective. I personally worry a bit about the language that has been used—“our goal is 2 percent or a bit less”—which perhaps suggests that 2 percent is a ceiling on inflation, and that could add additional policy cost.  I’m just not sure how people are interpreting that, and it bothers me a bit.  I think it would be useful to discuss that at some point.  The Tealbook box on policy commitment and discretion is instructive on this issue about inflation rising a bit above 2 percent for a period of time.  When policy commits to achieving its goals by keeping interest rates lowfor an “extended period” and allowing inflation to go very modestly above the 2 percent objective, while not exceeding 2½ percent, the growth and inflation outcomes are better in those economic analyses. Finally, a number of people have mentioned political risks, and I agree that those exist.  Will we be afraid to take further actions due to this criticism.  I think this cuts both ways, and I’m not really sure how to evaluate these concerns about policy risk.  I prefer to think about it on the merits of what the economy needs and take the heat that we’re supposed to take when that’s the best action. All that said, I find alternative B to be an acceptable policy today, although I think it has a stiffer dose of hope than I really prefer.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Pianalto.


Passage number 147.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The data since the last meeting haven’t changed my outlook substantially, and I see little evidence of any significant financial market problems following our announcement of additional asset purchases.  I favor a fairly high hurdle to make changes to the program.  In other words, it would take a surprising change to the outlook for inflation or output to cause me to want to make an adjustment to the announced program.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, expresses her support for alternative B and discusses her outlook on the data and financial market problems. She also mentions her stance on making changes to the program and the kind of change that would make her want to adjust the announced program. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this passage.


Passage number 148.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a statement followed by a polite thank you.


Passage number 149.
 MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be very brief.  I, too, favor alternative B.  I recognize that our eventual withdrawal of accommodation will, indeed, be challenging, but it seems to me that the fundamental fact for policy at this time remains that we’re likely to continue to fall short on both of our mandates, not just for a short period of time, but for the next several years.  Our announced asset purchase program is by no means a magic bullet, but it provides anudge, if not a push, in the right direction and will provide some insurance against downside risk to the economy and inflation.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Moore, expresses agreement and support for alternative B. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 150.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 151.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am in favor of alternative B, but I would like to expand on that to talk about what we should be doing in the next few months.  I’m going to talk first about how we should structure further accommodation or tightening, and then offer some tentative thoughts about appropriate conditionality. When thinking about further easing, I find it useful to return to the three tools that you, Mr. Chairman, outlined last August in Jackson Hole:  the LSAPs, forward guidance, and the IOER.  I would recommend against doing another LSAP for a couple of reasons.  As I suggested in October, I think that we have relatively little control over its effects.  Its ultimate impact depends on the accumulated stock of purchases that markets expect us to undertake, and that dependence combined with its relative novelty leaves us at the mercy of outside influences.  Indeed, even tweets from former governors of Alaska can end up affecting those expectations.  [Laughter] I like the other two tools better.  The staff’s analysis on pages 7 and 9 of Tealbook Part B indicate to me that forward guidance can be an effective way to provide further accommodation.  I think President Evans spoke quite eloquently about that in his remarks.  The work in the Tealbook is based on the FRB/US model, but it seems to me that forward guidance would emerge as a useful response to the zero lower bound in any economic model in which agents are somewhat forward-looking and the central bank is, in fact, capable of commitment.  These statements I’m making about the efficacy of forward guidance do not necessarily apply to the LSAPs, which do not have that same effectiveness in a wide class of economic models.I also like the idea of cutting the IOER rate, as President Plosser suggested last time.  Now, I have to say that cutting the interest rate on excess reserves by 25 basis points is likely to have only a slight effect on the economy, but it would have the additional benefit of solving what I’m becoming convinced is a big communication problem for us.  When I give speeches, I’ve found that the public has a hard time understanding why we’re paying a positive interest on bank reserves when we’re trying to stimulate the economy.  They see a positive IOER rate as a sign that we’re willing to subsidize the banks even at the cost of not fulfilling our dual mandate.  So I think that in addition to providing some stimulus, it would have an effect of helping solve this communication issue. Having given some of my thoughts on the easing front, let me turn now to the tightening front.  My recollection is that last spring we reached a tentative consensus, though certainly not unanimity, on how to proceed in tightening.  I think it’s a good idea to reopen that conversation, as Presidents Lockhart and Hoenig have suggested.  My recollection of that consensus was that we should begin by draining reserves, then raising interest on excess reserves, and then beginning asset sales.  I was happy enough with that consensus—I can be flexible about how we would order things.  I’ve heard some suggest that we could tighten by using the regular review process in alternative B to curtail our announced LSAP, but I don’t think that’s consistent with my recollection of our tentative consensus about the structure of tightening.  So I don’t think of the regular LSAP review process as being the right way to initiate tightening.  Instead, I view our statement in November as being a strong commitment to buy $600 billion of longer-term Treasuries over the next eight months.  I’ve thought of the regular review process as necessary, given that we don’t really know the full range of downside risks of LSAPs because of their relative novelty.  For example, I thought there was a possibility, though not a high probabilityone, that the dollar could have fallen to 50 euro cents, and, if it had, then I think we all would have wanted to curtail the LSAP.  I thought the regular review process was a way to make clear to markets and the public as a whole that we stood on guard against such possibilities. Having talked about easing and tightening, let me turn to conditionality.  As I mentioned in the first go-round, my preferred estimate of the output gap is near minus 4 percent, rather than the Tealbook estimate of minus 6½.  If I take that number and plug it into the Taylor 1999 rule on page 37 of the Tealbook Part B, I get something like minus 180 basis points.  So let’s call it between minus 150 and minus 200.  Now, our target rate is between zero and 25 basis points and can’t be negative.  But suppose we assume that markets expected the accumulated stock of the Fed’s purchases of long-term Treasuries will grow to be around $2 trillion.  The staff estimates in the last Tealbook would translate those $2 trillion of purchases into a reduction in the fed funds rate of 250 basis points.  All of this obviously has confidence bounds around it, but anyway, that would be the translation.  So, if you put that plus 25 basis points of our current interest on excess reserves rate together with the reduction of 250 basis points, we get a policy stance right now of negative 225 basis points.  It’s a little low for me compared with my minus 180, but in the right ballpark, I would say. So going forward I don’t believe we should be adjusting policy to every change in the output gap or realized inflation.  I view it as being a little less continuous perhaps than President Bullard sees it.  But I do think we should be adjusting policy to sufficiently large changes in the output gap or realized inflation in either direction, and I’m thinking right now that those would be changes in the range of somewhere between 100 to 150 basis points.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker discusses their preferred options for further easing or tightening of monetary policy, as well as their thoughts on appropriate conditionality. They offer their own opinions and suggestions but do not present any disagreement or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 152.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards Governor Yellen.


Passage number 153.
MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I think we should stay the course on the policy we announced in November and make minimal modifications to our statement.  We said that we intend to purchase $600 billion in additional Treasury securities by mid-2011.  This decision is subject to review, but I think the bar for stopping short of $600 billion should be set pretty high.  One relative consideration is whether the outlook has changed substantially.  I think the answer is “no.”  Inflation is still below the levels we consider consistent with our dual mandate, and it’s continuing to trend down.  Inflation surprises during the intermeeting period have been on the downside.  Unemployment is even higher than we anticipated it in November, although other measures of labor market performance suggest ongoing but very gradual recovery.  The outlook for growth in 2011 is slightly stronger due to the fiscal stimulus, but that stimulus is temporary, and the changes on balance are only marginal.  Some downside risks to the outlook have abated, but others have increased.  On balance, I still consider the risks weighted to the downside.  So the value of the program in providing insurance against downside risk, something that’s especially important in the neighborhood of the zero bound, remains, in my view, a valid rationale. A second consideration is whether potential risks associated with the program appear to be materializing.  Again, I think the answer is “no.”  In particular, inflation expectations have not become unhinged, and the program has not generated noticeable flight from the dollar. The third consideration is whether asset purchases are actually efficacious in stimulating the economy.  Here the incoming data strengthen my view that they are.  We saw very significant movements in longer-term Treasury yields and equity prices between Jackson Hole and the November FOMC, and those seem clearly to have been conditioned on market expectations of the program.  That market response was consistent with the key assumption onwhich the program was premised, namely, that relative supplies of securities of different maturities matter to the structure of yields and term premiums. Of course, we’ve seen an enormous run-up in longer-term nominal and real yields since the announcement.  Strong data do appear to explain part of the backup; end-of-year positioning and convexity hedging likely also played some role.  But I agree with Brian and the staff that a significant contributor was the scaling back of market expectations about the likely size and duration of the program.  The evidence suggests that criticisms of the program and the ensuing political backlash contributed to this adverse market reaction and, at the same time, raised the degree of uncertainty concerning longer-term rates and Fed policy.  Higher risk premiums due to increased uncertainty may also be pushing up yields.  These market responses are unfortunate, but they serve to strengthen my view that asset purchases do matter in influencing financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Yellen, expresses support for alternative B and provides reasons for her viewpoint.


Passage number 154.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage is not contentious or disagreeable as it simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Warsh. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or disagreement.


Passage number 155.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given where the Committee finds itself today, I can accept alternative B.  Let me just make a couple of brief comments.  First, I’m comforted by the Committee’s commitment to subjecting the asset purchases to regular review, but I don’t think that that means that at every meeting we should be tweaking or micromanaging the asset purchase amount.  I think that, in all likelihood, the most important policy judgment this Committee will face next will be what to do after June.  Obviously, we’ll have to debate that well in advance of the end of the $600 billion purchases, but that is where the action is. During the intermeeting period, there were some interpretations of market chatter about whether this Committee would fulfill its stated goal of purchasing $75 billion of Treasuries a month and live up to the $600 billion headline number.  I think that is a serious misreading ofwhat the market chatter and questions were about.  Markets have wondered during this period whether we would be doing more once the QE2 program ends.  That continues to be their question.  As a result, I think we should be very careful about not prejudging that question.  It will be tempting, particularly in the new year, as we’re all speaking and communicating to markets and giving our assessments on the economy, to put a thumb on the scale showing a bias, describing what we’re comfortable or uncomfortable about.  I think we’d be making a serious mistake by starting to influence what the asset purchase profile or other policy options that Narayana talked about might be once that period arrives.  I think we would do ourselves far greater favors by not being terribly newsy on what happens thereafter, and by being reasonably stealthy about what our dispassionate analysis is yet suggesting, giving it more time. And so what should we be doing during the period of January, February, and March.  My vote would be to describe what policy actions more broadly could be done by the U.S. government to help the economy grow at the level that we would all hope.  So that’s a hope and an expectation, because I worry that we could otherwise fall into a trap of again trying to make news in the winter when we really aren’t yet, at least in my view, in a position to be making any final decisions on what would happen in the post-June period.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their acceptance of alternative B and then goes on to give their own thoughts and suggestions. There is no argument or disagreement with anyone in the passage.


Passage number 156.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "Thank you." and the mention of Governor Duke do not involve any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 157.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It’s very difficult for me to determine what the effect of the $600 billion purchase announcement has been.  I confess I don’t see the success of the program, but I don’t see evidence of heightened risk either.  I never expected big results, but now I suspect that whatever the actual results of the purchases themselves were has been swamped by the uncertainty over the size of the program, given the public debate over our policy, including communications highlighting the differences of opinions on the Committee, aswell as a surprisingly, to me, anyway, vocal outcry from economists, politicians, and foreign officials. Nevertheless, the near-term outlook is slightly stronger now than it was at our last meeting.  I don’t know whether the positive surprises occurred because, as it turns out, we were just going through a soft patch anyway, or whether the lower rates and higher stock prices we experienced between Jackson Hole and our last meeting were already having beneficial effects or whether something else was at work.  But I do know that right now our immediate economic future looks a bit brighter.  So I think we should hold very, very still and let whatever is helping continue to work, and I support alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It primarily focuses on the speaker's uncertainty about the effectiveness of a purchase announcement and their observation of slightly stronger near-term economic outlook.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Going to play possum.  [Laughter]  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a situation where someone is going to play possum, which elicits laughter. Governor Tarullo is mentioned but there is no further information or indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 159.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as well.  For the reasons stated by Narayana and Kevin, I wish that it communicated rather more precisely than I think it does what the threshold for a change in our intended path ought to be, but it’s 12:35 p.m., and if we get into a discussion of that, we’re not likely to finish in a timely fashion. I would also reinforce Kevin’s caution about the impact of “FOMC chatter.”  We used to refer to that as what other people said about the FOMC.  Now it’s the FOMC itself that seems intent on chattering continuously in a way that I just don’t think is helping communications or the integrity and external perception of this Committee.  That’s it.  Everything else looks fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with how the intended path should be communicated and criticizes the FOMC for their continuous chatter, which they believe is not helpful for communications or the perception of the Committee.


Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 161.
 MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would support alternative B.  I also believe that the verdict on our latest round of LSAP purchases is still out.  I’m discouraged by the rise inthe longer-term yields since our last meeting but am well aware that there’s no way of knowing where yields would have been if we had not acted. At the very least, we’ve learned that the communication of monetary policy is as critical to the conduct of monetary policy as is the actual decisionmaking.  I think more work has to be done in identifying up front the various audiences of our actions with an eye to considering how to tailor the message of our policy decisions. Regardless of the ultimate verdict on this round of large-scale asset purchases, I think it would be premature to reverse last month’s decision.  I believe it has been somewhat successful in moving us towards meeting our dual objectives.  In any event, the fact that there is a significant hole to dig out of suggests the need for no reversal.  In addition, and significantly, such a reversal would, at the least, cause confusion and could well threaten the Fed’s credibility.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and acknowledges that the verdict on the latest round of LSAP purchases is still uncertain. The speaker also expresses the need for more work in identifying the audiences of the Fed's actions and tailoring the message of policy decisions. The speaker believes that it would be premature to reverse last month's decision and that the decision has been somewhat successful in meeting the Fed's objectives. The speaker also emphasizes the potential negative effects of a reversal, such as confusion and loss of credibility for the Fed. Overall, the passage does not contain any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 163.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Governor Raskin just sort of took the words right out of my mouth.  I am not a fan of QE2, as you know.  I would balk at expanding it.  I see no economic justification, and I think it would be politically suicidal to do so.  That’s a little bit less erudite and academic than your presentation, President Kocherlakota, but I’m happy not to hear anybody advocate for alternative A.  I was going to suggest that, if they were, they had been living on Pluto and then I’d remind them that Pluto is no longer part of the official planetary system.  [Laughter] At the same time, I think it would be a mistake to pare it back at this juncture.  The strong economic growth that my staff and I envision has not yet been confirmed by the data, and I thinkcorrecting course after making the very tough decision that we made at the last meeting would make us look extremely indecisive and make us quite vulnerable. Now, I want you to bear with me for a minute here because I’m sympathetic to many of the arguments that President Hoenig and others have made.  At the last meeting I attempted to provide a sober assessment of the possible costs that should at least be considered alongside the surmised benefits of the LSAP, and I expressed skepticism about what likely happened on the foreign exchange front and warned about speculative activity in stocks and commodities.  I believe I used the term “monetary kudzu,” something that would be very difficult to cut back long term, and I concluded that we could possibly be prescribing the wrong medicine at the wrong time given the economic circumstance. But the most worrisome to me, as I stated, was the cost of possibly placing our quasi-independence in jeopardy, and I said that we know that once the central bank is perceived as targeting government debt yields at a time of persistent budget deficits, the concern about debt monetization quickly raises its ugly head, and I went on to say I expect the propensity to draw that conclusion has been enhanced by this congressional election—that we’d be waving a red flag in the face of those who are our most volatile critics.  So I wasn’t surprised, Governor Duke, at the reaction that we received. Now, I made my best arguments.  The Committee decided to pursue a course.  There were others who made similar arguments, but the Committee made a decision.  When I was an undergraduate I was disappointed not to receive a scholarship, and a friend of mine, who became a well-known folk singer named Tom Rush, gave me a great lecture about making the best of a bad situation.  I’ll summarize it and clean it up a little bit, but I think it gets to the point.He told me a story about a neighbor who would go to work every morning, very diligent, and 10 minutes after he left, the milk truck would pull up and the neighbor’s wife would come out in her kimono, and the milk truck driver would kiss her on the cheek and go into the house and come out two hours later.  It bothered the heck out of Mr. Rush, so he went up to his neighbor, and he said, “You know, it’s none of my business, but I want you to know what’s going on.”  And the neighbor said, “Well, yeah, but look at it this way.  We’ll never run out of milk or cottage cheese or yogurt.” I think we need to make the best of this situation.  The people who did voice concern mainly were coming not from theory, but from the marketplace or from the real economy.  Remember that, in theory, theory and reality are the same, but in reality they’re not the same, and we have to be driven by the reality that we hear from people who come from financial market backgrounds or from the real economy or from the Districts.  I hope that one byproduct of making the best of the situation is weighing very carefully the input from the Banks and the Districts, as well as the theory that we try to put into practice. I would also say that we must not make the situation worse.  I do believe we are politically vulnerable.  I listened very carefully to the comments you all made recently, and there’s a subtext there.  I think we have to be very careful about what we say, and I think we need to unify as a team.  Otherwise those who mean us harm will take advantage of the cacophony that comes out of this Committee.  I confess that I may have been part of that cacophony.  I haven’t said a word publicly since November 8, and there’s a reason for it:  Once we make a decision as a Committee, I think we have to knit together and get our message very clear.  Of course, we should allow dissent, and I may well dissent in the future.  But knitting together and being very clear about our message are important because there are a lot of peoplejust looking for opportunities to tear us apart, and I think there’s going to be a great proclivity for that, particularly going forward politically. So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, if I were a voter, I would support alternative B.  I’m sympathetic a little bit to the comment about the $600 billion, but the $600 billion is already in there.  Having looked at the chart we were given earlier by the Desk, if we took the $600 billion out and just talked about $75 billion, I think we’d see that number all over the place in terms of expectations.  As others have mentioned, I do take it seriously when you say that we’ll regularly review the pace of the securities purchases and the overall size of the asset purchase program.  I learned earlier today that Bill Dudley and I had the same dreams when we were kids.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is expressing his own opinions and discussing his previous arguments but there is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or disagreement with others.


Passage number 164.
  We both wanted to be physicists, believe it or not, and I do believe in the physical principle of— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m not sure what to make of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 165.
 MR. FISHER.  We both would have been a disaster.  But I do believe in stochastic optimal control, and what that means in terms of a rocket launch is that you continually reevaluate the course you’re going through time, and I take the Committee at its word that we will do so.  But for now, Mr. Chairman, to change course and not embrace alternative B I think would be a serious mistake, and I hope that all of us, including myself, in terms of our future expression are able to convey the seriousness with which these decisions are made and support the Committee as a whole, even if we are tempted to dissent and even though at times we are uncomfortable with the decision that’s made.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" is a polite expression of gratitude and the term "Vice Chairman" is simply a title or designation.


Passage number 167.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m glad to see that Richard and I are on the same page today, just as we were when we were children.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and harmony with Richard, stating that they have always been on the same page since they were childhood friends.


Passage number 168.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  There’s a big space in between though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement about a big space in between, which does not imply any form of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 169.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I do want to talk about how we communicate as a group to the market and the public.  I think we’ve done a very poor job relative to what we’re capable of, and I think that judgment is borne out in a number of ways.  One way is the low score we received in the recent primary dealer survey conducted by the Desk, even though the survey and its comments said the Chairman did a very good job on 60 Minutes.  That was cited by a number of the respondents. It is not helpful for opponents of any policy we embark on, whether asset purchases or other actions, to criticize the policy in public in harsh terms as soon as possible after an FOMC meeting is over.  I really do think there are right ways and wrong ways to disagree.  I think dissent is completely appropriate, and I’m not trying to discourage that.  I think the right way is to say that reasonable people may disagree, but this is the decision made by the Committee.  This is why the Committee is doing what it’s doing, and here’s how the Committee expects this particular policy action is likely to work in practice. I think the wrong way is to paint the consequences of the decision in more apocalyptic terms and/or to create doubts and fan fears about the ability and/or will of the FOMC to execute policy successfully.  In my opinion, some of the most recent comments we’ve seen have undermined the effectiveness of the most recent round of LSAPs.  I say this not only because of our poor communications score, but also because the evidence suggests that a good portion of the backup in bond yields is due to a higher risk premium.  When I ask myself how the higher risk premium got there, obviously it was the critique of the Fed by outside observers, but I think we also did a little bit of that to ourselves.  I think the higher risk premium stems from uncertainty about our commitment to the program—in other words, would we be cowed by the criticism—and thereby represents a loss of credibility on our part.That being said, it isn’t the only reason that bond yields have risen.  I think there are lots of other reasons, and they’ve been talked about this morning.  First, expectations going into the last meeting were for a somewhat larger program than what we actually initiated.  Second, Treasury supplies likely increased due to the shift in fiscal policy, so the net supply held by the public is going to go up relative to what the public expected.  And, third, the economy looks like it’s on a more solid growth track.  So these three factors all interact.  More stimulative fiscal policy implies faster growth, and it implies more net supply, as well as a smaller expected LSAP program. Overall my policy view hasn’t changed.  The LSAP program still makes sense, and it’s helping at the margin.  We have damaged its effectiveness to some degree.  I think it’s important in reaching this conclusion to note that some of the primary risks of the asset purchase program, such as dislodging inflation expectations to the upside or causing a free fall in the dollar, have not materialized in any way.  Instead, the dollar has been strengthening, and the increase that we’ve seen in the yields have occurred entirely in real rates rather than in break-even inflation rates, at least as we measure them from November to today.  So I’m with pretty much everybody else, not quite everyone, in supporting alternative B.  I think we want to have a “low drama” meeting as Governor Duke said.  So I don’t mind playing possum either.  I think the small changes contemplated in alternative B are right.  They acknowledge some of the intermeeting data.  We still have a long way to go in terms of our dual mandate. A very accommodative policy stance to me is still fully appropriate.  Any retreat from our LSAP program at this juncture I would view as disastrous, not just because yields would back up further, tightening financial conditions, but also because such a shift would significantly undercut our credibility.  We would be viewed as weak and as intimidated by outside criticismand political pressure, and that would be, I think, devastating to this institution.  To my mind, this would cause our independence and our will to keep inflation in check over the longer term to be questioned.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, the passage contains disagreement or contention. In the passage, the speaker criticizes the group's poor communication and the negative impact it has had on the effectiveness of their policies. They also express disagreement with the idea of retreating from the LSAP program, stating that it would be disastrous and undermine the group's credibility.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and thanks to everyone for your comments.  Substantively, of course, I am supportive of staying the course and alternative B—I gave my reasons earlier.  Notwithstanding the very welcome improvement in the tone of the data, the general contours of the recovery remain similar to what they were in the last couple of meetings.  We are still missing our objectives by a wide margin, in expectation, not just currently.  I agree with President Kocherlakota that measuring the stance of policy is quite difficult and can be quite humbling, but I think it’s not at all clear that our policy is excessively easy given the state of the economy.  So I think we should stay where we are.  We should take more time to assess developments in the economy.  For those who mentioned it, I remain serious that we should continue to review the policy on three grounds:  What’s happening to the outlook, what’s happening to the efficacy of the policy, and what’s happening in terms of any side effects.  I think a responsible approach would involve all three of those aspects.  For today, I counsel watching and waiting to see how the outlook evolves.  It could change sharply—it has done so in the past, and in that case we would need to be willing to respond to that. I have two comments on communication.  Several of you have already spoken about it.  The first is that we have multiple objectives in communication.  One, of course, is to give our views, which is very important, but we also want to convey the fundamental collegiality, comity, and mutual respect in this Committee, which I think we need to make clear to everyone.  Another is that we need to do everything we can to maintain the independence of this institution to make policy.  We should be free to make mistakes, and we need to convey clearly that that’ssomething we all share.  The main thing we can do that would be constructive, as far as I’m concerned, is to pull down the heat a little bit.  You know, I’m not asking for any real changes.  Let’s just keep the heat down and give this policy some chance to work or not to work and give ourselves some time to make a better assessment, and I think that will work fine. The other aspect of communication was, I think, raised a bit by President Lockhart and President Evans.  It’s a little ironic that this Committee has spent years and years talking about inflation targets and similar kinds of structures, and one of the main issues has been whether we could succeed politically in creating an inflation target or whether there would be pushback from the Congress, etc.  I think we’re at a moment that if we wanted to do something like that, it would actually be welcomed by the political world.  I see absolutely no problem whatsoever from a political perspective if we want to go ahead and put some more structure, whether it’s an inflation target or some other kind of structure, on our policymaking.  Yet, in our video conference discussion of this, we just kind of talked ourselves out of it somehow, I think possibly because we couldn’t come to agreement on some appropriate way to talk about the other part of the mandate.  It seems to me that was kind of a shame.  I’m not suggesting anything specific, but maybe we can continue to talk about this informally, because I do think there would be very little resistance at this point.  In fact, a number of people would probably welcome it if we were to be more explicit about our inflation objective, and it might help with the communication issue going forward.  But that’s something for the intermeeting discussions and for future meetings. Turning back to the business of this meeting, I’d like to propose alternative B as it stands, and thank you again for a thoughtful discussion.  Debbie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for staying the course and alternative B, and suggests that more time should be taken to assess developments in the economy. The speaker also comments on communication within the Committee and suggests that more structure, such as an inflation target, could be welcomed by the political world. Overall, the passage is focused on finding common ground and maintaining collegiality within the Committee.


Passage number 171.
 MS. DANKER.  This vote covers the statement and directive for alternative B in the handout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that the vote covers the statement and directive for alternative B in the handout.


