FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEECONFERENCE CALLJuly 19, 1979PRESENT: Mr. Miller, ChairmanMr. Volcker, Vice ChairmanMr. BlackMr. ColdwellMr. RiceMs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Morris, Roos, and Winn, Alternate Members of the Federal OpenMarket CommitteeMessrs. Baughman, and Eastburn, Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of Dallas, and Philadelphia respectivelyMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Axilrod, EconomistMessrs. Kichline, Scheld, and Truman, Associate EconomistsMs. Greene, Assistant Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open MarketAccountMessrs. Czerwinki, Forrestal, Gainor, and Williams, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Atlanta, Minneapolis, andSan Francisco respectivelyat, the upper end of the 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent funds rate range setby the Committee. Personally, Mr. Chairman, I would recommend to theCommittee a 10-1/2 percent rate at this point. The aggregates areright at the [tops] of the ranges--actually above in one case. Thefunds rate averaged 10.35 percent last week and I believe there wouldbe little to gain by an effort to fine-tune it somewhere between10-1/4 and 10-1/2 percent. That completes my report on the aggregatesand their relation to the directive, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Steve. Gretchen, areyou on? Could we have your report on the foreign exchange market,please?MS. GREENE. Yes, I am. Can you hear me?CHAIRMAN MILLER. We hear you fine here in San Francisco.MS. GREENE. If I may, I'd like to bring the members of theCommittee up-to-date on the events since we last talked on Tuesday. Ishould say that following the news of Tuesday afternoon the dollarcame under intense pressure once again, primarily in the Far East onTuesday night. The magnitude of our intervention operations in thatmarket Tuesday night and a quick follow-up by the Bundesbank inFrankfort the next morning impressed the market and helped to quellsome of the immediate pressure. Since that time the market hastechnically been in better balance, but the environment and sentimentcontinue to be extremely bearish for the dollar. Market participants,commercial [firms], and investors are reporting that they are making ahard reassessment of the dollar's prospects and the implication ofthose prospects for their own operations. Even the promise offered acouple of weeks ago that a recession might help us on the inflationfront and on our trade account is a promise that is quickly fadingaway. The one thing helping us in the past day or so has been theexpectation--[which] has been affirmed over the past hours--that theheavy intervention the market has detected will soon be followed bysome other kind of package. Parallels are being drawn between thisperiod and the period leading up to November 1 of last year.In terms of our operations, the Desk has sold $450 millionworth of marks since we last spoke on Tuesday. This brings ourintervention since Sunday night to almost $1.2 billion, which has beenequally shared between the System and the Treasury. Since mid-Junethe net intervention by the United States has been $3.6 billion. Thiscompares to the $4.1 billion from our 3 partners in the November 1package-- for Germany and for Switzerland.And we should not overlook, however, the contribution in terms ofofficial dollar purchases by the Bank of England ofduring that period. Of the $3.6 billion of intervention we have done,$1.5 billion has been on behalf of the System. That has been entirelyfinanced by swap drawings on the Bundesbank. The $2.1 billion donefor the Treasury has been financed largely out of balances theTreasury had warehoused at the System. This brings the Treasury'sbalance to more than a billion marks short of their liabilities underthe Carter bonds. That's all I have to report, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Gretchen. Well,ladies and gentlemen, it seems to me--since the growth of theaggregates now appears to be over our upper limits--that we have a7/19/79condition where, in the absence of overriding instructions, the Deskwould follow the directive and move the fed funds rate up. I wouldlike to outline some possibilities for consideration and then goaround and get your reactions. One possibility is to [issue] no newinstructions. The Desk would therefore interpret the directive, asSteve was suggesting, as meaning that the fed funds rate should bemoved up to 10-1/2 percent.Let me say it this way instead. The first alternative is togive overriding instructions to keep the fed funds rate where it is.The second alternative is to let it go up [in accordance] with thedirective. The third alternative would be to let the fed funds go upwith the directive to 10-1/2 percent and very quickly move thediscount rate to, say, 10 or 10-1/4 percent to close the widening gapbetween the discount rate and the fed funds rate. This would involvesome tightening and some signal, which would not be tremendouslydramatic. Another possibility is that we could believe that we notonly have aggregates problems but international or foreign exchangemarket problems and perhaps we ought to take a more forceful action--move both the fed funds rate and the discount rate up further.I am not at the moment sure what the [Committee's] sentimentis. My [inclination] is that the minimum we should do is to followthe directive under these conditions. And should we do that, it seemsthat a discount rate increase is likely because a 1 percent gap[between the two rates] is very large and undoubtedly will bemisinterpreted unless we do something to [reduce that] margin. Sowith those general comments, what I'd like to do is run through thelist and see how you all feel about it. I'll start down the list Ihave here; it may not be in accordance with roll call [order] but I'lldo my best. Paul Volcker.VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I basically come out with yourintermediate position, Mr. Chairman, as a logical course. I couldrather easily be talked into your last position but I don't think weshould back down on the directive now. I don't think we should do adiscount rate change without a fed funds rate change. I would think,given the domestic and monetary and foreign exchange objectives, thatyour intermediate proposal might be a reasonable position. But Icould be persuaded to do more.I might add one other point. This question on the discountrate came up this afternoon, as it always does at our directors'meetings. There was some concern expressed, which I share, that forthis kind of action to be effective it shouldn't be a source ofcontroversy with the Administration; it should look like an integratedeconomic policy. Perhaps recent events have taken care of that. ButI just mention that [taking] some Federal Reserve action and thengetting a lot of controversy about it may not be helpful, unless [theaction] were bigger than what I'm talking about.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Paul, I think your comment is well taken.If we are going to take any monetary action, it might be [useful] totouch base with the Secretary of the Treasury and get it coordinated.Well, we will go back [to my list]. Bob Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I lean toward the hawkish side onthis. I think we ought to put the fed funds rate up perhaps a half-2-7/19/79point and move the discount rate up a full percentage point. And I'draise the fed funds rate range to, say, 10 to 11 percent or somethingof that sort.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Phil Coldwell.MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, as far as the Open MarketCommittee's action, which is all I would like to comment on at themoment, I would prefer that we move [in conformance] with the currentdirective. I'd reaffirm that directive and then have the Board take alook at a discount action as [the requests] come in tomorrow.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil, would you be seeking a discount rate[action by] the Board tomorrow?MR. COLDWELL. Well, I think we really need [a discussionamong the] Board members of whether the Board itself wishes to approveany kind of discount rate action. If it does, then I'd try to seek abroader action rather than just [act on the pending request of] oneBank.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Emmett Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I think we should stay with thedirective and that means to me that we should let the fed funds ratego up to 10-1/2 percent in accordance with the suggestions that wehave heard. I guess this is the middle range recommendation. At thistime, I would not like to see an increase in the discount rate. Idon't know if it's possible, in lieu of an increase in the discountrate, to suggest to the Federal Reserve Banks that they make access tothe discount window less automatic. I don't know how feasible thatis. I recognize that with the rise in the federal funds rate weincrease the spread between the discount rate and the funds rate andthereby provide an additional incentive to the commercial banks to usethe discount window. I think that should be discouraged if at allpossible. Nevertheless, I would not want to discourage it by raisingthe discount rate at this time. I would, however, like to see thefunds rate rise a quarter point. Thank you.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Emmett. Nancy Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I am opposed to changing [thefunds rate]. It seems to me, given the state of the underlyingdomestic economy, that we are going to be raising the funds rate andit's just going to be a matter of days until we have to turn aroundand pull it back down again. I think we are better off riding out theinternational storm. Other things are in such a state of flux that itwould signal a supreme lack of confidence in what is going on here inthe city of Washington at the present time. I think we are better offjust staying still. That's all I have.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, Nancy. Henry Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I see the need to move the funds rate onaccount of the behavior of the aggregates. The exchange markets havenot done anything immediately and visibly that would call for actionbut I think there is accumulating malaise there and if we don't act,we will probably see a move [in the dollar] and will have to take7/19/79costly counteraction. Putting those two things together, I would say:Raise the funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, as per the directive;move the discount rate up 1/2 percentage point; and urge the Treasury--as a sort of blessing to the action--to increase its sales of gold tothe old level.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry. Larry Roos.MR. ROOS. I would recommend that we follow the directive--let the fed funds rate move to 10-1/2 percent--and that we raise thediscount rate 1/2 point.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Larry. Willis Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I urge that we follow the directiveand permit the funds rate to rise to 10-1/2 percent. And then I wouldurge that we change the discount rate. In the announcement, however,I would focus on the behavior of the aggregates. That gives us theflexibility to back down in response, hopefully, to better behavior[of the aggregates] and the underlying economic situation. But Ithink we have to give some signals to the international markets if weare going to stem this dollar inflow. We certainly can't peg [thedollar]; we shouldn't peg it anyway. But we can't peg it, I think,just by direct intervention with no signal or we are going to findmore funds flowing in than we can possibly handle.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Willis. Ernie Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I think the minimum in thecircumstance should be a quarter point move in the funds rate and ahalf point move in the discount rate. And I think Henry Wallich'ssuggestion of something from the Treasury with respect to gold saleswould also provide a significant indication of the Administration'ssupport and participation.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Ernie. Dave Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. My preference among the choices--CHAIRMAN MILLER. Dave, we are not hearing you very well.Before you comment, I hope you will [discuss your own preferences] andnot feel bound by the choices I talked about.MR. EASTBURN. Well, I was just about to do so. Can you hearme now? I was saying that my preference would be to do nothing at themoment and wait a little while. But if action is to be taken, I thinkthe appropriate move is to raise the discount rate. I say thatbecause I think that would be an effective signal internationally andwould follow the directive up. I would announce it on the basis ofthe dollar problem.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Dave. Frank Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, the amazing strength in theaggregates has changed my position. I would be for an increase in thefunds rate to 10-1/2 or 10-5/8 percent and a move in the discount rateto 10 percent. I think Henry's idea of getting the Treasury toannounce simultaneously an increase in gold sales is a very good one.7/19/79CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. I believe we have fromKansas City Henry Czerwinski. Henry, are you there?MR. CZERWINSKI. Yes, Mr. Chairman. We would support anincrease in the federal funds rate to 10-1/2 percent. We also believethat there should be an adjustment upward in the discount rate by atleast 1/2 percentage point on [the basis of the widening gap] butthere are other good reasons to boost the discount rate as well.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry. Bob Forrestall inAtlanta.MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, Mr. Chairman. In view of thedifficulties in the foreign exchange markets, coupled with the rise inthe money supply figures that were published, I believe that a quarterpercentage point increase in the federal funds rate would beappropriate. We also would strongly support a discount rate increaseto 10 percent. The 10 percent rate can be justified on technicalgrounds if none other, but there are certainly compelling reasons togive a signal to the foreign exchange markets at this point.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Tom Gainor in Minneapolis.MR. GAINOR. Mr. Chairman, for the reasons already stated wewould favor a 10 percent discount rate and a 10-1/2 percent fed fundsrate.CHAIRMAN MILLER. I thank you, Tom. John Williams here inSan Francisco.MR. WILLIAMS. Yes, I would agree with Tom Gainor that forall the reasons stated we should go to 10-1/2 percent on fed funds andmove the discount rate up to 10 or 10-1/4 percent.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Unless I counted wrong, I believe I'vecovered all participants--Governors and either Presidents or FirstVice Presidents. Has anyone been omitted? My list seems to becomplete.SPEAKER(?). You didn't hear from Chicago, Mr. Chairman.MR. SCHELD. Well, Mr. Mayo and Mr. Doyle are away. This isKarl Scheld.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Oh, fine. What would Chicago like to say?MR. SCHIELD. The position hasn't changed here. We prefer tostay with the directive, moving to 10-1/2 percent on the fed fundsrate and moving up 1/2 point on the discount rate.CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, I think that does it. I'm sorryI missed Chicago. In going back and recapping, it seems to me thatfrom the FOMC point of view the reaction was overwhelmingly to followthe directive and go up to 10-1/2 percent on fed funds. The sentimentfor perhaps going a little [beyond that] didn't seem to be supportedthroughout the Committee. So, for FOMC purposes, assume that this isa consultation and in the absence of alternative instructions we will7/19/79follow the directive and go to 10-1/2 percent. Let's put it this way.Does anyone on the FOMC voting group dissent from that?VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't dissent, Mr. Chairman, but itcould be interpreted, I suppose, consistent with the directive thatit's a rather firm 10-1/2 percent. In other words, 10-1/2 percent iskind of a floor.CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think the directive carries it to 10-1/2percent, which is barely over what it is [now]. I don't think we'llkeep consulting. I don't mean to hedge it but a weak 10-1/2 or astrong 10-1/2--VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are refining it anyway.I'm happy.MR. MORRIS. We have had a very firm 10-1/4 percent, so itseems to me that a firm 10-1/2 percent would be appropriate.CHAIRMAN MILLER. On the matter of the discount rate, ofcourse, it is the prerogative of the Board of Governors to act on therecommendation of one or more [Reserve Banks]. But I wanted to getthe sentiment of the FOMC because I think it bears on how we fall. Interms of the total System response on this telephone call, there seemsto be overwhelming support for moving to at least 10 percent on analignment basis or on the basis of [the monetary aggregates] or on thebasis of the international [situation] or for all three reasons.However, I am not sure that sentiment showed up among theGovernors [as a group]. Phil didn't express [his view] and Henry did.Nancy and Emmett said no change in the discount rate. I'm not surewhere the Governors are coming out. We have to leave that in theirlaps to decide in view of the discussions of the whole group and whatis going to [occur] once we have a 10-1/2 percent fed funds rate.They will decide what is then appropriate. If, however, the Governorsbegin to believe that an alignment is desirable, I think Phil's pointis well taken that we should try to make that a System-wide responseand give all the Banks as much chance as possible to be in on it.I don't know what is [the best way to proceed]. I'd merelysuggest that the Governors talk about this among themselves andperhaps I could call in the morning and see if there is anything thatI should be doing. I'll leave it to the Governors now, if they'd liketo give me any advice. Phil, do you have any suggestions?MR. WALLICH. Bill, could I say that I think it's importantto get the two actions together, as far as the markets seeing them,because they don't understand the reasons and the mechanics by whichwe operate. Perhaps we'd be able tonight to get the Presidents readyto [catch] up with their boards of directors and have something readyearly tomorrow morning.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let's see. We have five Board members[available today]; I'm here and four of you are there. Chuck is notparticipating at the moment. I guess he was not available. Henry, Idon't disagree with you. I think it's going to be very strange if wehave a 1 percentage point spread between the discount rate and thefederal funds rate; it will be misinterpreted. Nonetheless, it7/19/79depends upon what the Governors as a body want to do. So, Phil, howdo you feel?MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, may I suggest that after wefinish our FOMC discussion you call in and we could hold a brief Boardmeeting?CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think that would be a very good idea.MR. COLDWELL. We could talk about it then.CHAIRMAN MILLER. I am trying to sense whether you'd ratherdo it now or in the morning, but I gather if the directors arewilling--. Why don't we all get off this call and why don't you callme back in San Francisco and we'll just pick up from here.MR. ALTMANN. Mr. Chairman, this is Murray Altmann. Whenthis is concluded if you hang up and we disconnect the telephonicsystem, I can get you back on just by calling the San Francisco line.VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just add a thought here:The Treasury financing is coming up pretty soon. So that is a reason,if there's going to be action, to get it done quickly.MR. COLDWELL. That's right.VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I certainly agree with what Henrysays that the actions will reinforce each other psychologically to theextent that they come together.MR. COLDWELL. There is one other point, Mr. Chairman.Before--MR. BAUGHMAN. With the situation here, it seems to me thatit would be quite unfortunate if Reserve Bank directors were to sendin recommendations for increases in the discount rate now and theywere not approved.MR. COLDWELL. That was the reason we wanted to discuss it,Ernie.MR. BAUGHMAN. Tomorrow is Friday and we will need to getgoing first thing in the morning to get--CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think the answer is that we should have aconference of the Governors now. If we decide that we need to closethe spread, then we need to get back to you tonight, I think.MR. COLDWELL. Yes, I agree.CHAIRMAN MILLER. That way we will act with some concert. Isthere anything else anyone would like to cover at this point?MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, this is Phil Coldwell. I'd liketo suggest one thing. Perhaps the FOMC might wish to look at liftingthe ceiling on its fed funds range to allow the rate to go to 10-3/4percent in the event things turn even more difficult.7/19/79CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, I'm open to suggestions on that. Ofcourse, the next time we'll have a look at [new data on] theaggregates will be a week from now. Are you suggesting, Phil, thatthe range be changed now or changed [next week]?MR. COLDWELL. Well, I don't think we have to have a vote tochange it if we just have an understanding of some leeway above the10-1/2 percent if it became necessary for international purposes.CHAIRMAN MILLER. If it becomes necessary for internationalpurposes, then I think we ought to poll the FOMC. It seems likesomewhat of a blank check to say "go over 10-1/2 percent" without anyfeeling based on the international situation. I'm not sure how theDesk could respond to that. And I'm not sure the Chairman should giveinstructions when he doesn't have the consensus of the Committee.MR. COLDWELL. I was trying to avoid a vote but if you wishto take a vote on it, I would make the motion that we do so.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Would you put any ceiling on it at all?MR. COLDWELL. Yes, 10-3/4 percent.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, I'll run down [the list] and see ifthere's any sentiment for that. Paul?VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be happy to do it but I don'tthink it is necessary this afternoon.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Black?MR. BLACK. I would favor it, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil Coldwell?MR. COLDWELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Emmett Rice?MR. RICE. No, I would favor staying at 10-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy Teeters?MS. TEETERS. No, I would not change it.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry Wallich?MR. WALLICH. Yes, I'd go to a range with a 10-3/4 percentceiling.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry Roos.MR. ROOS. Yes sir, I would support it.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Willis Winn.MR. WINN. I feel the way Paul does. I'm not sure it makesthat much difference, Mr. Chairman, but I can't oppose it.7/19/79CHAIRMAN MILLER. I believe we have only nine voting membersthis afternoon and I think I've called on all the voting members.We're missing an alternate for somebody; I don't know who it is.Kansas City?SPEAKER(?). And Chuck Partee.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Anyway, I was given a telex showing that 9voting members, including myself, [would be on this call].VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's correct. You are missing theSan Francisco President and his alternate.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, we are missing the alternate. Thatmeans that the vote would be 1,2,3,4,5,6--not counting me--for anincrease in the range and 2 against; Emmett and Nancy would not do so.That means that there is a majority to increase it and I'd be willingto go along with that. I think we are going to have to consult beforewe move it much. Emmett and Nancy, could you go along with it so wewould have a unanimous vote?MR. RICE. No, Mr. Chairman, I wouldn't want to go to 10-3/4percent at this time.CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right. Well, this isn't really a voteto go to 10-3/4 percent; this is raising the range so that based onfurther developments it could go there. Nancy?MS. TEETERS. Well, Paul sounds as if he is going to 10-3/4percent. He wants a very firm 10-1/2 percent and that has usuallybeen 10 or 15 basis points above whatever the mark was. No, I can'tagree to go to 10-3/4 percent.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I understand that this is anincrease in the range, but if it becomes necessary--if developments inmarkets change so dramatically that we feel we have to go to 10-3/4percent--we will have a chance to do that in another meeting.MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, Peter Sternlight. May I justinterject? With respect to any possible implementation of thatincreased upper end of the range, I think there is the Treasuryfinancing to consider. If you were looking at doing something a weekfrom now, that would be right in the midst of the Treasury auction.CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think that's right, Peter. And, as Isay, I'm not sure that this is necessary. We won't have any new datauntil next week and we'll be in the [midst of the Treasury] financing.Plus I think we more or less have to consult about these things.Nonetheless, the motion has been made. Unless it is withdrawn, itlooks as if there is a majority for it. I am not sure of anyprocedure other than to say, well, that's the will of the Committee.You have heard the comments. Phil, are you still satisfied that weshould set this range even though we are [unintelligible]? Have youhad a problem?MR. COLDWELL. Well, my reason for this, Mr. Chairman,ultimately [relates to] what we do with the discount rate. If it werethe sentiment of the full Board to go more than one half percentage-9-7/19/79point on the discount rate, then we're stuck with a fed funds ratebelow or equal to it. I just was trying to give us a littleflexibility in the event the Board decided on a discount rate changeof larger than a half point.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, [if we were to] change the range, Idon't see that the Desk would do anything differently in the next 7days regardless of what happens to the discount rate. The aggregatesare barely above their upper limits and that doesn't call for greatermovement [in the funds rate], absent some other directive. So I'm alittle confused by this process. But it is a democratic process, sowe'll do what the majority thinks is right.MR. COLDWELL. Well, I sponsored the motion, Mr. Chairman,and if there is a strong feeling of reservation on your part I'llwithdraw the motion. I just thought it gave us a bit more flexibilityrather than being at the ceiling [of the funds range] so early in theintermeeting period.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, let me say this, Phil. I appreciatethe reason and I appreciate the strong support here. But my tendencyis not to go off on these things without first having a quick phonecall so we can get everyone involved. I would hate to see us publishan interim action right now with dissenting votes. It seems to methat this is a time when we need to unify ourselves. For that reasonI am a little reluctant to see us take an action if we are not goingto use it, when we have two non-affirmative votes to be reported thenext time [the Policy Record is published]. It does not contribute toour overall course of action, so as long as there are dissenters whowon't withdraw [their dissents], I would ask that the supporterswithdraw at the moment. Let's just leave it that we will be in touchwith everybody if this action is necessary. And tomorrow we willstart again.MR. COLDWELL. Well, I'll withdraw the motion, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, then we will not take any formalaction today. We merely had a consultation and then proceeded withimplementing the [current] directive. Peter Sternlight, I assume youwill be [implementing this] tomorrow?MR. STERNLIGHT. That's right, Mr. Chairman. Funds were at a10.40 percent average today. I don't think there will be any greatproblem.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you need any further instructions orguidance, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think so.CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right. If there are no other commentsor suggestions, then I'll ask Murray to close off this session andthen I'll wait for your return call.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, do you want us to wait at this lineor will you call us in the morning or what?-10-7/19/79CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think the decision was made that we'llall hang up now and the Governors will stay in the Board Room. Murraywill call me back in San Francisco and we will have a Board ofGovernors session.MR. ROOS. Are you coming back to the Presidents?MR. COLDWELL. Yes.MR. WINN. Murray, this is Willis Winn. Will you call me athome after 9:30?CHAIRMAN MILLER. Oh, I'm sorry, the Presidents--MR. ALTMANN. I think the question is whether the Presidentsshould stand by. We can get back to you after the Board hasconsulted. I don't know how long that will take, perhaps not toolong.CHAIRMAN MILLER. It won't take more than 15 minutes.MR. COLDWELL. No.MR. ALTMANN. So if the Presidents will stand by in theirconference rooms, I can call you back. Do you want to say something,Steve?MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to call to theCommittee's attention--I don't believe it requires any action at thispoint--that there is an intermeeting limit on foreign exchange marketoperations set by the Committee. That limit is $1-1/2 billion andthere is $877 million leeway left under that limit. It doesn'trequire any action today but since the issue was mentioned last week,I wanted to alert the Committee to the possibility that a telegrammight be forthcoming in a few days if more intervention of size isrequired.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Very good point, Steve. Any furthercomments? The suggestion is that if the Presidents would continue tobe available for the next half hour at their own offices, we will beable to get back to them and tell them the sentiment among theGovernors. Any other comments or other questions?VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Meanwhile, I think you are a gluttonfor punishment, Mr. Chairman!CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, there are those who say I'm crazybut--VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that. Good luck.CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you.MR. ALTMANN. Mr. Chairman, this is Murray Altmann. Ifeveryone would take the next call in their conference rooms, we canget everybody on the same circuit. So I would ask you to be presentin the conference room.-11-7/19/79 -12-CHAIRMAN MILLER. Now you would like us to hang up.MR. ALTMANN. Yes, sir.CHAIRMAN MILLER. We are hanging up.END OF SESSION