Passage number 1.
  [Applause] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you very much, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  And, as we did the previous time and probably will from now on, our meetings will be throughout joint meetings of the FOMC and the Board of Governors.  I need a motion to close the Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 2.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  The first topic on our agenda is “Equilibrium Real Interest Rates,” r*. Let me ask Chris Gust to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It shows a smooth flow of conversation and agreement between Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 3.
  MR. GUST.1  Our briefing will be delivered in four segments by Kei-Mu Yi, Andrea Tambalotti, David López-Salido, and me. We will be referring to the package labeled “Material for Briefing on Equilibrium Real Interest Rates.” What level of the real policy rate would be consistent with moving the economy to, or keeping it at, full employment.  This benchmark rate is often referred to as the “neutral” or “equilibrium” real rate, or r*. A policy stance that sets the real policy rate equal to r* is, in some models, neither contractionary nor expansionary.  This general concept of a neutral real rate has been given several more-specific definitions, which I will summarize.  Kei-Mu, Andrea, and David will focus on longer-run trends in r*, on shorter-run variations in r*, and on the policy implications of having to rely on uncertain estimates of r*. Exhibit 1 identifies different concepts that have been referred to as r*—that is, different definitions of a “neutral” real rate.  Some have a very specific interpretation that is tightly linked to a model or class of models; others are statistical in nature. The first three entries in the list are associated with formal economic models. The natural, or Wicksellian, real rate is the real interest rate that would prevail in the absence of nominal rigidities such as sticky prices and wages.  Thus, it is the real rate consistent with the level of resource utilization that would prevail if there were no nominal rigidities.  The efficient real rate is the real rate that would prevail if there were neither nominal rigidities nor distortions such as imperfect competition or taxes that move allocations away from their efficient levels.  The optimal real rate is the rate that would be prescribed by optimal monetary policy based on maximizing some welfare criterion.  It may differ from the efficient rate if policy is constrained by the effective lower bound or if there are not enough policy instruments to achieve the most efficient outcomes.  The real rate associated with the optimal control simulations presented in Tealbook B is one example of an optimal real rate. The natural, efficient, and optimal real rates are short-term concepts.  Estimates of these rates fluctuate in response to economic shocks and move over the business cycle. In the simplest New Keynesian model, these three r* concepts are equivalent, and it is optimal for policymakers to set the short-term real interest rate equal to the natural rate in order to stabilize the price level and keep output at potential.  In larger, more realistic New Keynesian models, these three concepts need not coincide; nonetheless, as Andrea will discuss, a monetary policy strategy in which the real policy rate tracks the natural rate generally leads to beneficial economic outcomes. Continuing down the list, a focus on the long-run average real rate takes r* to be the average of some short-term real interest rate measured over a long period of time. This definition is statistical and does not rely on a specific economic model.  By contrast, estimating the steady-state real interest rate, which is the short-term real interest rate that would prevail in the long run once all shocks die down, requires a fully specified economic model.  These two concepts are often used interchangeably 1 The materials used by Messrs. Gust, Yi, Tambalotti, and López-Salido are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).  in simple policy rules that are based on an assumed fixed long-run or steady-state real rate and thus have a constant intercept term.  However, as Kei-Mu will explain, treating the long-run real rate as fixed, as is often assumed in the formulation of simple policy rules, does not appear to be realistic. FRB/US r*, which is shown in the Monetary Policy Strategies section of Tealbook B, is a different, though related, concept of r*. It provides a medium-run perspective on r* and is the level of the federal funds rate that, if maintained for 12 quarters, will close the output gap in three years. One can employ the “real rate gap,” which is the gap between the actual real interest rate and r*, as an indicator of the stance of monetary policy.  For example, if the path of the actual real rate lies persistently below the path for a short-run concept of r*, output would eventually exceed potential. I will now turn it over to Kei-Mu, who will discuss long-run trends in the real rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply providing definitions and explanations of different concepts of the "neutral" or "equilibrium" real interest rate.


Passage number 4.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you very much.  First, I want to thank staff of the Board and Reserve Banks for an exceptionally thorough and thoughtful range of materials.  This is greatly appreciated.  Really nicely done. A natural question occurs regarding this material, and I’m genuinely interested in the staff’s views about this. A basic message I take away from the staff memos is that current estimates of r* are well above the actual real federal funds rate.  Suppose we were to project ahead under the usual assumption that no further economic shocks hit the economy, and suppose we make the usual assumption that, in the long run, monetary policy can’t influence real variables. I take it that the underlying premise of these frameworks is that the real rate gap will close as we project ahead.  So, if you think of the current r* as the long-run value of r*, the real rate is ultimately going to have to rise to meet r* as we project out.  There’s the simple Fisher equation that has to hold.  In that projection, we’d see either a combination of a rise in the nominal interest rate or a fall in the expected inflation rate, and, presumably, if the latter took place, it would pull down the actual inflation rate. I’m interested in the staff’s views on the following question. If, under those assumptions, we held the nominal interest rate near zero long enough, would that cause inflation to fall. The second related question is, how long is “long enough”.  And then a third related question is, what are the odds that such a mechanism might be depressing inflation now. CHAIR YELLEN.  Does anyone want to take that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing appreciation for the materials provided by the staff and posing some questions for further discussion.


Passage number 5.
 MR. TAMBALOTTI. I can take a stab at it.  I can tell you what happens in the FRBNY-DSGE model.  That model has an interest rate rule that governs monetary policy as we lift off.  The gap between the prescription of that rule and the natural rate is not very different over time from what you see in panel 3 in exhibit 10.  Everything is quite well behaved in that context.  And inflation, actually, as well as the output gap, quite slowly converges back to the steady state.  That’s the context in which the existence of this gap doesn’t create any particular problem for the economy, and, in particular, you would then observe this effect that you are suggesting, in which inflation would be driven down along that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of the FRBNY-DSGE model and stating that in that context, the existence of a gap between the interest rate rule and the natural rate does not create any particular problem for the economy. The speaker also agrees with the suggestion that inflation would be driven down along that gap.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
 MR. LACKER.  I think you may have misunderstood.  One premise was that we hold the nominal interest rate fixed at zero for a long time, and that would violate the assumption you just described of following the rule you’ve implemented in your model.  I’m asking about a different simulation than you just described, in essence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Lacker disagrees with the assumption made by the speaker regarding holding the nominal interest rate fixed at zero for a long time. He argues that it would violate the rule implemented in the model. Therefore, there is disagreement between the two speakers.


Passage number 7.
MR. TAMBALOTTI. We would be happy to run that simulation and provide you with an answer.  We haven’t done that. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Tambalotti offers to run a simulation and provide an answer, but clarifies that they haven't done so yet. Chair Yellen responds positively.


Passage number 8.
 MR. EVANS.  I’m not really very familiar with this line of theory.  Actually, President Bullard has referred to these before.  Isn’t this sort of the new monetary—it’s a different equilibrium, sort of a “multiple equilibriums” kind of story.  I didn’t know that it had very desirable features empirically. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans states that he is not familiar with the theory being discussed and asks for clarification, to which Chair Yellen responds by providing more information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think one thing you could say is that the whole analysis is based on a unique steady-state equilibrium.  It’s a linear model approximated around that steady state.  Even when you’re at the zero policy rate, there’s no other steady state that you can converge to or anything like that. The paper by Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe says there is another steady state.  It is associated with zero policy rates, and that, they say, would exist in your model, but the way you analyzed it, either you’re assuming there’s no convergence to that steady state or you’re just ignoring the steady state altogether. CHAIR YELLEN.  Maybe what I’m going to say is consistent with what President Bullard just said.  Isn’t there an argument that if you were to hold the nominal rate at zero, in spite of the fact that the equilibrium nominal rate would be higher, you would end up generating not lower but higher inflation.  And, the higher inflation went, if you kept the nominal interest rate at zero, the lower the actual real rate would move over time, the gap would increase, and you would get accelerating inflation. But that’s equivalent to saying, instead of going to a steady state with lower inflation, you’d actually be on the dynamic path that would be unstable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement between Mr. Bullard and Chair Yellen. Mr. Bullard argues that there is another steady state associated with zero policy rates, while Chair Yellen is unsure and questions whether holding the nominal rate at zero would lead to higher inflation.


Passage number 10.
   MR. LACKER. Those are the standard dynamics in a model in which expected inflation is anchored and we’re following a policy rule when you’ve got some nonneutralities that generate those dynamics. So, the thought experiment I was asking about invites us to, first, back away from stable inflation expectations.  I’m not sure whether this is true, but President Kocherlakota and others have said we should question whether they’re well anchored or not.  And it backs away from adherence to a policy rule.  It asks us to think about, what if we depart from a rule for some time, and what if inflation expectations, over time, become unanchored. That’s the question.  Could we, by holding nominal rates low, drive inflation down. That was the question I wanted their thoughts on. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement presented in this passage. The speakers are discussing a thought experiment and posing questions for discussion, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 11.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I don’t know if I’ll add much, but I’ll talk anyway.  [Laughter] I think President Lacker’s comments really get at the heart of the matter, which is what would happen to inflation expectations if the FOMC were to keep the federal funds rate low over a long period of time.  And there are models in which the public thinks through, “Well, the reason they’re keeping the federal funds rate low is actually because their target for inflation has fallen, and so, because they’re keeping the federal funds rate low, I must lower my inflation expectations,” and that becomes consistent in equilibrium. I really think that the question is less a theoretical one than an empirical one about whether that is the way the public forms inflation expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 12.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  That’s what I wanted the staff’s thoughts about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 13.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That empirical question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a statement of a question being asked by Mr. Kocherlakota.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 14.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN. Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Lacker responds affirmatively to Chair Yellen's statement, indicating disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 15.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don’t quite understand the intuition behind the attenuation.  I understand the attenuation when you’re close to the effective lower bound, but when you’re not at the effective lower bound, what’s the reason why you would be lagging behind what you thought was the unbiased estimate of the r*. I mean, it would seem to me that if you were lagging behind with your unbiased estimate of the r*, you’d be risking falling behind in inflation expectations and allowing them to get unanchored.  What’s in the model that pushes against that.  I don’t really understand the intuition behind the attenuation.  I get it at the zero lower bound, because you don’t want to make a policy mistake and get pushed back to the zero lower bound, but when you’re away from the zero lower bound, what’s the intuition behind the attenuation. Are there features of the model that would generate that result. It just doesn’t seem that logical to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The author expresses confusion and disagreement regarding the concept of attenuation in the model and questions the logic and intuition behind it. They are unsure about why there would be a risk of lagging behind in inflation expectations and allowing them to become unanchored, especially when not at the zero lower bound. Thus, the author is challenging the reasoning behind the attenuation and seeking clarification.


Passage number 16.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  If I may say something, you’re right that the attenuation is smaller when you are far away from the effective lower bound, but, again, the attenuation is coming from the filtering problem that the policymaker needs to do.  In any case, he has incomplete information about the true value of r*, which means, following the usual William Brainard principle, responding less aggressively to any uncertainty.  The effect is a lot less important than when you are on the effective lower bound, precisely, as you mentioned, because of the nonlinearity.  But, in normal times, you also would tend to respond by less, precisely because you are still uncertain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing clarification and additional information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But you’re assuming that nothing bad happens when you’re lagging behind.  In other words, inflation expectations don’t respond to that because otherwise it could be explosive.  Let’s imagine that r* increased and then you lag behind because of the Brainard principle. What happens then.  Don’t inflation expectations start to get   unmoored because you’re lagging behind what the correct policy should be. I just don’t understand this notion that you always want to do less.  I understand it at the effective lower bound, but I don’t understand the attenuation otherwise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the notion of always wanting to do less and questions the assumption that nothing bad happens when lagging behind in terms of inflation expectations. They argue that inflation expectations could become unmoored if the correct policy is not followed.


Passage number 18.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  That’s right.  So, what we said is that, in normal times, the attenuation depends on the size of the signal regarding the natural rate.  You converge to the case in which you start to get a bigger signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining how the attenuation depends on the size of the signal in relation to the natural rate.


Passage number 19.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You catch up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 20.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  You catch up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any argument or disagreement. It simply provides a statement from Mr. López-Salido.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 21.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. But the model sets things up so there’s no cost to being late because, presumably, inflation expectations stay well anchored through this whole time period.  The model is sort of begging the result in some sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement by stating that the model is "begging the result." It suggests that the model is setting up a scenario where there is no cost to being late, assuming that inflation expectations will remain stable. The phrase "in some sense" implies that there is a difference of opinion or contention regarding the validity or accuracy of the model's assumptions.


Passage number 22.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  There are two assumptions used in the simulation.  One is, of course, that inflation will go down further, and the policy that we show is the policy under discretion.  So the policymaker is just optimizing period by period, taking expectations as given.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the assumptions and policy used in the simulation without expressing any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 23.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess what I’m trying to really drive home is that the expectation in these models that inflation expectations always stay anchored is a pretty strong assumption, and that ends up potentially driving some of these results.  I think that what’s driving that attenuation outcome needs to be brought out a little bit more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting to further explore a specific outcome.


Passage number 24.
 MR. LAUBACH.  If I may, this is very much related to President Williams’s past line of work.  I feel a little reluctant to opine about that here [laughter].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Laubach, seems hesitant to offer an opinion about President Williams's past line of work and his reluctance elicits laughter, but there is no apparent disagreement.


Passage number 25.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage.


Passage number 26.
 WILLIAMS.  Go for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker, stated as "WILLIAMS," is encouraging someone to take action or pursue a certain goal.


Passage number 27.
 MR. TARULLO.  Who’s the coauthor of that work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 28.
 MR. LAUBACH. He is a former Board staffer by the name of Athanasios Orphanides.One key point is that it’s the imprecision about the r* estimate that is really making you cautious.  I think one of the key lines that came out of the Orphanides-Williams line of work was that, in the presence of uncertainty regarding these estimates, you try to pursue strategies that rely much more on observed data rather than on these imprecise estimates.  And so, the key lesson arising from that, for example, was that you want to particularly weigh in on observations on inflation, because if your estimate of the natural rate turns out to be wrong, this is where the information should show up.  And so that’s why you give relatively little weight to the r* estimate.  I hope I’m presenting that fairly. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply summarizing the views and findings of Athanasios Orphanides.


Passage number 29.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Two questions for Kei-Mu, I presume.  On the global dynamics, exhibit 3, can you explain the convergence since, say, 2000 or so.  You said in your remarks that rates seem more synchronized.  Is there a hypothesis of why that has happened.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for an explanation or hypothesis regarding the convergence of rates since 2000.


Passage number 30.
 MR. YI.  There are hypotheses.  I think the most natural one is that countries have become more financially integrated over time, globally.  So, barriers to capital flows have come down, and when that happens, various wedges that make interest rates differ across countries tend to become smaller, and then the rates become more similar.  I think the financial-integration story is the most natural story for the past quarter-century.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their perspective and reasoning on the topic of financial integration.


Passage number 31.
 MR. LOCKHART. My second question is probably an economics or monetary policy 101 question, but I won’t be embarrassed asking it.  There was so much talk a few years ago about the global savings glut.  As a practical matter, where does it show up, and through what channels does it have the most effect on our rate structure. Is it from foreign exchange reserves to Treasury securities. Is that the channel that most influences real activity in theUnited States, or are there other channels by which that global savings glut has an influence on our economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question asking for clarification on the topic of the global savings glut and its impact on the US economy.


Passage number 32.
 MR. YI.  I’m going to think in terms of former Chairman Bernanke’s view of it, and I think his story had both a private-sector and a public-sector element to it.  I think the public-sector element was that a number of governments—for example, those coming out of the Asian financial crisis—decided that, as a precautionary mechanism, it would be useful to build up a lot of foreign exchange reserves.  And the way they built up those reserves was, they bought a lot of U.S. Treasury securities. So that was a force to drive down real interest rates. I think you can make a similar argument for some of the oil-producing countries, too. At the same time, there are stories of emerging markets—for example, China, India— joining the global economic scene.  These are countries that are growing rapidly, but they also are financially underdeveloped.  In that type of world, if it were not for the financial underdevelopment, you would think that these countries would have high interest rates because their productivity prospects and growth prospects are very high.  But because they are financially underdeveloped, their interest rates at home are actually quite low, and they are looking to save abroad.  And so, once these economies start opening up, then these private-sector resources go abroad.  Maybe not so much in China, because there are still capital controls there, but from other emerging market countries.  And that is another force to drive down U.S. and other advanced foreign economy interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain disagreement or contention. It is a discussion of different factors that contribute to the forces driving down interest rates.


Passage number 33.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 34.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.  I had a question for Andrea, though it also relates to Kei-Mu Yi’s memo.  On exhibit 10, you have a natural rate of interest and a federal funds rate.   That picture must depend on the assumption about the long-run or steady-state neutral rate. How does your estimate for that dovetail with what is in Kei-Mu’s memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 35.
 MR. TAMBALOTTI.  Thank you.  That’s a very good question.  The models are built around a constant steady state.  So, in the long run, all the models are going to go back to the steady state.  Let’s say that the natural rate at that point is something around 2 percent; that is generally across the models.  In that respect, there is no long-run variation in the long-run r* in these models.  So that’s part of the reason why we call these “short-run estimates of r*.” So, if I wanted to integrate this perspective with some of the work that President Williams, for example, has done together with Thomas, I don’t want to say that you would want to sum the two sources of variation, as that would probably involve misstating the way in which the two components co-vary.  But, roughly speaking, that’s the type of exercise that you want to do. There is really no variation in the very long run in these models.  So you would want to take that into consideration as well if you wanted to have a complete picture of the short-run and long-run variation in the natural rate that comes from this exercise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation of how the models are built and stating that there is no long-run variation in the long-run r* in these models. There is no disagreement or contention expressed in the passage.


Passage number 36.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  So, to push you a little harder, if you were to try to integrate some of the thinking that was in Kei-Mu’s memo with what you had done, would that tend to push the blue line downward or upward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply poses a hypothetical question about the potential effect of integrating two different lines of thinking.


Passage number 37.
 MR. TAMBALOTTI.  It would definitely push down.  Again, I wouldn’t want to say that you want to have a one-to-one addition there.  Another consideration is that there are very persistent shocks in our models that do keep the natural rate depressed below the steady state, potentially for very long.  That’s the reason why you wouldn’t want to add up whatever effects might come from Laubach-Williams-type estimates.  But, certainly, the bias could be toward   making the black line somewhat lower, and we would have to do more work to tell you exactly how much lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It explains the speaker's position and considerations, without conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 38.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. The individuals mentioned, Mr. Kocherlakota and Chair Yellen, are simply being acknowledged and thanked.


Passage number 39.
 MS. MESTER.  I want to thank the staff for the memos.  I found them very useful, good conceptually and also in terms of the policy.  I have three questions about the policy prescriptions.  I guess I wasn’t that surprised about the attenuation result within the context of the models you were looking at, but I was wondering whether you have investigated models that actually think about the cost of financial stability of keeping interest rates low.  In particular, ones that have true microfoundations of that. Giovanni Dell’Aricca, Luc Laeven, and Robert Marquez have a Journal of Economic Theory paper that actually provides some microfoundations regarding some of the costs of financial stability.  In their model, they have a banking sector in which, if the interest rate is very low for a long time, banks take on more risk, they become more leveraged, and they no longer monitor their borrowers as much as they did.  So you get this aggregate increase in risk to the financial system.  The DSGE models don’t have that; the DSGE model is just going to have the macroeconomic risk.  Have you thought about what the policy prescription would be in a model that has this kind of financial-stability cost of low interest rates. That’s one question. The second question has to do with the type of uncertainty.  You only look at uncertainty or measurement error associated with r*. But you can also think about uncertainty associated with other artifacts in the Taylor rule—in particular, the output gap.  We know that’s measured with imprecision; there’s a lot of uncertainty about it.  And if there is uncertainty, for example, in some of the parameters in the model—for example, the degree of relative risk aversion—you canthink about whether there would be a negative correlation between the r* and the output gap.  Some of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland staff analysis indicated that that attenuation result would then go away, because the measurement errors would offset one another.  You’d have to think about how that would interact when you consider a policy prescription.  I was wondering if you have any thoughts on that. With regard to my third question, in the Tealbook we sometimes use the inertial Taylor rule in which you are keeping interest rates low and then not reacting totally to it.  My third question is that I’m wondering whether you are going to propagate the measurement error in r* over time, and how that would interact with your attenuation result, if you think about a different kind of rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing gratitude and asking questions for clarification and further discussion.


Passage number 40.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  Thank you, President Mester.  Those are very good questions.  I’ll try to answer in the context of what we did, so I’m going to go in reverse order. You are absolutely right.  Thinking about the inertial aspect of the rule, we experimented in the memo with the first-difference rule, and you have a problem of “nowcasting” actual variables like the output gap or even inflation.  Then you actually translate persistent mistakes into the level if you respond wrongly to the variables.  So, that is obviously going to have an effect that is probably going to make the attenuation less important, and we discussed that in the memo.  So you are absolutely right. The idea that we have in the memo, though, was trying to get a way of introducing this smoothing parameter that is kind of a reduced-form in character, in order to capture many things and to try to illustrate a potential way of thinking about a smooth response, or a gradual response, of the nominal interest rate by thinking about uncertainty about r*. That’s the way we thought about that issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the points raised by President Mester and acknowledges their validity. They also mention discussing a particular issue in a memo, suggesting a collaborative approach rather than disagreement.


Passage number 41.
   MS. MESTER.  Let me just rephrase that.  So what you’re saying is this is an alternative to looking at an inertial Taylor rule, because part of the reason you want an inertial rule is not because we don’t like fluctuations in the interest rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply involves one person rephrasing what the other person said.


Passage number 42.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  That’s an alternative view.  In your first question, you probably have in mind, too, because of this financial-stability consideration, that this idea of smoothing the interest rate is another way of thinking about how, without having that in the rule as, it can arise because policymakers have a problem with incomplete information.  That’s absolutely right. Your second question is about the uncertainty of r* and another form of uncertainty.  What gave us some perspective on that is that we use a little model; it’s very much a “toy” model.  In it, the r* is moving because we can control the nature of the fluctuations underlying the economy.  The r* is moving because there are different shocks, whether a discount factor shock or technology shocks, and there are potentially shocks that matter for the Phillips curve too.  Those are what we call macro shocks.  We actually know exactly what variation was behind what we call uncertainty about r*. Of course, we can introduce other forms of uncertainty into the model.  You mentioned uncertainty coming from a parameter; that is going to enter your model in a nonlinear way, so, in terms of the model, it is going to lead you exactly in the direction that William Brainard was emphasizing, to some attenuation. Of course, that’s going to depend on what parameter.  You mentioned one, risk aversion, which pretty much is saying something about the relation between the real interest rate and aggregate demand.  Of course, if you change that, because that’s related to risk aversion in this kind of model, that’s going to lead to some counteraction to what we call attenuation here.  You’re absolutely right. We didn’t consider those kinds of uncertainties. But in the case of all  the uncertainties that we did consider, the ones that we discussed always led in the same direction, in terms of r*, that we just put here in the memo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing additional information and explanation, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 43.
 MS. MESTER.  But even if you didn’t want to pin it to one parameter.  With the parameter I chose, of course, you get the negative correlation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or observation about the chosen parameter and its negative correlation.


Passage number 44.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is yes. The word "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without the actual passage being provided, it is not possible to give a specific explanation of the contention or disagreement in this case.


Passage number 45.
 MS. MESTER.  You can imagine a world in which the measurement error associated with r* and the measurement error associated with the output gap would be negatively correlated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is presenting a hypothetical scenario (imagining a world) and does not mention any contradictory or conflicting viewpoints. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 46.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  You can think of situations like that.  We have these kinds of situations in the model, in order to think about markup shocks or technology shocks, and create—sometimes it depends on the persistence—this kind of negative correlation.  And you’re right.  On the one hand, you want to attenuate your response; on the other hand, you don’t want to do that.  So, you can have situations like that in which they can cancel each other.  We see that in our model, too.  But for the kind of shocks that we consider, either technology or the one that changes the preference in terms of savings, they both lead to the conclusions that we have. And then, the last question was about how to introduce financial-stability considerations into these models. That’s a really interesting question.  The only thing that I can say there is that we have a paper in which, instead of going through theory of how you might introduce searching for yields into the model, we follow a very simple practical and empirical approach.  That is, we made a probability of a crisis endogenous with regard to a policy decision. We incorporate that into a New Keynesian model, and we try to understand how this kind of framework matters when you take into account that your policy decisions matter for future inflation and output through changing the probability of a crisis in the future because of searching for yields or other mechanisms.  We leave that completely outside the model.  We introduced such kinds of nonlinearities into the model, too.  And that’s, of course, going in the direction that you mentioned.  That’s leading to less attenuation when policymakers endogenize or internalize that there is a potential cost, and that is then to move the rates in the direction of increasing as opposed to attenuating.  However, when we calibrate the model, the effects tend to be small.  So, it’s really difficult, taking as given the correlation that we see in the data between the nominal interest rate and the probability of a crisis.  You need to have a really large effect on changes in the policy rate on credit to that probability to get some results along the lines that you suggested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about different scenarios and considerations in a model, without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 47.
 MS. MESTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the information provided does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only states that the person referred to as "MS. MESTER" is being mentioned without any conflicting statements or contrasting opinions.


Passage number 48.
  Of course, it depends on, if you’re a minimax person, right, the fact that you may end up with this crisis— MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO. Well, if you think in terms of robust control, too, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 49.
 MS. MESTER.  Yes.  Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The word "Yes" indicates that there is agreement or confirmation, not contention or disagreement.


Passage number 50.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO. Whether the last person—yes, you definitely need to take into account worst-case scenarios to think about policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that considering worst-case scenarios is necessary to think about policy.


Passage number 51.
 MS. MESTER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 52.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  You’re absolutely right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "You're absolutely right" indicates agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 53.
 MS. MESTER.  All right.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans, did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individuals are simply having a conversation and clarifying if there are any questions.


Passage number 54.
 MR. EVANS.  I do.  Is it my turn. CHAIR YELLEN.  Let’s say it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen seem to be in agreement.


Passage number 55.
 MR. EVANS. Thank you.  First, on page 10, when you describe the experiment in which the volatility in inflation and the output gap are reduced when you follow the natural rate, what is   the volatility of the policy rate process in that case.  Presumably, it’s a lot higher, because it doesn’t have inertia.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 56.
 MR. TAMBALOTTI.  That is correct.  We only focused on the volatility of inflation and the output gap without taking a stance on what would that imply for the policy instruments. It is quite volatile.  If you look at the estimates of the natural rate, you will see how volatile they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tambalotti simply provides information without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 57.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.  So if anybody wanted to try to pocket those types of improvements, we’d be apt to move policy around quite a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if anyone wanted to take credit for those improvements, they would be likely to change their policy.


Passage number 58.
 MR. TAMBALOTTI.  Yes, absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker states "Yes, absolutely," indicating agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 59.
 MR. EVANS.  President Mester’s question was fascinating and related to something I had been thinking about, too.  If you think about the financial-stability issues and try to build them into these models—obviously not having seen that model—it’s going to imply some type of real cost to the economy when you’ve got these types of shocks and structures in place. So, you’re going to lose your “divine coincidence” result really quickly and in a big way.  One of the nice things about these types of analyses is, if you think about r* movements as indicative of what almost-optimal policy or optimal policy is, it kind of tells us how to close inflation gaps and output gaps. Now, if we’re going to build in another mandate, financial stability, I’m presuming that we’re not going to be getting closure of inflation gaps and output gaps if you’ve only got one instrument to achieve those three things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses the potential implications of incorporating financial-stability issues into economic models but does not present conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 60.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  That’s absolutely correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker affirms the correctness of a statement without any contradiction or dispute.


Passage number 61.
 MR. EVANS. Any ideas on how far away the wedges might be or how you go about thinking about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for suggestions or thoughts.


Passage number 62.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 63.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  Fair enough, fair enough.  It’s an imponderable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The exchange between Mr. Evans and another speaker is lighthearted and is characterized by laughter. They seem to be in agreement with each other.


Passage number 64.
   MR. LAUBACH. Very quickly, President Evans, just for clarification:  In the analysis that David just was referring to, the goals actually remain the traditional dual-mandate objectives.  There is no third objective of financial stability per se.  It is simply that you take into account that your policies may have implications for your dual-mandate objectives through a channel that wasn’t previously present, which is that it might contribute to the probability of a financial crisis in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 65.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  That’s right.  You can think about how any financial friction you can bring into the model may involve an additional gap from whatever the optimal credit-to-GDP ratio is in the absence of any friction.  In that sort of model, we don’t have a loss function that incorporates into the policymaker’s decision the deviation of any financial variable from that target.  We only look at the usual deviations of output from potential output and inflation from target.  If you accommodate that, it’s going to bring another tradeoff, as you mentioned.  I wasn’t sure whether that’s what you meant when you referred to the gap.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of information and explanation rather than a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 66.
 MR. EVANS.  Well, it’s kind of open-ended, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Well, it's kind of open-ended, really" does not express any kind of disagreement or contention. It simply indicates that the speaker sees the situation as indefinite or without clear boundaries.


Passage number 67.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO. You definitely need to think about all of the instruments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that "You definitely need to think about all of the instruments."


Passage number 68.
 MR. EVANS.  Let me see if I’m following this. If you consider models that are more complicated and they introduce these financial-instability risks with those structures, now you go to compute your definition of r*. It’s going to be the Wicksellian version in which you close out the nominal rigidities, not the efficient real rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by Mr. Evans explaining how the computation of the definition of r* changes when more complicated models are considered. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 69.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO. With the natural rate, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is any contention or disagreement regarding the topic mentioned (the natural rate). It is only a statement without any additional context or opposing perspectives.


Passage number 70.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay, the natural rate.  So in the analyses without that friction, you could take some comfort in saying, “Gosh, if I know what that r* is, I can kind of judge policy and move it in that direction and feel like I’m on track to achieve our dual mandate.”  Now, in the more complicated model in which we compute that, there’s going to be these additional wedges preventing that closure.  So it’s not going to be enough to be following that r*, but we’re going to need additional strategies in order to close the gaps.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that in a more complicated model, it is not enough to just follow the natural rate of interest (r*), but additional strategies are needed to close the gaps.


Passage number 71.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO. Exactly, exactly. The optimal policy will never be to close the gap between the real rate and r*, whatever its definition.  For example, that’s precisely what happened in this simple model when you acknowledge the effective lower bound, because once you are at the effective lower bound, you recognize reaching the effective lower bound as a credible threat and the possibility you will come back to it.  It’s like a shifter that creates another wedge.  You will never be able to close inflation deviations and the output gap.  So tracking the natural rate is not going to be the optimal policy in that case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact and providing an explanation based on a simple model.


Passage number 72.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Then why don’t we start our go-round.  This is not a full go-round, but a number of people have indicated a desire to speak on this topic.  Let’s start with President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply setting up for a discussion or conversation.


Passage number 73.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. However, since only the acronym "MR" is provided, it is not possible to determine the context of the passage and provide a more accurate analysis of potential contention or disagreement within it.


Passage number 74.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think this is a timely topic for two reasons.  One is, I think it is useful input into our own policy decisions and deliberations in the situation we find ourselves in today.  But I also think it is important for thinking about our longer-term policy strategy, and I’ll come to that in a few minutes. I found the memos and the briefings very useful and the discussion we’ve had already this morning very good, but my remarks will focus on the research on r* that Thomas Laubach and I have been working on for the past 15 years and that was summarized in the paper that we distributed to the Committee last week.  And, by the way, after the paper was distributed, I received a nice e-mail from President Kocherlakota saying, and I quote, “As you think about  your policy intervention for the upcoming meeting, I highly recommend this thoughtful paper.” Now, I found it very gratifying that he found our work useful input for the Committee’s thinking. But upon closer inspection, I noticed that the e-mail was not addressed to the FOMC but only to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 75.
 [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  It’s still relevant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that the topic being discussed is still relevant.


Passage number 76.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without a passage or context provided, I cannot determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the given text. Could you please provide more information or the passage in question?


Passage number 77.
 WILLIAMS. In my reading of the literature and my own work with Thomas on this, I think a robust finding across pretty much all the studies is that r* has declined considerably over the past decade and, although point estimates differ, nearly all the current readings on r* are near historic lows. What remains unanswered is, what are the forces that have driven the natural rate of interest down.  Numerous explanations have been put forward, including slower economic growth, global factors, and so on, but it’s not possible to draw definitive conclusions based on the available evidence. This inability to identify clearly the sources of a decline in r* makes it hard to know how much of the shift will be temporary and how much will be long lasting. Although much is made, in debate among researchers, of this distinction, for policy purposes we don’t need to wait for a definitive answer.  Even if the natural rate eventually returns to its higher level, it’s likely to remain low for the next few years.  This is seen in the analysis from the DSGE models and, quite honestly, from all the other models in which the natural rate is assumed to be only temporarily depressed.  The conclusion I draw is that a relatively low natural rate of interest is likely to be with us for some time, and we need to take that into account in our forecasts, our analysis, and our policy deliberations.  Particularly, it argues for a shallow path of rate increases and an endpoint for interest rates that are below historical norms.  I should note that the Tealbook forecast implicitly incorporates a very low   effective short-run r* and a long-run r* of only 1¼ percent. So these considerations are already built into the baseline projection to a large extent. Looking further ahead, if the natural rate of interest stays persistently low, this does have direct implications for the frequency and severity of zero-lower-bound episodes and for financial stability.  As prudent planning for such a possibility, we should have renewed discussions here in the Committee of the optimal size of our balance sheet, the expected use of LSAPs in the future, negative interest rates, and even the optimal inflation target and other approaches to cope with an environment of very low rates.  Even if you’re not convinced today that the natural rate of interest is permanently lower, I do think that it makes sense for us to focus on these issues over the next year or so.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It presents an analysis of the decline in the natural rate of interest and discusses the implications without contradicting or debating any opposing views.


Passage number 78.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The estimate for the equilibrium federal funds rate that I submitted to the September SEP was 350 basis points.  However, I must admit that I have very little confidence in my ability to estimate the real equilibrium federal funds rate in the long run or in the short run.  If the next recession were to begin with the federal funds rate at 350 basis points or lower, I am worried that we would once again return to the zero lower bound. Because we have lowered the federal funds rate more than 500 basis points in the wake of each of the past three recessions, the potential to hit the zero lower bound seems uncomfortably high. As the paper circulated by President Williams discusses, lower real equilibrium interest rates limit the options available to monetary policymakers to counter contractionary shocks to the economy.  However, further exploring the tolerance of the Committee for expanding the balance sheet to offset average-sized recessions, assessing the effect of balance sheet actions on term premiums, and discussing the cost and benefits of a higher inflation target seem to be the most fruitful areas of discussion at this time. A lower equilibrium real interest rate implies that both the frequency and duration of zero-lower-bound episodes have risen, although it is difficult to know by how much.  The past 15 years have already shown us that the frequency and duration were too high.  The other implication of a lower real rate will be that we may need to respond to slowdowns with more-aggressive monetary policy actions.  This may imply reducing the federal funds rate more quickly and aggressively than we have done in previous economic slowdowns, and we should prepare the public and the Congress over time for the potential that unconventional monetary policies may not be idiosyncratic, associated only with severe financial crises in the future, but may become tools more commonly deployed in economic slowdowns.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any outright contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing concern and uncertainty about the ability to estimate the equilibrium federal funds rate and the potential implications of a lower real interest rate. The passage also suggests areas of discussion and possible actions to consider in response to these concerns.


Passage number 79.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  And thanks to everyone who worked on this r* project.  The memos provide an excellent summary of the state of knowledge about this important topic.  In fact, this topic is central to our policy deliberations. The fundamental question before the Committee this year and next is whether policy is sufficiently accommodative to support currently low inflation rising to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. These memos get to the heart of this issue. Does our current zero interest rate policy represent emergency levels of monetary policy accommodation, or is it just slightly accommodative, or is it not really accommodative at all.  Understanding movements in r* is a way to bring all of these issues together in one place.  There’s too much good material in these memos to cover all the interesting observations.  Here’s a few messages that I took away. First, r* has been falling over time.  I think President Williams was on target there.  These reductions are quite persistent.  Some analyses, like the DSGE models, assume stationary deviations, and they turn out to be potentially very persistent, depending on the driving process that got us there.  Other analyses, like Laubach-Williams, assume I(1) permanent changes that persist indefinitely.  I agree with President Kocherlakota’s e-mail to you quite a lot.  [Laughter] The most recent Laubach-Williams r* estimates are close to zero and permanent.  A very low r* combined with our 2 percent inflation objective implies that dealing with the zero lower bound will continue to be a big risk even once we get inflation back to target.  So it’s important that we know how to deal with future situations when our policy rate may be forced to zero.  I agree with all of the suggestions that we should continue to study our tools that we could bring to bear on that situation when we find ourselves at the effective lower bound again. Second, even though it is not totally clear why real rates have been falling, it seems to be a worldwide phenomenon that has been going on for two or three decades.  I agree with Kei-Mu and Jing that most of the developments that we can foresee suggest r* is going to stay low or maybe fall even lower, leaving us in a world in which the effective lower bound may be frequently binding. Third, with r* currently close to zero, we cannot just assume that today’s zero funds rate is providing large amounts of policy accommodation.  It appears that we are only below the equilibrium nominal rate by something on the order of 150 basis points.  Some have characterized our current policy rates as being at an emergency setting, a comment that’s clearly meant to imply that emergency rates are no longer appropriate for current economic conditions. My view from these memos is that having the real funds rate about 150 basis points below r* is not really an emergency setting.  Maintaining a zero funds rate is just prudent policy following a long period when we would have liked to have put rates much, much lower but couldn’t because of the effective lower bound.  These low r* estimates also mean that two or three quarter-point increases in the funds rate could eliminate a good portion of the accommodation that we are finally now able to provide. Fourth, uncertainty about r* most likely implies that “lower for longer” is a prudent risk-management policy.  It’s not enough to simply point to wide uncertainty bands surrounding r* estimates. We need to assess the variety of policy losses under different realizations of r*. Our policy losses are asymmetric at the zero lower bound, and, hence, in David, Chris, Ben, and Bob’s memo, optimal policy delays liftoff and prescribes lower rates until uncertainty about r* and the odds of hitting the effective lower bound are substantially reduced.  My Brookings paper with Fisher, Gourio, and Krane reached a similar conclusion on the basis of a different information structure. Finally, President Lacker brought up an interesting point and criticism of our monetary policies related to—I can’t really penetrate these models very well—the New Monetarist models with alternative equilibrium calculations.  I think that if you go out in public, you can hear people make comments like this to us.  I think it might be worth our time to figure out what is there and what is not.  Every time I hear the Fisher equation mentioned as an important point in this regard, I’ve come away with the impression that it’s the slavish appeal to an interest rate rule that interacts with the Fisher equation to validate this equilibrium, and it’s really quite fragile. If you were to break from that interest rate rule, and maybe you’ve got a threshold that tells you, “When I get way off target, I break from it,” that’s going to break that equilibrium.  These are   kind of transversality-type conditions. President Bullard, some years ago, when he was talking about this issue, similarly argued that maybe we should start doing more asset purchases, work the money angle on this.  That’s another attempt to break the slavish commitment to that interest rate rule, and that knocks that equilibrium out.  It’s outside the model, but in talking about these things, as President Lacker mentioned, if the public starts thinking we’re going after lower inflation, it begins to ratify this.  That’s why I think it’s so important for us to recommit ourselves firmly to our inflation objective of 2 percent in an aggressive symmetric approach to that so that people won’t be left with that wrong impression and perhaps validate that type of outcome.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the memos and highlighting the main points and implications of the information presented.


Passage number 80.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  And thanks to the staff for these memos.  They are very thoughtful and stimulating. When I think about r*, I have two concepts in mind, one short run and one long run.  The short-run r* is consistent with what I think is a neutral monetary policy today, and the long-run r* is what I think will be consistent with neutrality in the long run.  I don’t have a precise estimate of what either of those are, but I certainly agree that both are likely to be well below what we have seen historically. With respect to the short-run r*, I would put some weight on the model results, but I also would look elsewhere—simply, how fast has the economy been growing.  If r* were really close to 2 percent, I doubt we’d be growing at only a slightly above-trend pace right now. I think we also have to be a bit careful and not overemphasize the DSGE model results too much because these models typically have very underdeveloped financial sectors, if they have one at all.  This relevant in the current environment, because I think developments in thefinancial system have been important in depressing the real equilibrium rate.  It’s not just about longer-term fundamentals such as productivity growth and demographic trends.  For myself, I think that short-run r* has been held down by strict lending standards for mortgages, especially for households with low FICO scores.  Also, to the extent we have had higher capital requirements and other regulations, they have weighed on the intermediation margin.  I would expect those would push down r* slightly, both now and in the longer run.  I think memories of the crisis may also be important through their effects on precautionary saving, less borrowing.  Presumably, that influence will diminish over time, assuming we don’t have any new crises. As I have noted in speeches for some time, I also think the appropriate stance of policy does depend on how financial conditions evolve because monetary policy is not transmitted directly to the real economy but, instead, through its effect on financial conditions.  I think this is particularly important because the linkage between short-term rates and broader financial conditions is not stable through time.  The events of the fall of 2008 are the most noteworthy example of that.  Financial conditions tightened abruptly, and this called for a much lower short-term interest rate and response. That implies that the level of short-run r* is affected by financial conditions and how they respond to cyclical, secular, and even political developments. My expectation about the short-run r* is that it will gradually rise over time as some of the financial headwinds generated by the financial crisis fade.  I would expect that household credit histories and FICO scores will gradually improve as we get further away from the Great Recession.  Also, as home prices recover, the number of mortgages that are underwater should decline.  This may also lead to a greater access to credit for affected households. At the same time, I don’t expect r* to get all the way back to 2 percent in the long run.  So I’m with President Rosengren, 3½ percent on the long-run nominal federal funds rate without a lot of conviction.  But it strikes me that an aging population, slower labor force growth, and somewhat slower productivity growth should all be factors that suggest that r* will stay below 2 percent for the foreseeable future. Finally, I think it’s important that we don’t overfixate on r* compared with other issues. For example, this issue of how far we want the policy rate to deviate from our short-term r* estimate is also important.  Presumably, there is a path back to full employment and price stability that is superior to others in terms of its welfare-maximizing attributes.  We need to be open-minded about the size of the differential that we should be seeking and not just accept the prescriptions as simple policy rules because those policy rules seem to be doing a good job of describing monetary policy in the past.  The impetus to economic growth from a given gap between the policy rate and r* might be different now than in the past.  And, if that was the case, then that should affect our choice of the policy rate and the size of the gap.  Also, I would argue that, currently, risk-management concerns may imply a wider differential than maybe we have had in the past.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and ideas about r* without contradicting or challenging any other viewpoints.


Passage number 81.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In reflecting on the memo and the presentation, I just have two brief comments related not to the theory but to our current policy decision, what faces us right now.  First, I’m on board with the general thrust of the memos that the neutral rate is zero to slightly positive. This implies to me that the policy is currently too accommodative.  And I believe this view is broadly consistent with the unemployment rate being close to its natural rate. Second, I think that the steady-state r* is probably around 1.75 percent.  The U.S. economy is fundamentally sound, and productivity should pick up in the future.Because of the after-effects of the financial crisis, neutral r* is below its steady-state value.  But it will rise over time, and monetary policy should keep pace with that rise. Additionally, and I think this is important, we need to learn, and we will be learning, about r* as normalization proceeds on a shallow path.  And we need to see how the economy evolves as interest rates rise.  There is an experiment that we will be conducting, and it’s an important experiment, to watch how r* evolves as we move along this shallow path.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Harker, is expressing agreement and support for the ideas presented in the memo and the overall policy direction. He also suggests that the neutral rate should increase over time and acknowledges the need for further learning and experimentation.


Passage number 82.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have just a couple of brief comments.  According to this excellent staff work, as well as many other estimates and under a variety of definitions, r* has declined over two or three decades to a very low level, now about zero, with no signs yet of recovery.  And the markets and a variety of factors suggest that a low r* is likely to be with us for a while. What are the implications of this. In the short term, while r* may be low, short-term rates are now substantially negative.  So real short-term rates are providing a good deal of stimulus.  For me, that’s appropriate for three reasons: We have inflation below mandate; we have economic growth that is barely above trend; and we have, as page 10 of the handout shows, five years to make up for when the Committee was unable, probably despite significant unconventional monetary policy, to provide adequate support for the economy. For me, the implications of the precise timing of liftoff are more ambiguous.  I agree that uncertainty regarding r* argues for some inertia when policymakers are at the zero lower bound.  Indeed, there are many arguments that support the idea of having inertia at the zero lower bound. But what is the right amount of inertia or patience. Is it more or less than the Committee has already employed.  This work, to me, doesn’t speak directly to that question.  There is also the argument that uncertainty about the level of r* as well as about the level of the natural rate of unemployment should lead us to de-emphasize those factors in setting policy, which tends to lead, then, to something that focuses on the inflation gap, which we are better at observing, andalso the change in the output gap, or a first-difference rule.  And I would say that the first-difference rule is also consistent with liftoff in the current time frame.  So I don’t take any obvious signal about the precise timing of liftoff from this work. I would say that the medium- and longer-term implications of a sustained low r* are clearer and more troubling.  If economic growth is going to continue along just a bit above its lackluster trend rate, it would not surprise me if every single rate decision will be very challenging in the coming years.  On that growth path, it is going to be extraordinarily difficult— indeed, it would be inappropriate—to raise rates at anything other than a very gradual pace. And, over time, as others have stressed, that very low path implies more frequent and longer episodes at the effective lower bound. On that last point, I read one of Andy Haldane’s clever speeches over the summer titled “Stuck,” which caused me to get into a series of discussions with Bill English and many others.  And Bill ran some numbers, which I’ll share. Based on historical data, experience suggests that the chance of a recession over the next four years from today is about 40 or 50 percent.  The Committee has typically cut rates about 400 basis points, give or take 100 basis points, in a recession.  So, if you take the market’s projected path for rates, or even the latest primary dealer survey, you will see that almost any recession for the next several years will return us to zero interest rates. So I would echo what others have said around the table.  There really is a need to evaluate all of our tools, including forward guidance, the balance sheet, and negative rates, because much as one might hate to admit it, we may very well need them.  In fact, we are likely to need some or all of those tools. The other thing is that a gradual increase in r* to more normal levels is a fundamental assumption underlying the Tealbook forecast for interest rates.  And, if this work calls that assumption into question, it really does suggest that the set of issues regarding this question will be the major challenge facing monetary policy in the coming years.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a speech given by Mr. Powell expressing his perspective and opinions on the implications of a low r* and the challenges facing monetary policy in the coming years.


Passage number 83.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I wanted to comment on President Bullard’s point about the rhetoric from the Committee about accommodation.  I think, certainly, the Committee has pointed out that we have used a lot of historically unprecedented forms of accommodation given the fact that we are at the zero lower bound.  That’s what I always took the rhetoric about high levels of accommodation to mean—that our tools, because of the evolution of the economy, had to be historically unprecedented.  I do not think that the American public believes that the economy has evolved according to what would be deemed as being appropriate over the past five or six years.  I don’t think it will come as a shock for them to find out that inflation has been below target for seven years, or that output has been growing so slowly.  I don’t think it would take a major change in communications, simply more focusing on the outcomes of our policy on inflation and output.  That’s what gives rise to calculations like Cúrdia’s. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Kocherlakota is providing his own perspective and opinions on the Committee's rhetoric about accommodation. He does not directly disagree with President Bullard or Governor Brainard, but rather offers his own viewpoint.


Passage number 84.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I will follow up on this conversation about communications.  I think the very helpful work that the staff presented to us is quite illuminating for how we think about as well as how we talk about what we mean by “normalization.”  I went to our website, and it equates normalization with steps to raise the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates to more normal levels. But it begs the question, what are more normal levels.  It clearly implies that the target range for the federal funds rate is currently below normal.  We haven’t, I don’t think, explicitly defined what we mean by “normal,” but the central tendency, or the median, of the path in the SEP might reasonably be considered a rough guide.  And by that proxy, the definition of normal has moved down noticeably at all horizons over the course of the Committee’s discussion of what normal is.  I think today’s discussion, and the work that we do based on it, does provide a common analytical framework that should help us get to a more common definition of what we have in mind with “normal.” It also perhaps can help educate the public, which I think is very important. I think what stands out from the work that was presented here, from the empirical estimates of the shorter-run natural rate of interest from the DSGE models and the other important work that has been done in this area, is that a wide variety of models suggest that r* has been negative in recent years and is only now approaching or is close to zero six years into the recovery.  With these estimates far below the average level in previous decades, it implies that the accommodation associated with any given level of the federal funds rate has fallen short of what one might have been thinking about in historical terms.  And those shorter-run estimates imply that the current level of the federal funds rate is likely to be mildly accommodative, something that might help explain the very gradual pace of expansion in activity and, in  particular, despite being low by historical standards, a very long period of low rates has coincided with only modest growth in investment throughout the recovery. There are, I think, a host of observable reasons that the natural rate might be low currently.  And, of course, earlier in the recovery, the dominant explanations focused on domestic factors and headwinds from the crisis.  More recently, I think it’s likely that the foreign outlook has become increasingly important as a source of downward pressure on short-run r*. Weak economic growth trajectories are now the norm in much of the world.  And, as we know, in the other G-7 economies we have seen a very large shift down in 10-year sovereign bond yields, a shift that has been persistent over the past year or so.  But also, interestingly, if we look at emerging markets, we have seen a broad-based reduction in interest rates with average real Treasury bill rates falling from about 5 percent earlier to around zero in recent times. The way this would spill over into our rates would be through adjustments in the exchange rate.  I think the staff provided a useful simulation to get a sense of how big an adjustment in the federal funds rate might be necessary to restore monetary policy to “normal” in the sense of insulating domestic employment from an appreciation in the dollar.  So let’s just take a 10 percent appreciation of the dollar, which is the experiment that they ran, which is about two-thirds of the movement that we have seen in the past year alone. It suggests that in the context of a Taylor (1999) rule with a fixed intercept, normalization of monetary policy in the sense of insulating us from this exchange rate shock would call for lowering the intercept about 60 basis points.  And because we’re in the neighborhood of the effective lower bound, that means that you push off liftoff as well as pull the path down. Another benchmark we use for determining what constitutes normal is the medium-term FRB/US r*.  And there we have seen that, by that metric, the current stance of policy is quite   accommodative relative to what would be prescribed by that, which is the level of the funds rate that, if maintained, would close the output gap in 12 quarters.  What is important, I think, is that that benchmark actually takes no account of inflation.  If you look at that benchmark, it gets us to 1 percent above where we should be on the output gap, and we are still shy of our 2 percent inflation target at the end of the 12 quarters, suggesting that if we cared a lot about inflation, we would actually want a more accommodative stance. Or, similarly, we are pretty far along in the recovery, and if we instead wanted to think about policy normalization as closing the output gap in, say, 4 quarters instead of 12 quarters, again, that benchmark regarding what constitutes normal would suggest a lower federal funds rate would be appropriate right now. I think the discussion around the table has also been good at focusing on several factors that suggest that the medium-run or even long-run natural rate of interest has also shifted down.  And for reasons that many people around the table have talked about, and that resonate a great deal with me, if we believe there has been such a shift down, we would want to think very seriously about what that implies for the likelihood that we see the policy rate returning to the effective lower bound with more frequency and with longer duration than has been the case historically.  And, in that context, risk-management considerations and the asymmetry of them, I think, would lead one to counsel a cautious stance even today. Finally, I think the likely low level of the natural rate of interest in today’s conditions, and the implications for what can be considered normal monetary policy, do suggest we should be thinking very much about our communications and devoting some care and attention to how we talk about what “normal” means and is likely to mean as we go forward.  I think it is very striking that there is a draft bill in the Congress that would codify a 2 percent intercept in a Taylor equation as the benchmark by which monetary policy would be evaluated at a time when most researchers believe the empirical regularities that underpinned that relationship are unlikely to hold.  I think several around the table have also suggested that it may lead us to want to reevaluate unconventional tools and consider whether they will need to be used more frequently.  If that is the case, we should really start communicating that now, because I believe there are much higher bars for returning to a realm of unconventional tools than there are for simple adjustments of the interest rate up and down.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 85.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like everyone else, I would like to thank the authors for their very good work, and I would add to their four papers, the paper sent to the FOMC by John Williams, one of those he wrote with Thomas Laubach, “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux.” I was all ready to summarize everything, and then I looked at exhibit 13 and realized that they had copied what I was going to say and put it into their presentation. It’s on page 13 of the handout, “Equilibrium Real Interest Rates.”  I think that it is a good a statement of what the overall findings are in the very interesting work that we have been presented. Obviously, the finding that everyone knows is that the natural rate of interest has fallen sharply and shows few signs of recovering.  That’s happened since the start of the Great Recession, and it is a common finding among all of the papers.  There is, I think, another key point, and here I’m going to diverge a little from what everyone has been talking about.  The point is that r* also depends on a set of other variables, some of which are policy-related—for example, fiscal policy; productivity growth, I don’t know to what extent it is policy-related; the real exchange rate, which is monetary policy-related; the relative price of energy; and demographics.  All of these are factors affecting r*, and I think we need to start talking about   what it is that moved r* more than using r* as a shorthand way of saying, “We’ve got to keep the interest rate very low.” I say that for two reasons.  I think we need to speak up much more about the policy responsibilities of other agencies in this town, including the fiscal authorities, which I know we are not allowed to do, but I am never quite sure why.  All other central banks do it.  And I suspect that productivity growth will have far more influence on future r* than what it is that we do with the interest rate.  The interest rate works through investment.  Since Solow’s initial paper, there hasn’t been another paper that says technical change is not the main driver of economic growth.  And I suspect we will end up there one day. I have been trying to figure out what is the use of r*. You read Wicksell, and it is either brilliantly simple or it’s too simple.  It says there is a marginal rate of return on capital.  And when the interest rate is below that, then there is going to be a high level of investment and more inflation.  And when the marginal product of capital is below the interest rate, then we are going to get deflation.  And so there is a rate which will keep the price level constant. Well, that’s what we calculate in our models, and we get a measure of r* that takes us back to a steady state of some sort over 12 quarters, and that’s what we use.  But why don’t we just use the models.  What is the extra that we get out of the r* as opposed to what we get out of the different models we consult when we are looking at different policies, which would take us to where we want to go. It was very interesting that one of the findings was that, using r* instead of a calculated optimal policy, you could actually do fairly well.  Well, that’s an interesting reason to want to know r*. But how do you think—I’m asking the authors.  How do you think about r* and what its uses are.  It’s obviously a shorthand for us.  But as we talk about it, I have a sense very much   that it gets more weight in our minds than it should, and that we should also be focusing on other variables. Well, to end, I was naive and I tried to answer the three questions.  I guess next time, if the other students would only tell me which questions you have to answer, I’d do much better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker diverges from the overall findings discussed by others and argues that other variables such as fiscal policy and productivity growth have a significant influence on the natural rate of interest (r*). The speaker also questions the usefulness of r* and suggests that it may be given too much weight in decision-making compared to other variables.


Passage number 86.
 MR. EVANS.  I’ve spoken on that before.  It’s a rookie mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that they have previously talked about the topic mentioned and referring to it as a "rookie mistake," implying that it is a common error made by inexperienced individuals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 87.
  [Laughter] MR. FISCHER.  Anyway, what does your estimate of current r* imply for the degree of accommodation provided by current monetary policy. I think almost everybody said it—r* is somewhere around zero.  The real rate is somewhere around minus 1 percent, minus 1½ percent.  So we have, I think, adequate accommodation, which will be higher when the inflation rate rises, I assume, or when productivity growth rises.  And, yesterday, in another meeting, some of us here saw a staff model forecast that I’m not sure has been generally accepted by the staff, which showed productivity growth returning to 1½ percent from next year.  I don’t know if there is anything other than convenience in that chart. What did the exchange rate do to r*.  The appreciation probably temporarily reduced r*. And then the third one was, how do I expect r* to evolve, and what are the implications for the appropriate future path of the policy rate. Well, there is great uncertainty about future r*.  That is what is clear from the various factors that have been mentioned as determining it in the various papers that we have.  If productivity goes up at a reasonable rate, if animal spirits return, I assume that r* will rise.  If we stay stuck in roughly the equilibrium we are in now, I think that people will begin to be very worried that there is not much in the future and it could potentially fall. My bottom line is that r* is useful.  Which is what I think is said at the first line of exhibit 13: “r* is a relevant, albeit complex, benchmark to guide the stance of monetary policy.” Well, it’s not a definitive benchmark.  It’s not the pole star of whether monetary policy is right, but it is something useful that we need to consult.  But I think that if we want to get full analyses of the policies we are undertaking, we still need to use models.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: In this passage, there is disagreement or contention regarding the staff model forecast for productivity growth returning to 1½ percent. The speaker mentions that it has not been generally accepted by the staff, implying disagreement or uncertainty about its validity.


Passage number 88.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to the staff for these papers.  I tried to think over the past several days about my answer to number 3, how is r* likely to evolve, and what are observable factors that, at least, I will be watching to try to figure that out.  And I probably didn’t like the answer to my own question, in that, number one, the decline in the working-age population in the United States, that demographic, is a major factor.  Two, another factor is globalization, and related to globalization, the demographic challenges not only in Japan but in China, which has a severe demographic problem and one that will evolve and grow over the coming years.  I also believe we are on the flip side of the—for lack of a better term—debt supercycle. We spent the past number of decades leveraging up.  We are now more recently, since the crisis, on the flip side of that debt supercycle, and we are having to deal with deleveraging, which I assume has to bring down r*. And then, finally, more regulation in general, across industries in our economy—much of it in financial services was desperately needed—has contributed to the fall in r*. When I look at all of these factors, which are transitory or cyclical and which are secular, almost all of them, unfortunately, appear to me to be secular—that is, they are going to be with us for an extended period of time.  So, these are the fundamental issues that I will be looking at, in the years to come, that I would think will result in downward pressure on r* in general, all things being equal. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and beliefs about the factors that will likely affect the evolution of r*.


Passage number 89.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Lorie, you mentioned, in connection with the ON RRP, that some of the foreign banks have pulled back, presumably to try to put their balance sheets in a better light for capital purposes.  Given that the ECB, the Bank of England, and the Swiss banking regulator have all recently indicated increased expectations regarding capital among their big internationally active banks, do you think we can expect take-up to be moving up on a durable, rather than transitory, basis because foreign banks will be a little less willing to intermediate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting information and asking for the opinion of the speaker.


Passage number 90.
 MS. LOGAN. We’ve seen a decline in repo trading activity, particularly from the European banks, and I think that has marginally affected the level of overnight RRP.  But over the past year, the RRP level has been fairly steady.  Looking ahead, I think market participants are still very attuned to whether that repo activity does continue to decline.  But they’re more focused on the money fund reform and the expectations that government funds are going to have larger amounts of assets under management, and that’s going to be more likely to affect the overnight RRP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about a decline in repo trading activity and its potential impact on the level of overnight RRP, followed by an observation about the steady RRP level over the past year. It then mentions the focus of market participants on money fund reform and the expectation of larger assets under management for government funds, and how that might affect the overnight RRP. There is no disagreement or contention between different parties in this passage.


Passage number 91.
 MR. TARULLO.  Of the three jurisdictions, only the United Kingdom is increasing the leverage ratio.  The other two are just risk based, which presumably won’t have as much of an effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the current situation in different jurisdictions regarding the leverage ratio.


Passage number 92.
 MS. LOGAN. We’ve seen a lot of the largest declines already in the European banks, and they’ve suggested in commentary that they’re largely done with that reduction.  But it’s hard to really know, as the firms get better about doing this full assessment across the firm, how different departments are then going to adjust.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that it is difficult to know how different departments within banks will adjust to the reductions.


Passage number 93.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only contains a single statement without any opposing arguments or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 94.
   MR. POTTER.  And in the unsecured markets, Canadian, Swedish, and Australian banks are doing a lot of the trades.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about Canadian, Swedish, and Australian banks participating in trades in the unsecured markets.


Passage number 95.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions for Lorie. Okay.  Seeing none, let me turn to Jane Ihrig, who is going to talk about issues associated with the debt limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange between participants in a meeting.


Passage number 96.
 MS. IHRIG.3  Thank you, Chair Yellen.  I would like to take a few minutes to review issues related to the debt ceiling.  As Lorie reported, the Congress seems to be close to an agreement to suspend the debt limit until March 2017.  Proposed legislative text was released last night, and procedural steps are being taken to allow for expedited consideration of an agreement.  This proposed agreement also would lock in spending caps for the next two years, making a government shutdown unlikely before the end of fiscal year 2017. No votes have been scheduled as of yet, and the contents of a proposed deal could change at any point before legislation is formally brought to the floor.  Rank-and-file members of the House and Senate learned of the proposed deal only yesterday afternoon and were first briefed on the contents of the proposed agreement last night, so there is no guarantee as of yet that a deal would have the votes necessary to pass in both the House and the Senate. The uncertainty surrounding a resolution in the past couple of weeks was starting to show signs of strains in financial markets; Lorie noted bill yields on securities that are at risk of delayed payment had moved up.  These strains led to some inquiries regarding the Federal Reserve’s operational plans, and the Chair’s letter last week outlined an approach for FOMC participants and Federal Reserve staff to deal with questions.  The hope is to minimize public communications on issues associated with this topic to the extent possible.  However, in response to inquiries, the minutes of the October 16, 2013, videoconference meeting are available on the Board’s public website to reference. My exhibit provides text in those minutes that might be seen as talking points on debt ceiling matters now and in the future.  With regard to operations involving delayed payments on Treasury securities, policymakers saw “no legal or operational need to make changes to the conduct or procedures employed in open market operations, securities lending, or to the operation of the discount window,” and would “continue to employ prevailing market values of securities in all its transactions and operations, under the usual terms.”  Regarding supervisory policy, policymakers noted that they would “take into account and make appropriate allowance for unusual market conditions.” 3 The materials used by Ms. Ihrig are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). If asked about steps the Federal Reserve might take to address market issues resulting from a delay in payments of any obligation of the U.S. government, it may be useful to note that “appropriate responses would depend importantly on the actual conditions observed in financial markets,” and “while the Federal Reserve should take whatever steps it could to address disruptions in market function and liquidity, the risks posed to the financial system and to the broader economy by a delay in payments on Treasury securities would be potentially catastrophic, and thus such a situation should be avoided at all costs.” In terms of tools that the Federal Reserve has to address financial market pressures, the staff memo sent to the Committee on Thursday reviewed Desk and Reserve Bank operations that may moderate pressures.  These operations include daily, routine operations such as overnight reverse repurchase tests and securities lending, and also repurchase agreement operations and the use of the discount window.  No change would be made to current temporary open market operations without the consultation of the Committee. The staff will continue to monitor markets for signs of financial strains that pose risks to market functioning and liquidity in case a deal does not go through and could, at a later date, come back to the Committee with options for potential actions as appropriate. Thank you.  I would be happy to take questions. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions for Jane.  Seeing none, let me ask around the table.  As Jane noted—and I sent a note to the Committee last week on this—the proposal would be that, in answering questions that may arise on this, we continue to act in line with the decisions that were made in 2013.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 97.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes. We discussed this in the Committee on Credit and Risk Management and reviewed what happened last time and what tiny, narrow, little potential credit issue there is.  It seems quite manageable by manual workaround means, so we support this as a communications strategy and a recommendation to our colleagues on the conference as to how they should proceed in response to inquiries. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  And to the extent we have open market operations, we would continue to treat securities at risk in the normal ways.  Any concern around the table. We don’t need a vote, but I want to make sure there’s broad agreement on the strategy.  [No response] Okay.  We also need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 98.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Second.  Without objection.  Okay.  Thank you.  Now we will go on to the “Economic and Financial Situation.”  Let me call on David Lebow to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply involves routine procedural steps in a meeting.


Passage number 99.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had a question about the inflation outlook.  On page 2 of 2 in the handout labeled “U.S. Outlook,” if I look at the 12-month change in core PCE, going from July up through December—obviously, December is a forecast—we see an increase of 0.3 percentage point in a five-month period.  At that point, the staff is expecting core PCE inflation to either flatten out or even decline slightly over the course of 2016 before beginning its gradual rise back up to target over the remainder of the decade. What’s the story for 2016.  Many observers, if your forecast comes to pass in 2015, are going to be saying, “Look, we’re going up 0.3 percentage point in five months.  It looks like the Fed is back on track.”  But that isn’t your outlook, so I was wondering what the story is behind that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question about the inflation outlook.


Passage number 100.
 MR. LEBOW. Most of these movements in the 12-month change in total PCE inflation that you’re referring to have to do with the timing of when the energy price movements are happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact regarding the timing of energy price movements and their effect on the 12-month change in total PCE inflation.


Passage number 101.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Sorry.  I meant to talk about core.  The 12-month change in core PCE in July was 1.2 percent, and you expect it to move up to 1.5 in December.  If you go to Tealbook A, the outlook for 2016 is actually, I think, 1.4 percent.  So I was just wondering, what’s the story for the contours of that forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question and inquiry about the forecast for core PCE.


Passage number 102.
 MR. LEBOW. That’s right.  For 2015 as a whole, the four-quarter change is 1.4 percent, and so it’s not surprising that the 12-month numbers you’re seeing in the fourth quarter are at that same level.  One of the factors built into our projection is a little bit of residual seasonality, as we’ve talked about before.  That is not as visible because the September CPI that we just got was higher than expected.  We do have some low-ish numbers built into our monthlies for the next couple of months, and that affects the three-month change pattern that you’re seeing, in which it falls back from 1.5 in November to 1.2 in December. Broadly speaking, in 2016, we are expecting that some of the effects of the import prices holding down core inflation are going to be waning, according to our projection of what import prices will do.  That in itself would lead you to expect a little higher inflation in 2016.  In fact, that’s worth maybe a couple of tenths.  In 2015, that 1.4 is actually a little higher than we would’ve predicted on the basis of the fundamentals, including the movements of the dollar and import prices.  So that slight positive surprise in 2015 goes away and offsets the dollar effects coming out in 2016.  That’s why we’ve got the same 1.4 in 2015 and 2016 in our projection of core inflation.  Then we have core inflation edging up from there as the import and energy price effects on core dwindle further.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and projections.


Passage number 103.
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any sign of contention or disagreement. Mr. Kocherlakota is thanking someone, and Chair Yellen responds.


Passage number 104.
 MR. FISCHER.  Andreas, we talked a fair amount about leveraged loans last year, and it seems that the talking worked.  Was it the talking, or was it something else that was happening at the same time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 105.
 MR. LEHNERT.  Yes. Certainly, the evidence from the examinations that our supervisory colleagues have conducted is that the number of so-called nonpass loans—that is, loans violating the guidance—really declined over the past year.  At the same time, there was a pretty substantial increase in risk aversion.  We had the oil price declines in late 2014 and the associated concerns about the outlook for that sector in which there’s a volume of leveraged loans.  So between supervisory pressure, guidance, et cetera, and the increase in risk aversion, it’s hard to judge.  I guess I’d say that the spread widening probably can’t be explained by guidance per se, and that it seems to reflect more risk aversion or risk appetite or the outlook for that sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different factors that may have contributed to a change in loan behavior and spread widening, but there is no disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 106.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange between Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 107.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’d like to ask a question about the Tealbook A box on page 54, “The Recent Decline in Longer-Horizon Inflation Compensation.” For a little context, we just had the discussion about r*, and one of the things that comes out of that is, it depends a little on your modeling strategy—whether your shocks are basically stationary and you’re not going to have your estimates move around for any great length of time or whether you allow them to be permanent.  Our FOMC statement, for quite some time, has pointed to market measures of inflation compensation moving down but survey measures being   fixed.  What’s our ability to detect longer-horizon movements in those. Are they baked in the cake, are they never going to move, or do they actually have the opportunity. Now, taking it to the yield curve data—the topic of the box—most of our term structure models have baked into them I(0) stationary assumptions about inflation and the yields and things like that, so they can’t move very far from endpoint inflation expectations.  But in the box you allude to a new model that has I(1) properties, so it has the possibility of seeing them move.  This came up with President Lacker’s comment about different equilibrium and whether inflation expectations can move down.  If I understand it right, its estimate is potentially 50 basis points lower inflation expectations.  That’s viewed as an upper bound.  I’m not quite sure how to put all of those things together.  If I remember right, the inflation attractor that the Tealbook uses is around 1.8 percent, and then there’s the assumption that it’s going to move up, and we don’t really know.  Could you discuss some of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and further discussion on the topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 108.
 MR. LAUBACH. Perhaps I can pick up on the upper-bound notion.  That really has to do with the possible persistence of shocks to inflation.  In that sense, rightly, this model takes the view that these shocks might leave a permanent imprint.  You might view that as one polar assumption.  You’re right in pointing out that it matters a whole lot for the implications for longer-horizon inflation expectations whether, technically speaking, you have a unit root, or the root is 0.99.  It makes a huge difference as you forecast further and further out.  Of course, I’d add that, sadly, for that reason, the data also don’t speak very loudly on the matter, so we’re presenting this estimate as an interesting case to consider.  But if you asked us about our confidence as to whether it’s this assumption or what’s built into the standard model, it would be very difficult for us to confidently say anything about which of the two it is.  As you know, even in our standard model, there’s some persistence—at the 5-to-10-year horizon, you can generate   some decline in inflation expectations, and so it doesn’t revert back very quickly.  Nonetheless, it matters a great deal whether you move to the possibility that you literally have permanent imprints on inflation expectations.  I wish we had greater ability to discriminate confidently in the data between these two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a disagreement or uncertainty regarding the persistence of shocks to inflation and the implications for longer-horizon inflation expectations. The author states that it is difficult to confidently say whether the assumption of permanent imprints on inflation expectations or the standard model is more accurate, as the data does not provide clear evidence.


Passage number 109.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I’m sympathetic to all of those issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses sympathy towards the mentioned issues, suggesting agreement or understanding.


Passage number 110.
 MR. LEBOW. Regarding the inflation projection itself, just to be clear, our projection is predicated on the idea that longer-run expectations are stable and will remain stable for some time more. In other words, we’re not taking signal for our baseline inflation projection from this news in the TIPS spreads moving lower.  Our assumption is of stable expectations that are consistent with PCE inflation settling out a bit below 2 percent—1.8 percent, as you said.  We do eventually assume that those expectations will drift slightly higher to be consistent with 2 percent inflation in the longer run, but there would be no support for that assumption in the TIPS data— quite the opposite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 111.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of one person expressing gratitude and another person acknowledging the thanks. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in their statements.


Passage number 112.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage because only the abbreviation "MR" is provided and no further information or context is given.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.  I have a couple of questions around financial stability, but these charts also appear in the Tealbook, so it can be a free-for-all. In the QS report, chart 1-11 shows cap rates in commercial real estate, which you mentioned are at very, very low levels—in fact, I would say the lowest we’ve seen since 2006 and 2007.  Also the price-to-rent ratios in residential real estate are in chart 1-14.  I don’t just want to think about financial stability, I want to think about risk to the macroeconomic outlook, because when I talk about financial stability, we immediately go into leverage of banks and this and that.  I’m actually also focused on risk to economic growth.  Which should I think of as the  better metric, or measure, of risk to the economy. Is it the price-to-rent ratio relative to a historical norm, a cap rate relative to a historical norm, or a cap rate that’s adjusted for where interest rates and other right-hand-side variables may be. It could be, as we saw in the mid-2000s, that basically all assets were overvalued, and so when you compare commercial real estate cap rates with Treasury securities, everything looks great because everything is in a frothy state while, in fact, there are problems all over the place. Also, in the house-price-to-rent ratio, you have this long-run trend that, as I understand from the footnote, reflects not only some trend in the house-price-to-rent ratio but also carrying costs, which I take to mean interest rates and things like that. The way I read the house-price-to-rent ratio is that the house prices are about 35 percent above their historical norms, but once you put in this trend and the carrying costs and other things, it actually looks pretty good. Going back to my question, when we think about macroeconomic risks, should I be thinking about the 35 percent, should I be looking at cap rates being really low, or should I be saying, “Maybe I can justify all of this because of very low interest rates.” If that wasn’t a leading question, it was supposed to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is asking for clarification and guidance on which metric or measure of risk to the economy is better to consider. They are presenting different perspectives and asking for input on whether to focus on price-to-rent ratios relative to historical norms, cap rates relative to historical norms, or adjusted cap rates considering interest rates and other variables. The speaker is also questioning whether the current low interest rates can justify the seemingly overvalued assets.


Passage number 114.
 MR. DUDLEY.  I have a question for President Williams.  Let’s say the risk was all Treasury yields.  Then don’t you have the risk of Treasury yields going up a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a scenario and asks a question.


Passage number 115.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is not specified.


Passage number 116.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.  That’s one way to put it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 117.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It seems to me that it doesn’t matter that much if the cap rates are out of line or the Treasury yields are out of line.  Something is out of line; you still have the same risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion that whether the cap rates or Treasury yields are out of line, there is still a presence of risks.


Passage number 118.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 119.
 WILLIAMS.  Right.  That’s actually how I was thinking about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, seems to be in agreement with the previous statement or thought.


Passage number 120.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Okay" does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it is a simple acknowledgement or agreement.


Passage number 121.
   MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or statements that could lead to contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 122.
 WILLIAMS.  But then that would argue, “Don’t tell me cap rates are low because Treasury yields are low, so that’s okay.”  But I also don’t quite understand where this long-run trend that’s in both the Tealbook and the QS report really comes from.  To what extent is that some view about trend price-to-rent ratios—which I don’t have a good understanding of—or to what extent is it really reflecting just interest rates.  At the last FOMC meeting, I said house prices were roughly 30 percent overvalued based on a chart like this, and of course the Tealbook says that’s not correct, they’re actually overvalued by 6 percent.  I want to know the right way to think about the risk to the outlook.  Maybe they’re both good ways to think about it, but it’s a question.  It’s a leading question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Williams, expresses disagreement or confusion about the relationship between cap rates, Treasury yields, long-run trends, price-to-rent ratios, and house prices. They are questioning the accuracy of their previous statement about house prices being overvalued and seeking clarification on the correct way to think about the risk to the outlook.


Passage number 123.
 MR. LEHNERT.  I know you don’t want to hear about leverage and so forth, but I’m duty bound.  [Laughter] As someone who labors in the macroprudential-industrial complex, I feel required to mention this.  The question from a stability perspective is, what happens if prices decline a lot.  What I tried to lay out for you was an argument that in the CRE space at least, there wouldn’t be any amplification; there wouldn’t be any second-round effect.  There are no externalities or spillovers from leveraged intermediaries suffering capital losses and so forth.  That is doubly true in the residential space in which all the credit risk is held, for better or for worse, on the public-sector balance sheet. I heard some questions about the price-to-rent ratio.  I have to talk about that, too.  [Laughter] I think I might be the original progenitor of the price-to-rent ratio.  As I recall, Josh Gallin and I worked on it 15 years ago.  The problem in residential is that there’s no equivalent of cap rate.  There’s no way that you really observe a house being both available for rent and available for sale.  One way to approach that problem is to compare indexes with indexes—the index of prices with the index of rents.  There are many measurement problems, but the most obvious one is that the stock of rental housing and the stock of owner-occupied housing are divergent in terms of their hedonic qualities over time—the willingness of people to pay for them.  So that’s the main underlying source for the price-to-rent ratio trend. Then the question of the sensitivity of the overvaluation estimate to the trend is a fair one.  Back when I was doing this, I tried a bunch of different ways to correct for this, including looking at the Census data directly and actually doing a regression of hedonic characteristics and trying to construct an equivalent rental house and an equivalent occupied house.  A much simpler way to do it is to forget about rent.  Let’s just assume that there’s some kind of trend in real house prices for whatever reason—population growth, what have you.  And let’s say that the bubble period began in 2000 or 2001, and let’s estimate the trend through there and then jump it off. All of these kinds of approaches—the paper that I wrote with our former colleague Morris Davis and the simple-minded jump off from the trend—all give you answers that housing is no longer cheap, but it’s not, I would say, excessively rich.  I don’t know if that helps you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and explaining their perspective on the topic.


Passage number 124.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage or statement is not mentioned, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 125.
 WILLIAMS.  The issue there is always extrapolating.  You’re extrapolating now 15 years out on the trend, and your out-of-sample period is getting closer to the size of your actual sample.  But that answered my questions on how to think about it. I actually said I wasn’t going to ask about leverage, but you wouldn’t let me do that.  My own view of leverage was that one of the things that we should have better understood was the distribution of leverage and not just the aggregate.  When you look at a picture like yours, it’s really high, it’s lower than it was before, it’s flat, but there’s not a lot of information in here about how many people in California today are buying houses with 95 or 100 percent LTVs, because this is an aggregate statistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the issue of extrapolation and the speaker's view on leveraging in the housing market.


Passage number 126.
 To the extent that these summary statistics are mushing together my parents, who have no leverage; me, who has a little bit; and then all of my neighbors, who are completely leveraged out—[Laughter] MR. LEHNERT.  Okay.  I’m really glad you asked that question, although you may live to regret it. That is an absolute void in our understanding that we identified back when this was first a concern.  The staff here has done an extraordinary amount of work to try to understand precisely the issues that you’re describing.  I don’t know if this is available to you, but there’s a big book of QS assessments, which is a mere 216 pages this round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a response to a question and the speaker acknowledges the question as a valid concern and praises the effort of the staff in addressing it.


Passage number 127.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 128.
 WILLIAMS.  We’re limited at our Federal Reserve Banks in how much we can spend on printers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a limitation at the Federal Reserve Banks in terms of spending on printers.


Passage number 129.
  [Laughter] MR. LEHNERT.  I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of laughter indicates a friendly or lighthearted tone, suggesting agreement or understanding.


Passage number 130.
 MR. TARULLO.  It’s a high one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 131.
  [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is indicating laughter, which typically signifies agreement or amusement, rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 132.
 WILLIAMS. But there’s a limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contrasting or conflicting viewpoints. It simply presents a statement made by Williams without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 133.
 MR. LEHNERT. I would say that we do look at the cross-sectional distribution of a variety of different measures.  Maybe one to highlight is county-level breakdowns.  If you see house prices move a lot, how much do you see debt in that county grow. There’s a pretty solid relationship between those two variables in history.  Since 2009, that relationship has really broken down.  I don’t know your neighbors, and I don’t know where you live, but my sense is that people are using cash to buy or pay.  You may argue that they’re paying too much, but the point is that they’re not really borrowing money to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply states a observation and the speaker's sense of what is happening in regards to the relationship between house prices and debt at the county level.


Passage number 134.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 135.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.  It would be great to have updates in which we see that kind of information because we are definitely hearing a lot more stories from our banking advisory council, CDIAC, and from our board about very high LTVs in our District—over 90 percent. CHAIR YELLEN. Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 136.
MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to build on President Williams’s question, because I think Andreas actually has more to say about it than he has to this point. President Williams was, I think, implicitly drawing an important distinction between, on the one hand, financial stability considerations, in which leverage is implicated—meaning that there’s some significant risk to the intermediation function—and, on the other hand, the potential effect of leverage as a macroeconomic matter. Nellie and Andreas, I thought we had a pretty good case study of at least thinking that through in the leveraged-lending context that Governor Fischer was mentioning a moment ago.  In that case we were pretty confident that financial-stability risks, as conventionally understood, were not all that implicated by this big growth of leveraged-lending originations because so much of that was getting passed on to ultimate holders who were not themselves intermediators, or at least not highly leveraged intermediators.  But then there was a complementary analysis, which I think came from your office, saying that you would still be concerned because this is upping the risk of quite a few bankruptcies—more bankruptcies with a minor dip than would otherwise take place—and, thus, although we may not have supervisory or regulatory tools to deal with it, it still ought to be relevant.  That was what I understood John to be getting at, which then does argue for more granular data on, as he would put it, how to “disaggregate” that curve. I think I’m characterizing fairly what you said 6 or 8 or 10 months ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a reflection on a conversation and attempts to summarize and clarify previous points made by others.


Passage number 137.
 MR. LEHNERT.  That’s right.  In mid- or late 2014, as I recall, we asked what the strongest case was to be concerned about the growth of the leveraged finance sector.  The channel that we identified was one in which the business sector gets leveraged and then you have a more fragile industry from now on that’s more likely to face higher credit losses and financing constraints.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It is stating a fact or observation about a discussion that took place.


Passage number 138.
  MR. TARULLO. One could say that about people who own commercial real estate and people who own houses, too, even though they’re not intermediators, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Tarullo is simply posing a question and seeking confirmation.


Passage number 139.
 MR. LEHNERT. Yes. I see your point.  There’s still the legacy of the old mortgages that are hanging around, but in terms of debt service burdens and so forth, those have come down remarkably in the past few years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage shows agreement or acknowledgement of the point raised by the speaker. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 140.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR."


Passage number 141.
 WILLIAMS.  I invite you to come to my beautiful District.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Williams is extending an invitation to someone to visit his beautiful district.


Passage number 142.
  [Laughter] MR. LEHNERT.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange of thanks between Mr. Lehnert and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 143.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you.  To follow up on Governor Tarullo’s question, there are two issues.  One, what happens if the interest rate goes up and they’re at 5 percent down on the mortgage. And the other is, what happens if business conditions deteriorate.  Now, both of those could create the bankruptcies about which you talked.  What are you focusing on, or doesn’t it matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking about two different scenarios and inquiring about the focus of the discussion.


Passage number 144.
 MR. LEHNERT. In the exercise that we did in 2014, we focused more on just the susceptibility of the business sector to shocks—typical, if you will, accelerator-type dynamics.  On the interest rate picture, we often do think about the sensitivity of the system to rates and so forth, but that seems to be a slightly different question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any hint of contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the different focus areas in an exercise conducted in 2014 and acknowledging that the question about sensitivity to interest rates is separate from the previous topic.


Passage number 145.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 146.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Doesn’t it depend a bit on the rollover risk.  I could have a leveraged position, when interest rates go up, but as long as I’m term funded, nothing really is going to happen to me for a while, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a question that prompts a discussion about the impact of rollover risk and interest rate changes on a leveraged position.


Passage number 147.
   MR. LEHNERT.  Yes.  I think it’s more of an issue in the leveraged finance sector, in which people expect to refinance their big loans even though, as you say, a bond is going to have a term exposure.  The loans themselves are floating rate, so that’s an area in which an increase in rates would pass through, in terms of payment burdens, to the borrower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their belief that the issue mentioned is more prevalent in the leveraged finance sector and explaining how rate increases could affect borrowers in that sector.


Passage number 148.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But in housing, presumably, people have mostly fixed-rate mortgages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an assumption or statement about the nature of housing and mortgages.


Passage number 149.
 MR. LEHNERT.  Yes.  Exactly.  Housing, autos, and cards are mostly amortization.  There’s not really an issue there. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speakers are simply discussing the types of loans and their amortization.


Passage number 150.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I thought President Williams’s intervention was really food for a lot of thought.  I wanted to follow up on one of his comments about thinking about the decomposition of price-to-rent ratios into a risk premium factor, a path-of-short-rates factor, and a term premium factor. Some of these questions about how secure we should feel about the current level of price-to-rent ratios really come down to what you think of the time-series properties of these various factors.  One way to respond to his question would be to provide some information to the Committee about the particular time-series properties of these various factors.  Obviously not definitive, but, certainly, it would be a starting point. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Now, we have an opportunity to make comments on financial stability, and a few people have indicated their desire to do so.  Let me start with the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion between two individuals about potential factors influencing price-to-rent ratios.


Passage number 151.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I’d like to talk about something that we haven’t talked about yet, which is Puerto Rico.  Time is running out there, and nothing that will facilitate an orderly restructuring has yet emerged.  On the positive side, you’ve probably seen that the  U.S. Treasury has taken the initiative in proposing that the Congress pass legislation that would enable the territory—not just the public corporations, but the territory itself—to have the option of filing for bankruptcy. If they got that authority, that would be important, because that would put pressure on creditors to agree to a voluntary restructuring or, failing that, to have a more organized process for restructuring under bankruptcy protection.  Also, the Treasury has advocated increasing the earned income tax credit for Puerto Rican residents, improving Medicaid access, and having an oversight board to monitor the restructuring and its aftermath. On the negative side, I would say that the congressional response to the U.S. Treasury’s proposal has been lukewarm at best, and it’s unclear whether the Treasury proposals go far enough, frankly, in putting Puerto Rico on a sustainable course.  There are many other structural impediments that could be addressed that the Treasury is silent on, including exempting Puerto Rico from the Jones Act, allowing a lower minimum wage for Puerto Rico, or taking steps to broaden the tax base, because Puerto Rico has a very large informal economy. At this juncture, a hard landing for Puerto Rico seems like a real risk within a few months, and much needs to be done quickly if we’re going to avert that outcome.  If it does transpire, it’s going to be absolutely horrible for Puerto Rico and its residents, but as I said in the past, the systemic effect on the broader U.S. economy and the financial system is still likely to be very modest.  Puerto Rican debt already trades, for example, at a steep discount from par, and municipal bond insurers that are exposed to Puerto Rico play a much smaller role in the municipal bond market now than they did before the financial crisis. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents both the positive and negative aspects of the situation in Puerto Rico and acknowledges that more needs to be done to address the issues.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 152.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This follows up on one of Andreas’s charts.  Recently, a number of economic research papers have focused on assessing theinformation content in credit spreads.  Not so long ago, we were concerned that credit spreads were unusually low, suggesting an underpricing of risk.  It is noteworthy that spreads have moved from their unusually low levels.  Particularly at a time when we are actively considering tightening monetary policy, it is somewhat incongruous that we are seeing credit spreads reaching multiyear highs last seen several years ago when concerns over European problems were particularly acute. It should be noted, however, that at these levels, the spreads on high-yield bonds relative to Treasury bonds are significantly below the peaks seen during the financial crisis.  If one looks at the Bank of America Merrill Lynch high-yield corporate bond index, high-yield spreads have risen 267 basis points since June 2014.  Although this increase has certainly been aggravated by the oil and commodity downturn that has significantly affected firms in those industries, the rise in high-yield bond spreads is not coming from that sector alone.  For example, when the energy sector is excluded from the Bank of America Merrill Lynch high-yield index, high-yield spreads ex energy have widened 210 basis points. One explanation for the higher yield is concerns about the future growth of the economy.  However, if so, concerns being expressed in bond spreads are at variance with our discussion on policy and the need to tighten rates.  An alternative is that high-yield securities are now viewed as being more risky because of loosening underwriting standards and the previous willingness of investors to hold riskier assets. If so, we should be considering the implications for how these changes in high-yield bond characteristics may affect the performance of these bonds in a future downturn, as well as how such a downturn might cause investors to rapidly reduce their willingness to hold risky assets, further adding to any instability in bond markets.  Thank you, Madam Chair.   CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two different views on the cause of the rise in credit spreads. One view is that it is a sign of concern about future economic growth, while the other view is that it is a result of increased risk in high-yield securities due to loosening underwriting standards.


Passage number 153.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m going to comment on these charts from a slightly different perspective as we sit here in approximately year six since the post-2009 low.  I agree with your conclusions.  I actually see a number of markets that seem to me to be quite overvalued.  The U.S. stock market leads the list for me when you consider that corporate earnings for 2015 are estimated to be down year-over-year and the market is still trading at about 19 times 2015 earnings. It’s one thing for the market to be trading at 17 or 18 times earnings when earnings are rising, but these earnings are actually declining.  This multiple really strikes me as full.  Having said that, unlike a so-called bubble in which you have severe overvaluation that could lead to a boom and a bust, what I see that worries me maybe as much is a significant and prolonged trend in behavior affecting asset allocation, involving pools of capital, the choice between bonds and more risky assets, and carry trade taking place in various forms. Let me explain one particular aspect of this that probably bothers me the most, and that is the change in the behavior of people running companies and what it means today to run a nonfinancial business.  By the way, I would say that in the sixth year of an expansion, you would normally see more excess than we are seeing, but, not to be gratuitous, I think financial regulation has helped tamp it down, except in the area of people running companies.  Increasingly, CEOs have had to become not so much operators as financial engineers.  This is widespread.  It is now unusual for me to talk to a CEO who is not dealing with an activist, or the fear of an activist, in their stock and who is not actively being pressured to use financial engineering, often to buy back their stock in size.  If you ask them what they would be doing if they were a private company or without the activists, a fraction of them would actually be using their resources to do things that would yield more revenue growth.  But their time frames are much, much shorter.  This is because—even though there have always been activists—in the past several years, the recent emergence of very, very large pools of activist capital means that the pools of capital are dramatically bigger now, as people are willing to allocate to riskier assets. It’s not surprising because not only time frames are shorter, but also the tenure of CEOs in this country is much shorter.  It’s not a coincidence.  These pools of capital have an extremely short time horizon, to the point at which I would call them renters of the stock, not owners of the stock.  They’re not going to be around a year from now, they may not even be around six months from now, but they will stay around long enough to get a CEO—or groups of them will get a CEO—to take an action.  These pools of capital can’t afford to be patient because the people who bought the pool themselves have made allocations away from bonds to riskier assets.  And they’re probably overallocated to riskier assets, so they don’t have a lot of patience either. So what’s the point of all of this. A lot of this is a byproduct—not fatal yet, maybe, but I think it’s getting to be dangerous.  Considering our dual mandate, particularly real GDP and unemployment, I think this type of behavior continuing at this scale probably cannot be helpful to our desire to foster GDP growth and lower unemployment.  I don’t think it helps foster a flow of capital into more productive resource allocation that might actually grow revenue, create jobs, and increase productivity.  This is something I haven’t seen before.  I’ve seen a lot of waves of takeover artists and others that were driving mergers, and, in a way, I like that trend better.  These activists are not owners, they are short-term traders, and I am concerned that behavior is starting to be affected in a widespread way.  I think that, at some point, it is likely to undermine our ability to achieve our own mandate.  That’s the comment I’d make on financial stability. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Kaplan, agrees with the conclusions that have been made and offers his own perspective on the overvaluation of certain markets. He also expresses concern about the trend of behavior in asset allocation and the influence of activists on CEOs. This is a personal observation and does not indicate any disagreement with others.


Passage number 154.
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to say a few words about the QS and the work that’s being done in the Office of Financial Stability.  The QS report we received on October 20, 2015, is really extremely useful, and it’s well summarized in two charts. The first one is on page 3, which we’ve talked about already.  It’s the overall evaluation of what’s going on, with the overall assessment being that risks and vulnerabilities are moderate. The other one is on page 32—the radar chart that is sometimes known as “the spider’s web.”  If we look at the one on page 32, it tells a very interesting story.  On the side that says “Financial Sector Vulnerability,” relative to what there was before the crisis, there’s almost nothing that looks dangerous until we get around to consumer credit.  And then commercial real estate sticks out as the one area in which we’re now in worse shape, according to this, than we were in 2006.  This is a very useful chart for concentrating the mind and telling the story in a very vivid way.  By the way, on page 32, there are a few things for which we don’t yet have the data—as far as I can see, we don’t yet have the data for nonfinancial business—so there may be something more that is problematic. Now, the question is, “what are we supposed to do with this if we detect a problem area.” We’re likely to say, “Use macroprudential policy,” but we don’t have a whole lot of macroprudential tools.  We have the countercyclical capital buffer, which is gradually making its way into regular examination by the Board.  We have margin requirements, which we haven’t used for a long time.  We have supervisory capacities, which, at least to those lenders we supervise, we can use to try to control risks.  And we’ve got OMP, which is “open mouth policy,” which may do well in some circumstances.  We don’t know how well this all works, and it’s something we’ll have to feel our way into.   The other half of this—the stuff that Governor Tarullo and his colleagues in the FSOC are doing—is structural reforms, and that becomes the far more important part of what we have to do to reduce the potential costs of future crises or what might have been future crises.  There’s a lot going on there.  There are the very large increases in capital.  We hope there will be improved resolution procedures soon.  So we can feel a bit better about all of that, and we can feel that the effort that Nellie and her colleagues are putting into the surveillance is very, very useful. But we also have to remind ourselves that surveys like this and the work that goes on in the FSOC, which is monitoring, is essentially an intelligence exercise—it’s the exercise of an intelligence agency, which is inherently difficult. History tells you that however good the intelligence agencies are, they make mistakes and they miss things, which means, once again, that this is very, very important.  Getting the structure right, getting the ability to absorb losses is probably more important, without detracting in any way from what is being done by the people doing financial stability analysis. The only other thing I think we have to warn ourselves about is this great concern that every time you get into a crisis, the more you look, the more you find that there are problems that you missed, and so not to believe that small sectors don’t lead occasionally to big problems, and to keep that up. This is very important work that’s being done.  It needs to be accompanied by other very important work on strengthening the financial sector’s ability to deal with shocks and problems. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the usefulness of certain charts and reports and expressing the need for both surveillance and structural reforms in order to reduce future crises.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 155.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I often say in public remarks that the Federal Reserve has a much better understanding of financial system vulnerabilities and risks than it did a decade ago.  I feel safe in saying that because of the work of the QS group, and I want to thank Nellie, Andreas, and the other QS contributors from all around the System for their thorough and thoughtful measurements and analysis. As I suggested earlier today, I believe that r* will be low for many years to come.  If so, the FOMC will achieve its dual-mandate objectives only in the presence of signs of financial instability, like high and possibly volatile asset prices.  This observation suggests to me that financial-stability considerations are likely to be a central consideration at FOMC discussions for years to come.  The Committee will need to become even more systematic in its approach to these issues. There are two key points as you think about how to become more systematic.  First, as already noted, our statutory mandate is to promote price stability and to promote maximum employment.  I see financial stability mattering for this Committee only insofar as it affects the risks to the outlooks for inflation and unemployment.  The stance of monetary policy should not be influenced by a risk that some bondholders or collection of bondholders will lose money because of a rapid rise in term premiums.  A relevant question for monetary policy is whether such a sudden revaluation of bonds lead to a decline in employment and prices that is not readily addressable using ex post monetary policy tools.  We need to have a way to trace the manifestations of financial instability into price and employment outcomes. The second issue is, we need to know how changes in monetary policy would mitigate financial-stability concerns, mitigate the risks that I mentioned earlier.  Right now, I’m not sure that I even know the signs involved, let alone the magnitudes.  For example, if we’re concerned   about undue increases in house prices that could eventually lead to a housing bust, should we address the stability concerns by removing monetary accommodation to slow the rise in house prices or by adding monetary accommodation to cushion an eventual fall. Presumably, it depends on the position you are in the cycle, but, as we know, that timing is hard to judge. As I said at the beginning, I feel the current financial stability briefing process has served the FOMC well, but I see it only as a first step. The current approach implicitly treats financial stability as an add-on concern for the Committee’s consideration.  The Committee and its staff should aim for the financial-stability briefing to be more seamlessly integrated into Tealbook A.  Let me be somewhat more specific about what I have in mind.  Tealbook A currently focuses on how monetary policy influences the modal outlook, which is grounded in the certainty equivalence principle that emerges from quadratic objectives. As I’ve discussed both here and in various conference settings, we can incorporate financial-stability considerations by seeing them as a way in which monetary policy influences the risks to the outlook beyond just the modal outlook itself.  I would say the ultimate goal should be a Tealbook A that allows the Committee to gauge, in a systematic and quantitative way, how its monetary policy decisions will influence both the modal outlook and the risks associated with that outlook.  I’m optimistic that through the collective effort of QS and monetary economists around the System, this goal could well be achievable in a couple of years. I was at the conference that the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston hosted on macroprudential tools—a great conference—and Lars Svensson presented some interesting work that started to push in this direction, and he threw down a gauntlet.  As those of you who have heard Lars before know, he’s done that before.  He challenged people to find big effects of monetary policy on employment and price risks through financial stability.  He was not able to find very much along those lines in his own calculations.  While it’s not the way the System should think about financial stability, I think it would be great for this Committee to have a more integrated approach.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. In the passage, Mr. Kocherlakota suggests that financial stability considerations should only matter to the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) if they affect the risks to inflation and unemployment. He argues that the stance of monetary policy should not be influenced by concerns about bondholders losing money or a rapid rise in term premiums. However, he acknowledges that he is uncertain about how changes in monetary policy would mitigate financial stability concerns and questions whether tightening or loosening policy would be appropriate in response to potential housing market risks. This suggests a disagreement or lack of consensus on how financial stability should be integrated into monetary policy decisions.


Passage number 156.
 MR. TARULLO.  Can I just ask President Kocherlakota—this is your last meeting, so I’m not going to have this opportunity again—on that point you just made, I recall the fact that risk-management systems, particularly quantitative risk-management systems, of banks broke down because they were so bad at dealing with tail events.  I’m wondering whether there’s a similar problem here.  The risk to financial stability—at least in the Williams–Tarullo understanding of it—is about intermediation.  When those risks mature, it is a very big deal indeed, as we saw a few years ago, but because they tend not to go incrementally, it’s a tail-risk issue.  And I’m wondering how the Tealbook kind of approach could be modified to incorporate tail risks in a sensible fashion like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage contains a question and a statement, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 157.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think it would be useful to actually draw upon thinking beyond the people in this room to try to address this.  Jeremy Stein, I think, when he was still Governor, made reference to the idea of having an objective that would be nonquadratic in nature.  So that starts to get at moments of the distribution beyond mean and variance.  It starts to force you to think about tail events.  Tail events are hard because they don’t occur very often, but I think the way you start to force yourself to think about them is to think about not just the mean, not just the variances, as I’ve emphasized in some of my talks or that Svensson has, but also these higher moments. I’ll give you my biases upfront.  Because of the uncertainties of how monetary policy actually influences all of these financial-stability considerations, I think it’s going to be hard tobuild a case in which you’re going to actually tighten to trade off the deterioration of the modal outlook you might get in order to achieve the lower probability of the tail events.  But that’s the way you would start to build it—to have an objective function that was starting to bring in aspects of the probability distribution other than just the mean and the variance. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 158.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just one follow-up to that comment.  The Survey of Professional Forecasters does try to provide a distribution.  I’d say it doesn’t do very well at capturing the distribution, particularly in the tail. So it probably means thinking a bit more in terms of simulation exercises rather than trying to do what the Survey of Professional Forecasters does because my past experience with that is, it almost never captures tail events, and very rarely did the tails seem to widen prior to actual problems occurring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the shortcomings of the Survey of Professional Forecasters in capturing distribution, particularly in the tail, and suggesting alternative approaches such as simulation exercises.


Passage number 159.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I agree with what President Rosengren is saying.  My own guess about what the Survey of Professional Forecasters does is that they have normal Gaussian errors, they generate a bunch of simulations based on that, and they look at tails based on that Gaussian distribution. It’s almost like you want to use scenario analysis to try to inform yourself and then think about how monetary policy might be influencing the probability of those scenarios.  I think it’s a very rich and, I hope, rewarding journey. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break at this point for about 15 minutes, and that takes us to about 3:50 p.m.  Then we’ll return to begin the economic go-round. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  I think we’re ready to begin the economic go-round.  Let me just mention before we do this that some of you may note a slight change from past practice.  It has been traditional, both in the economic go-round and in the policy go-round, for the Governors tospeak at the end, after all of the presidents.  But—in a radical break with tradition—we’re going to shake this up a little bit and, from now on, just as you were polled on when you would like to speak, the same will be true for the Governors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing their agreement and understanding of the Survey of Professional Forecasters and monetary policy.


Passage number 160.
 MR. TARULLO. We are told when to speak.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  So you may see a violation of the traditional order.  Let’s start the economic go-round with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is light-hearted and does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The laughter suggests a friendly atmosphere between the speakers.


Passage number 161.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The most serious concerns about the outlook that were raised at the September meeting seem now to have diminished.  Neither the slower economic growth in many parts of the world nor the financial market turbulence at the end of August have spilled over noticeably into the domestic economy.  Private domestic final purchases grew at a robust 3.9 percent rate in the second quarter, and the Tealbook forecasts similar growth for the third quarter at a 3.8 percent rate.  The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston forecast is consistent with that outlook, with consumption expected to grow more than 3 percent in the second half of this year and residential investment continuing as a source of strength for the economy. While the data for private domestic final purchases suggest little spillover from foreign developments to the domestic economy, strong domestic final demand has been needed to offset the greater-than-expected weakness in exports and inventories.  The effects of the appreciating dollar and continued disappointing economic growth among trading partners are largely responsible for our bank’s forecast of growth over the next six quarters only a bit faster than 2 percent. With relatively sluggish productivity growth holding potential down, this pace of growth should gradually diminish the remaining labor market slack.  And relatively slow  economic growth should also give us the flexibility to raise rates very gradually—possibly closer to current market expectations than to our last median SEP. Financial markets have recovered some of their lost ground, helped by policy easing abroad.  Boston staff analysis of stock market movements since the middle of August finds little effect on the stock prices of firms with large foreign exposure.  Firms with a larger share of shipments abroad generally—or, more specifically, with significant trade with China—registered cumulative stock price changes that were virtually unchanged from the middle of August to the end of September.  And since that time, stock markets have improved somewhat more.  With the recovery in stock markets since the August tumult and no notable effect on firms with the largest exposure to foreign trade, it is not surprising that the U.S. economy has not suffered the potential collateral damage that encouraged us to defer the onset of tightening at our September meeting. With my forecast projecting the unemployment rate to decline to 5 percent by the end of the year and continuing to decline in 2016, I am now reasonably confident that inflation will gradually move to 2 percent.  While core PCE inflation is still well below our target, recent price data do seem consistent with some firming since earlier this year. And while we have consistently overestimated how quickly inflation will return to 2 percent, we have also consistently underestimated how quickly the unemployment rate would decline. While U-3 is nearly at its full employment level, the broader U-6 measure is not yet back to normal.  And although U-6 has declined to 10 percent, it still needs to decline further.  Work by my staff looking at U-6 and U-3 reveals that both remain elevated in some states relative to the period before the recession, consistent with our position that some slack remains in labor markets. It is noteworthy that, in states in which U-3 has normalized, U-6 is still running above its pre-recession levels. This may suggest that at least some of the elevated spread between U-6 and U-3 will be more persistent. In summary, while I believe we are still somewhat above the natural rate of unemployment and I am comfortable probing a bit lower for it, especially given the low readings on inflation, I also recognize that we are already at or below the natural-rate estimates of many Committee members.  Given the amount of monetary stimulus from low interest rates and our hefty balance sheet, I do not want unemployment to undershoot significantly our estimate of the natural rate of unemployment.  Because we have significantly underestimated the speed at which the unemployment rate has declined over the past four to five years, we need to be cognizant of the risk that labor markets could tighten more quickly as well as more slowly than we are currently anticipating.  Tomorrow, I will discuss the implications of that heightened risk.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is giving their viewpoint on the current state of the economy and expressing confidence in their forecast. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 162.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our District, like the nation, has seen a step down in economic growth.  Job growth has pretty much stalled, and manufacturing has declined.  However, retail sales, especially those at auto dealers, remain strong.  There is a high degree of confidence among both consumers and firms, and unemployment insurance claims are down.  Overall, I would still categorize economic growth in the Third District as modest. Employment growth slowed in both August and September, and unemployment has remained flat.  Participation rates have remained flat over the past year as well.  Indicators of Third District manufacturing activity have also indicated weakness.  The current activity index in our manufacturing Business Outlook Survey was negative for the second month in a row, and it   displayed substantial weakness in all of the subindustries as well. Although manufacturers remain optimistic, it is safe to say they are currently hurting a bit.  Meanwhile, the service sector is performing much more strongly than manufacturing.  In our nonmanufacturing Business Outlook Survey, employment bounced back strongly in October, and the index is solidly in positive territory.  The general activity index in the October survey rebounded after a relatively weak summer, and respondents remain optimistic.  Sales of light vehicles are at near-record levels, and bank lending has been growing rapidly.  Regarding real estate, growth in both residential and nonresidential construction lags that of the nation, and house prices continue to rise more slowly as well.  The exception is the Philadelphia area. With respect to price pressures, the prices received index has resurfaced from negative territory, and both future prices paid and received have entered positive territory.  So while there is no evidence of rapid price increases, disinflationary pressures appear to be waning. Turning to the nation as a whole, I believe the real economy remains healthy overall, even though economic growth has slowed somewhat.  Although it is not totally unscathed, the economy appears to have weathered the significant late summer decline in stock prices, the temporary increase in financial market volatility, the effects of weakening growth in China, the fall in oil prices, and an appreciation of the dollar.  Further, the waning in price pressures appears to be a temporary phenomenon, and I am somewhat more confident that inflation will gradually firm in the coming months.  Thus, I agree for the most part with the Board staff’s assessment of the economy. The Committee is placing a lot emphasis on labor market conditions in its assessment of when to begin policy normalization, and I would like to suggest an examination of how the Affordable Care Act may be affecting some of the measures we look at—namely, wage   pressures and the number of involuntary part-time workers. A number of recent papers investigate how that law is affecting these variables, and some of that research is being done in our own research department.  While there is certainly no consensus on the magnitude or the nature of the increase in part-time work that is ensuing as a result of the ACA, the legislation represents a significant change in the labor market landscape. I’m thinking here of research by Aizawa and Fang, Nakajima and Tüzemen, Even and McPherson, and Mulligan.  This research points to the possibility that the ACA is increasing the prevalence of part-time work in the economy and may have caused an increase in the incidence of U-6 unemployment.  I believe we should keep this growing body of research on the ACA in mind when assessing labor market conditions. The labor market of the future may not, and probably will not, look exactly like the labor market of the past.  Thus, the wage growth we are experiencing may indicate a healthier labor market than we think, and the somewhat larger than historical difference between U-6 and U-3 may be due in part to a structural transformation in the labor market.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Harker, is simply presenting various economic indicators and observations.


Passage number 163.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data suggest that economic activity has slowed a bit since midyear.  Payroll job gains have eased from 210,000 per month in the first half to 170,000 per month in the third quarter, with 180,000 expected for the fourth quarter.  GDP growth has stepped down just a little bit, from a 2¼ percent rate in the first half to an expectation of a 1¾ percent rate in the second half. Despite that, I see the underlying economic growth narrative as generally intact.  And that narrative is based on continued strong growth of private domestic final purchases in the range of about 3 percent, underpinned by the strong job gains of the past three years, increases in real  income, continued gradual healing in housing markets, and improved household confidence.  That rate of growth should also mean continued job creation at a pace that will materially reduce labor market slack. The drag on GDP growth generated by the downshift in inventory investment is likely a one-off event.  Activity is likely to pick up in the current quarter.  The drag arising from net exports will continue for a while longer but should begin to fade next year if the dollar roughly stabilizes. I am also a bit more confident in the outlook than I was at the last meeting.  The September meeting followed a month of rising uncertainty about prospects in China and the emerging markets and was accompanied by substantial financial turmoil.  At that time, I did not see that the modal outlook had changed, but rather that the chances of realizing downside cases had increased.  And many emerging markets, of course, remain vulnerable to slower growth in China, lower commodity prices, and substantial leverage.  But the risk of an emerging market– driven crisis that would have substantially affected U.S. economic growth seems to me to have receded. Most importantly, the data have reinforced the view that China is not facing a hard landing.  Mutual fund outflows from emerging market funds have stopped for now, corporate debt spreads have declined, most EME stock markets are up since the September FOMC, and their currencies have, for now, appreciated against the dollar. Average hourly earnings, the only piece of wage data that we received during the intermeeting period, rose at a 2¼ percent pace over the 12 months ending in September, the same pace as in the previous 12 months.  There has been much discussion about the lack of acceleration in wages and what it might mean, and the memo on wages and slack did an excellent job of reviewing what we can and cannot glean from wage data. The paper’s basic finding is that, under current staff assumptions regarding trend inflation, structural productivity  growth, and the natural rate of unemployment, wages are not growing unusually slowly.  The underlying narrative is that the effects of declining slack and disappointing productivity are more or less offsetting. But the model uses averages of productivity growth over fairly long periods of time as its benchmark for the trend.  If, by contrast, actual businesses were looking at shorter-term trends, which I suspect might be the case, then one could argue that wage growth is relatively high, as productivity has for a number of years been well below the 1½ percent trend used by the model.  That would also imply that the natural rate of unemployment would be higher.  To be clear, I’m not arguing that; I’m just suggesting that the risks seem to me to be well balanced on both sides. In addition, as recently shown in a paper by Ekaterina Peneva and Jeremy Rudd, as well as many other papers over the years, wages have not been a reliable predictor of price inflation for a long time.  The implication of all that is that the FOMC should not be using nominal or real wages as a litmus test but should instead monitor them, as they may provide some information about the natural rate of unemployment. Turning to inflation:  The picture is slightly improved since our September meeting, with a bit more inflation over the second half of the year.  The Tealbook has 1.4 percent core inflation in both Q3 and Q4 despite residual seasonality, so the true underlying number could be a bit higher.  If you more or less mechanically add onto that number the effect of import prices and a little bit of leakage through from lower oil prices—a total of 30 basis points or so—one could easily see underlying core inflation as running in the range of 1¾ percent.  And from there, it requires no great leap of faith for me to see inflation returning to 2 percent over the medium term once these transitory factors recede provided, critically, that resource utilization continues to tighten.   A key question for me is whether economic growth will continue to be materially above trend for some time.  With some slack remaining in the economy and with inflation below target, we need above-trend growth to continue the healing process.  And while I expect economic growth to be above trend, the margin is not a large one.  This question, which I will return to tomorrow, has important implications for policy, and I hope for some intermeeting clarity from the data—perhaps yet another example of the triumph of hope over experience.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Powell, is providing an analysis of the current economic situation and expressing his confidence in the outlook.


Passage number 164.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In my remarks on the economic situation in the past few meetings, I have said I believed that we were closing in on full employment, and that I was reasonably confident inflation would rise to 2 percent in the medium term. Well, those statements are still true, but they may not be as firmly held as they were in September in light of the two most recent job market reports.  So I’d like to discuss the two main issues I will be watching most in the coming weeks as we decide what we want to do in December. The first and most important issue is whether the economy is continuing to expand.  There would be two reasons for concern if the economy is stalling.  First, if it is stalling, we will need to be thinking about instituting some expansionary monetary policy, and that wouldn’t be consistent with raising the interest rate.  Second, if the economy is stalling, I would be becoming less confident that we will reach our 2 percent inflation goal as soon as I would like.  So that is the critical concern. Although the macro data have been indicating further expansion almost all year, the most recent two labor reports were not encouraging.  And in the next couple of months, I’d like to see payrolls rise by at least enough to keep the unemployment rate steady and perhaps fallingslightly.  I would also like to be sure before the end of tomorrow that we have a good idea of what the figure for maintaining the unemployment rate steady will be, and I think we should all hear from the staff on what those numbers would be.  Ideally, we might also get some upward revisions to weak August and September readings.  This seems possible because domestic demand, particularly consumption and business investment spending, appears to be holding up quite well.  So that’s the main issue that we should be looking at. Thinking about all that, one of the things I like about these meetings is listening to the presidents tell us what is going on in their Districts.  And I am impressed that an increasing number of presidents think that whatever is going on in their Districts suggests that we should raise the discount rate.  Of course, not every president who has spoken so far today has reported improvements in economic developments in their District. I thought President Harker was, at best, balanced and possibly reported a slight negative trend.  But for those who remember that Texas is key to economic growth in the United States—something we all learned previously— economic activity is growing again in the—what is that, the Eighth District.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily focused on discussing economic indicators and the speaker's own assessment of the economic situation.


Passage number 165.
  [Laughter] MR. KAPLAN.  I think it is still the 11th District.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply shares their belief or opinion about the 11th District.


Passage number 166.
 MR. FISCHER.  Still the 11th.  Of course.  I didn’t know you were so far away. CHAIR YELLEN. The Twelfth is very large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Fischer is simply expressing surprise at learning that they are so far away, and Chair Yellen explains that the Twelfth is a large area.


Passage number 167.
 MR. FISCHER.  Do you think they did that to make the Texans mad, that they’re not the biggest District. CHAIR YELLEN.  There wasn’t that much out there 100 years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 168.
  [Laughter] MR. FISCHER.  Anyway, I’m glad that Texas is growing again, so that the world is coming back to normal in that respect.   The second issue relates to wage growth. When talking about prices, I keep being bothered about the emphasis that is placed on wage growth and why it hasn’t risen.  I read with interest the memo that was sent to us by Deb Lindner, John Roberts, and Bill Wascher on compensation and labor market slack.  I thought the memo was remarkably clear, and I was particularly struck by their specification of the wage equation, which showed wage growth depending, inter alia, on a weighted moving average of structural productivity growth.  With structural productivity growth having been so weak in recent years, it is probably not surprising that we are seeing disappointing real wage growth.  That is, on the demand side, it’s hard to see why, when productivity is barely rising, real wages would be expected to be rising at any significant rate. Having said that, there may nonetheless be more wage gains occurring in the economy than we are seeing in our favorite wage measures.  The Lindner, Roberts, and Wascher memo showed in its figure 6 that some measures of wage pressures have been rising more robustly than the employment cost index and average hourly earnings.  And in March, we had an alternative-view Tealbook box in which Jeremy Nalewaik showed that these alternative measures do a pretty good job of predicting current-year growth of the wages and salaries component of compensation per hour.  We are also aware that the actual data on compensation per hour are often subject to large revisions of their initial estimates. We have also seen the forecast, which I have mentioned several times today—and I apologize if I keep coming back to it—that the staff is predicting labor productivity growth, which includes the effect of capital deepening, will return to 1½ percent per annum next year.  And that would indicate some moving up of wages and perhaps some pressure on prices.  So I continue to expect that we will see inflation moving toward our target before too long.I still believe we are meeting the criteria that the labor market continues to strengthen. Subject to discussions on how much it takes to keep it at the same level of strength as it is now, we will be able to see that in the data early next month and then early in December.  I do believe that we are going to see inflation rising toward 2 percent in the medium run, but we will come back to several of these issues tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and beliefs on various topics, but there is no opposition or contradiction being presented.


Passage number 169.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  With the exception of the state of Colorado, the pace of economic activity in the 10th District has slowed compared with the nation. While unemployment rates remain low in most District states, employment growth is flat or down over the past six months due to weakness in energy and agriculture, which appears to now be spilling over into other sectors. In the energy sector, our District energy survey paints a picture of continued headwinds.  With the breakeven price of oil at around $60, District firms are not expecting a return to profitability for some time. As a result, capital spending plans are being downgraded and firms continue to shed workers, though anecdotal evidence suggests that some displaced workers are finding jobs in sectors such as aerospace. Some District energy companies have faced credit downgrades, and one company recently filed for bankruptcy in an attempt to shed around $3 billion in debt from its balance sheet. Conditions in the District’s agriculture sector also remain soft.  Cattle prices, which had been holding up, have declined, and prices for commodities such as wheat and corn remain low.  Overall, weakening farm income has led to increased borrowing by farmers and less capital spending.  Finally, weak demand for exports has weighed on manufacturing activity, which, according to our District manufacturing survey, has declined for eight straight months.  These business contacts point to international conditions as a primary factor weighing on demand for their products. For the national economy, I expect economic growth to average around 2 percent in the second half of 2015 before moving up to around 2¾ percent next year.  The drag due to the behavior of net exports is likely to continue to weigh on headline growth.  Otherwise, growth in private domestic demand has been running at more than 3½ percent for more than a year, a pace that looks to have continued and possibly strengthened in the third quarter.  Given demographic and productivity trends, I view this pace of domestic growth as quite robust. Consumer spending, of course, has been a driving factor.  Notwithstanding the sluggishness of core retail sales in recent months, they increased at a solid pace in the third quarter.  Vehicle sales and consumer confidence remain at high levels.  The momentum in consumer spending appears broad based, and growth in real PCE has steadily picked up over the past few years.  For example, the year-over-year growth in consumer spending was about 1.3 percent at the end of 2012.  Now it’s running at 3.3 percent. In contrast, net exports have weighed on the outlook, and I see them subtracting about ¾ percentage point from GDP growth this year, reflecting the stronger dollar and soft foreign economic growth.  Because this forecast has taken developments in recent months in financial and international markets on board, I view the risk from abroad as currently balanced.  Along these lines, domestic and foreign financial markets have largely stabilized since our previous meeting. The recent deceleration of payroll employment growth bears watching in coming months, but we have seen such bumps before, most recently this March.  So it’s hard to judge whether this deceleration stems from the start of a more general slump in economic activity or slowing momentum in the pace of employment gains.  Given the momentum we’ve experienced over the past two years, I do expect some moderation in the monthly pace of payroll growth over the next year to below 200,000 because of demographic factors and the fact that the economy is likely close to full employment.  Even if the slower pace of the past two months continues in the next two employment reports, such a pace would continue to comfortably exceed the minimum growth necessary to continue reducing labor market slack. Of course, the slowing in employment growth would be more concerning if measures of unemployment were rising.  That said, initial claims are currently very low, at levels last reached in 1973, and the U-6 broad unemployment rate continues to make steady downward progress.  While most measures of labor market slack have shown significant improvement over the past two years and suggest that only a modest amount remains, some have pointed to lingering concerns that persistently low levels of nominal wage growth are indicative of higher levels of slack.  Recent research by my staff aligns with the findings in the Board staff memo showing that current measures of wage growth are in line with readings from our main labor market indicators. Using the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s labor market index as a broad measure of labor market conditions, the analysis found that a model of real wage growth based on this index and labor productivity predicts real wage growth consistent with actual real nominal wage growth.  This leads me to believe that the current low level of real wage growth is related more to weak productivity growth and not necessarily to hidden slack.Finally, turning to inflation, the foreign exchange value of the dollar and energy price movements have been primary factors affecting my outlook.  While core inflation remains somewhat low, it has been stable in 2015.  The 12-month change in the core PCE index has stayed at 1.3 percent since January, even amid further appreciation of the dollar and additional declines in energy prices.  This may suggest that diminishing slack has been compensating for downward pressure arising from these temporary factors.  If so, as the effects of these temporary factors fade, it would seem reasonable to expect that both headline and core inflation will begin to move toward our 2 percent goal.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an analysis of the current economic conditions in the 10th District and making predictions for future economic growth.


Passage number 170.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 171.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My views on the economy haven’t changed much since the September meeting.  The good news is that domestic final sales still seem to be rising relatively briskly, and the rise appears to be broad based.  Consumption, housing, and business fixed investment all seem to be growing at a respectable pace. The bad news, though, is that the economy may be downshifting to a somewhat slower overall growth pace.  As many people have mentioned, inventory drag is going to be a big factor in the weakness we see in the third quarter, and net trade is not only going to be a drag in the third quarter, it’s going to be a drag for many quarters to come. The improvement in labor market conditions, at least measured by the Board’s broad-based measures, stalled out in September, but it’s unclear to me whether this is a one-time blip or the start of a new phase in which payroll gains slow and the improvement in the labor market grinds to a halt. It seems to me that labor market developments over the next two months are going to be very important in assessing whether the timing is right for liftoff in December. The key question for me is, will the slowdown in economic growth that I think we’re seeing lead to lower payroll gains, and will those lower payroll gains, in turn, lead to weaker consumption growth.  A number of people have postulated that consumption will stay strong regardless, but if you have a weaker economy leading to lower payroll gains, there’ll be less income, and I start to worry about how that dynamic will play out. I think the downside risks to the outlook arising from overseas developments have subsided.  It is noteworthy that we actually do see real GDP growth abroad finally accelerating in the third quarter, compared with the second quarter.  And although the level of market stress increased very sharply late this summer, I think it is quite significant that even though we really ratcheted up the degree of stress, nothing of significance seems to have broken in response to that stress. This is important because the way that a situation like this gets out of hand, as we saw in 2008 and 2009, is that stress causes things to break, which creates more stress, and events start to unfold in a very bad way.  I think the fact that equity prices in emerging markets have rebounded quite significantly in recent weeks is also significant.  The big question I have with respect to that is, how much of that improvement is due to the fact that nothing is broken, which some people are taking some comfort from, and how much is due to the fact that there’s been a shift in expectations about our own policy rate path.  And, at this point, I just don’t know the answer to that.  Nevertheless, it is a positive development. On the inflation side, I think the news has been relatively constructive in the sense that the core rate of inflation has been broadly stable despite the downward impetus to commodity prices due to the behavior of the U.S. dollar.  Although we haven’t seen any meaningful uptick in nominal wage growth, I think the anecdotal reports are generally consistent with emerging pressures.  For example, you hear the story about the truck drivers almost everywhere at this point.  But we need to be careful about the inference that we take away from the fact that nominal wage growth has not picked up.  I found the staff memo on compensation and labor market slack very helpful in terms of my own thinking.  And I agree that it’s certainly possible that the wage gains have been restrained because headline inflation has fallen and productivity growth has faltered, and that those two factors may be offsetting the effect of a labor market that is, in fact, closing in on full employment.  What I take away from that is, one, I’m pretty uncertain, and, two, as a consequence I wouldn’t be comfortable making a pickup in wages a necessary condition for liftoff.  The pressure may already be there, but we’re just not seeing it in the aggregate data because the upward pressure has been offset by these other factors that are restraining nominal wage growth. The fly in the ointment on the inflation side, which people haven’t really commented on very much, is the persistent decline in inflation compensation.  I understand why inflation compensation is coming down over the near term because of the weakness in oil prices and other commodity prices, but the persistent declines in the five-year, five-year-forward measures are more difficult to explain and, therefore, more troubling.  Although I don’t have any reason to dispute the model results—that this is mostly about the liquidity risk premium and what people are willing to pay for inflation protection—I do have some anxiety that we’re putting a lot of weight on particular models to disentangle the sources of the decline in inflation compensation.  The fact that some of the models are constructed in such a way that they beg the conclusion and push that weight onto liquidity risk and the price of inflation protection makes me a bit more concerned.  So I wouldn’t want to dismiss the decline in five-year, five-year-forward inflation compensation altogether. I think what I need to see is economic data that make me comfortable that the economy is likely to continue to grow at an above-trend pace in 2016, that core inflation is flat or rising, and that inflation expectations are well anchored.  If I see that, I think we can definitely justify liftoff and probably justify a liftoff at the next meeting. I do think, though, that we need to talk about alternatives to that scenario, and I’m going to talk tomorrow a little bit about what should happen if the economy should fall meaningfully short of the baseline forecast.  I do think we need a Plan B for monetary policy in case the economy disappoints, because if we don’t lift off in December, the next question for the Chair is  going to be, what happens if the economy continues to weaken, and what are you actually prepared to do about it. And I really don’t think we’ve had that conversation around the Committee table yet to a sufficient degree.  I think this is very important, and I very much welcome your thoughts on that tomorrow.  I’m going to go at the very end, as I always do, but if you have anything to say earlier, I’d love to hear what you think we should do if the economy disappoints and we don’t lift off in December, because I think we need to have an answer. Narayana, maybe you’ll have a few thoughts on that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Let me turn it over to you, President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their views on the economy and discussing various factors and uncertainties.


Passage number 172.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I guess it’s a first for me to go last in this round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is going last in a round of speaking.


Passage number 173.
 MR. TARULLO.  It’s the first and last for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply referring to a specific event (the first and last) for the person he is addressing.


Passage number 174.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but as an AI text-based model, I cannot perceive the content of the passage you are referring to. Please provide the passage or more context so I can assist you further.


Passage number 175.
 WILLIAMS. This is President Kocherlakota’s last meeting, and I know he would be very disappointed if I didn’t contradict him contradicting me.  [Laughter]  I do think we know more about why labor force participation for prime-age men and women is low.  If you compare the shift by age of those outside the labor force between1999 with 2014, and look at the answers to the question of why they are outside the labor force, there has been a significant increase in the number of people who designate themselves as disabled or retired, people who are taking care of family, and people in school.  There are a lot of reasons for these “deltas” in relation to 1999. If you look at the groups that want a job but are not in the labor force and ask why they aren’t in the labor force, those are higher.  But, again, this is the reason the staff looked at this very carefully.  It’s not a very big group, and it has changed very little.  The other group that is not explained is not part of this group at all.  In the survey responses, the answer to the question “why are fewer prime-age people in the labor force relative to 1999, which was a very strong economy.” is basically that the number of those disabled and retired has increased.  I suppose the question I have is, can monetary policy change that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their own perspective and questioning whether monetary policy can address the issue.


Passage number 176.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Madam Chair, may I answer President Williams’s question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply asking for permission to answer a question posed by President Williams, and Chair Yellen is granting him the permission to do so.


Passage number 177.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  The answer is “yes,” President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person speaking simply agrees with President Williams.


Passage number 178.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 179.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  I feel better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing gratitude and a personal feeling of improvement.


Passage number 180.
  [Laughter]   MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’ll say a couple of things by way of response.  I think this information is very valuable, first of all, and I think it’s important to keep in mind.  With that said, when you look into the flows, as your staff does so ably, you do see that people who have no interest in getting a job do transit to a job all the time.  And I think that’s important to keep in mind.  The question for us is, how much of an inflation cost do we have to pay to bring these folks back into the labor force.  When I look at men aged 25 to 34, maybe you’re happy with their being retired from the labor market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees that the information is valuable and acknowledges that people who have no interest in getting a job sometimes transition to a job.


Passage number 181.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 182.
 WILLIAMS.  They’re in school, which you should like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by the speaker (WILLIAMS) is straightforward and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 183.
 MR. KAMIN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This morning we received the advance trade release for September.  This was a release just for the goods part of trade in goods and services.  The full report comes a few days later. But in this release, September exports came in strong, and stronger than we were expecting.  Imports fell more than we were expecting.  All told, that leads to a smaller drag in the third quarter of net exports on GDP growth.  So we’ve revised from a drag in the October Tealbook of minus 0.6 percentage point to a much smaller drag of about 0.1 percentage point in the third quarter.  That said, first, these data for trade in goods are going to be subject to some further revision. Second, when we receive trade data and parse them through to look at the effect on GDP, we also take into account any other responses to inventories and things like that.  And then, finally, we have yet to receive the data on services.  So this is a very preliminary estimate, but right now, we’re looking at a smaller drag on net exports in the third quarter.  I’ll be happy to take any questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the recent trade release and its potential impact on GDP growth.


Passage number 184.
 MR. TARULLO.  How many airplanes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question being asked.


Passage number 185.
 MR. KAMIN.  These data are preliminary, and we just received them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the data being preliminary and recently received.


Passage number 186.
 MR. TARULLO.  So you don’t have the disaggregation of aircraft sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 187.
 MR. KAMIN.  We don’t have the disaggregated data at that level of granularity.  I understand from our very first snapshot that the strength in exports was concentrated in consumer goods, but that’s all we know at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kamin is simply stating that they do not have detailed data at a granular level and providing the information they do have about the strength in exports being concentrated in consumer goods.


Passage number 188.
 MR. LEBOW. Whereas I mentioned in my remarks yesterday that the 1½ percent number we had in the Tealbook for our estimate of GDP growth in the third quarter was now at  ¼ because of incoming data on the advanced durables and a couple of other small pieces, this news would put us back at 1½ percent. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Let’s get started on monetary policy, and I’ll turn to Thomas for his briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lebow is informing the group about a change in the estimated GDP growth and Chair Yellen simply acknowledges the information and proceeds with the meeting.


Passage number 189.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thomas, I want to ask a question about exhibit 1.  It’s always hard to know exactly how much to make of the dots that you show because we don’t really identify who the dots are.  I do think we have a missed opportunity, in that we   don’t share with each other the identities of our explanations. It would be so much more effective if I could associate the good explanations that I read in the SEP with everybody’s commentary.  But, having said that, on these calculations in the second row, is it the case that the relative ordering of people’s funds rate dots is largely preserved. Is there something about your IS calculation that scrambles the identities around very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Evans asking a question and expressing a desire for more information or clarification.


Passage number 190.
 MR. LAUBACH. There can be instances, actually, in which they are being scrambled, because it really depends very much on your projected path for the unemployment gap.  You can have someone who has, say, a relatively high federal funds rate but who has a very shallow unemployment rate path.  Therefore, actually, that person sees very little accommodation, whereas you could have somebody who still has a relatively low unemployment rate but sees a sharp decline in the unemployment rate and, consequently, must see a whole lot of accommodation.  That’s basically the approach to backing out the estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement explaining how the amount of accommodation needed can vary depending on the projected path for the unemployment rate.


Passage number 191.
 MR. EVANS. Is there a lot of that action, then. In principle, I can see that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans is simply asking a question and expressing his understanding of a situation.


Passage number 192.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I’d really have to go dot by dot to give you a good answer of how high the correlation is between departures of r* estimates from the median and departures of funds rates from the median.  I think that’s what you would like to know.  I’ll get back to you on that. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a response to a question with the speaker stating that they would need to analyze the data further to give a more accurate answer.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
 MR. BULLARD. Yes, I have a comment on exhibit 1.  This is interpreting people through the lens of this particular model.  People could have other materially different models that have very different implications for the real rate of interest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that people could have other materially different models that have very different implications for the real rate of interest, implying that there might be opposing viewpoints or conflicting interpretations of the given model.


Passage number 194.
 MR. LAUBACH. Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Absolutely" as a response to something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 195.
 MR. BULLARD.  I think it’s interesting to look at this, but it’s not clear that everyone is using exactly this model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "it's not clear that everyone is using exactly this model" suggests that there is a lack of consensus or agreement among the individuals being referred to.


Passage number 196.
  MR. LAUBACH.  I’m fairly confident that this is not the model that everyone used.  [Laughter]  If I may say, it is, of course, based on an estimated historical relationship.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Laubach is simply expressing his confidence that not everyone used the same model, and it is followed by laughter, which suggests a lighthearted tone.


Passage number 197.
 MR. BULLARD. There are other models that would have different implications that are also based on estimated historical relationships.  So there are a lot of assumptions about how you’re going to interpret the data. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating that there are alternative models with different implications and assumptions, while Chair Yellen is acknowledging President Kocherlakota's presence.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 198.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m going to turn to exhibit 2 and the panel on alternative B.  The last bullet says that alternative B leaves the Committee “wide latitude” at the December meeting.  When we discussed the changes in language in alternative B, particularly paragraph 3, at the Minneapolis Reserve Bank, we were concerned that those changes did not leave the Committee with a lot of latitude at the December meeting. Let me explain our thinking on that.  If the Committee were writing the very first FOMC statement of all time, it would be true that considerable latitude would be left by that language at the December meeting.  That is not the case.  The Committee is choosing with intention to bring up a specific reference to the next meeting at this time. Our concern was that it would be read by market participants as signaling a relatively strong intention on the Committee’s part to initiate liftoff in December. Clearly, the staff here had a different perspective on this.  I’d be interested in hearing your thoughts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is disagreement between Mr. Kocherlakota and the staff on the interpretation of the language in alternative B. Mr. Kocherlakota argues that the language suggests a strong intention to initiate liftoff in December, while the staff has a different perspective.


Passage number 199.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I’ll be glad to share my perspective. A literal reading of this red language is, in my view, desirably agnostic because, effectively, all it states is that the Committee is going to wrestle with this question at the December meeting.  That, of course, should come as a surprise to no one. There is nothing here that says anything about the likely timing of the liftoff itself.  It is only about how, at that meeting, the question will be on the table.   Now, I understand that the literal reading is one thing and what it’s taken to signal is a very different one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward explanation of the speaker's perspective on the red language and its implications.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I think I would grant your literal reading, but it’s really about the choice to make the change to this particular wording at this time, signaling an intention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement about the choice to make a specific change in wording at a particular time, which suggests contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 201.
 MR. LAUBACH. One question is whether the public will look at this and say, “Well, they could have said it a lot more pointedly, but they chose to say something fairly hands-off.” So it at least admits the interpretation that the FOMC is not yet very certain that it will want to lift off at the December meeting.”  But how this will be interpreted by market participants, for example, is very difficult for me to predict.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is discussing the potential disagreement between the public's interpretation of the FOMC's statement and the speaker's own prediction of how market participants will interpret it.


Passage number 202.
 MR. POTTER.  I would add one thing.  I think the market or the public, however you want to say it, knows that we know that they’re not expecting large changes to paragraph 3.  So the fact that they know that we know suggests that there is some signal in that if people understand it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a belief or understanding regarding the expectations of the market or public.


Passage number 203.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Well, the changes are clearly designed to put December on the table to some degree, and the question is, how much signal does the market want to take from that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that changes have been made to make December an option and is questioning how much significance the market will give to those changes.


Passage number 204.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, that was President Kocherlakota’s point, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter agrees with President Kocherlakota's point.


Passage number 205.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. There is some uncertainty about how the market will actually take this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there is uncertainty about how the market will react.


Passage number 206.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  My staff and I felt that December is already on the table to a certain extent. I think that’s consistent with the surveys, et cetera.  Then the question is, given that December is already on the table in the minds of those from the survey and the peoplewho are betting with their money in the markets, what is the intent of the Committee in adding this additional language at this time.  How people will interpret our intent is one of the questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the possibility of adding additional language and questioning the intent of the Committee, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 207.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think the expectation is that it would push the probability expectation up somewhat, but because it is agnostic in its true language, the expectation is not that much.  Simon, what is the probability today—roughly 30 percent for December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement. The statement is expressing a personal belief about the expectation of a probability, and there are no conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 208.
 MR. POTTER.  Somewhere between 30 and 40.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a numerical range without any conflicting opinions or statements.


Passage number 209.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It’s 30 to 40 percent.  So maybe it takes it to 40 to 50. But we don’t really know, and that’s the hard part of the parsing we do.  Does the market look at it with a literal interpretation, or does the market say, “Oh, gee, you changed this, and therefore you’re trying to provide a signal.” I think there’s a range of uncertainty about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the uncertainty and lack of knowledge regarding how the market interprets certain changes. There is no clear contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 210.
 MR. LAUBACH. What might also be helpful is the insertion of “based on incoming data.”  Again, this should come as news to nobody, but my sense is that this can be read as saying that it really depends on the data that will be received between now and your December meeting. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Laubach is suggesting a potential addition to a statement, and Chair Yellen is responding with an agreement and interpretation of the suggested addition.


Passage number 211.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Madam Chair, it’s worth mentioning, I think, that you have some opportunities to elaborate further in the next few days. CHAIR YELLEN. Next week, I will be testifying on supervision before the House Financial Services Committee, but, of course, during the hearing I might be asked questions about monetary policy.  Then, in early December—a couple of days before the November employment report comes out—I’m going to give a speech on the outlook and monetary policy,and the next day, I’m testifying on the economy and monetary policy before the JEC.  So I will have some opportunities and, arguably, one in the very near term, at least next week, if there seems to be some misinterpretation of what’s happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply describes future opportunities for the speaker to elaborate on certain topics.


Passage number 212.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think the intent here is to make people view this as possible, not probable.  If, for some reason, the market reacts that this is probable as opposed to possible, we’re going to have to communicate in a way that makes clear that what this language is meant to mean is “possible,” not “probable.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the intent and possible interpretation of certain language.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 213.
 MS. BRAINARD. On the same point, I also reacted to the “wide latitude” as perhaps a little out of context with what I’ve been reading in the market newsletters, which have been looking very carefully at this language.  If we say “whether it will be appropriate to raise the target range . . . , the Committee will, based on . . . ,” I think that will be seen as a lean and as providing wide latitude.  When we also add “later this year” or “at its next meeting,” that closes the latitude a bit and leans even further.  So it’s a question at this juncture as to whether that additional precision regarding “at its next meeting” and “later this year” really does not just boost the probabilities—something that I understand is the intent here—but also locks us into something that we then will need to try to figure out how to exit, if the world doesn’t turn out the way we expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage. Ms. Brainard is expressing disagreement with the idea of providing more specific language regarding the timing of a potential increase in the target range. She argues that this could limit the flexibility of the committee and potentially create difficulties in the future if the expected conditions do not materialize.


Passage number 214.
 MR. LAUBACH. From my perspective, the hardest piece is to anticipate how the markets will interpret what the incoming data say about the likelihood of liftoff.  That is, suppose we get middling employment reports.  The world is easy if you get very strong or very weak ones.  If you get middling reports, how will they be read.  What inference will market participants draw:  “Is this good enough, or is it not good enough.”  All this language can do isto point to the fact that your mind is not made up one way or the other.  In that regard, the “based on incoming data” is helpful. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 215.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 216.
 WILLIAMS.  I’m going to pick up on a point, which I completely agree with, that Governor Tarullo made yesterday, and that’s about this issue of “based on incoming data.” I have no problem with the sentence. It is a compromise.  It’s an uncomfortable compromise for me but perhaps on the opposite side of some of the concerns that were just raised.  But this “based on incoming data” does, I think, feed right into the point Governor Tarullo made yesterday.  I’m a big believer in data dependence.  I absolutely love the phrase “assess progress—both realized and expected—toward its objectives,” because it is a medium-term outlook and it is about our objectives.  When you say “based on incoming data,” we have to accept that we are falling, in my view, into the trap that Governor Tarullo talked about, in which everybody is going to be looking at one employment report and the next employment report, looking for each and every one of us to focus on whichever data release it is. The reality is, we have to say, as I’ve had to do in every interview I’ve done and every speech I’ve done, “I’m not going to say anything about this employment report, these trade data, or whatever piece of news comes out that morning.  I’m going to talk about the medium-term outlook in terms of our progress—both realized and expected—toward our goals.” I do think that when you put in a phrase that says “based on incoming data,” we are just priming everybody to react to these specific short-term noisy data.  I’m not saying that we will do that.  I hope we will look at it through the lens of, what does it mean for the next year or two.  But what this phrase is telling people to do is to look at the couple of data points that are comingup. Again, it’s a compromise.  It’s an attempt, as I think Thomas nicely explained, to have your cake and eat it, too.  But that’s just the cost of this. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Williams, is discussing his agreement with a point made by Governor Tarullo and expressing his own opinions on the topic. He acknowledges that the phrase "based on incoming data" may lead to a focus on short-term noisy data, but ultimately acknowledges it as a compromise.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 217.
 MR. ROSENGREN. I have two quick observations.  I do think, like Governor Brainard, that if we say “at its next meeting,” that indicates “probable,” not “possible.”  If we actually want “possible,” something like “soon” would be a fuzzed-up word.  I think we have to distinguish between what we would prefer and what we think we’re signaling.  I would prefer to say “at its next meeting,” because I’d rather make it probable.  But if the goal is to make it possible, I would probably just say “soon.”  Everybody can have a different view of the English connected with this, but I do think that, when you add a specificity of “at its next meeting,” it focuses the attention and the rest of the caveats get lost. That’s just my own view of the English.  After the go-round, we can get a sense of where the Committee is on that. The question I had was on alternative C. Assuming that the economic conditions come in such that we actually are planning on taking action at the December meeting, I’m wondering whether the language in alternative C gives enough information about the rate path.  If part of the goal would be, in effect, a dovish first tightening—which is to say, we are tightening, but the path we’re taking is expected to be very gradual—I’m not sure the current version of C conveys that to the extent that I might want. So, as you’re thinking about the next meeting, if it does seem to be appropriate, I’d suggest maybe rethinking that paragraph a little bit to more strongly indicate the path. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Governor Rosengren disagrees with the use of the phrase "at its next meeting" and suggests using the word "soon" instead to convey a possibility rather than a probability. He also expresses concern that alternative C does not convey a dovish first tightening path.


Passage number 218.
 MR. ROSENGREN. Right now, I’m not sure I could deduce what the path or the likely path is from the language.  If that’s the intent—to signal the path—then we might want to craft some language that does that. CHAIR YELLEN. Are there any further questions.  Okay.  Let’s begin the go-round. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are unsure about the path or likely path and suggests crafting some language to clarify. The response is a request for further questions.


Passage number 219.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Madam Chair, it has been an enormous honor to serve with my colleagues around this table under your leadership.  I wish all of you the best of success in your future decisionmaking. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and well wishes, and the response is a simple thank you.


Passage number 220.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The outcome of this meeting should surprise no one.  We were not expected to start the normalization process at this meeting, and we should not and will not do that.  Rather, this is a scene-setting meeting at which we have first to review   where we are and where we might be going and then to communicate our conclusions accurately to the public, the markets, and ourselves. In September, we took a pause to evaluate recent developments in the global economy, particularly in China.  We can now conclude that the global economy is not at the start of a serious crisis; that global financial markets remained robust in the face of the September surprises; and that the external effect on U.S. economic activity and inflation of foreign developments is likely to be substantial but not inconsistent with a continuation of economic growth, the strengthening of the labor markets, and a gradual return to our 2 percent inflation target. By the time of the critical December decision, we will need to decide whether the employment reports for October and November that are due just over a week from now and early in December, respectively, are consistent with a continuation of economic growth and the strengthening of the labor market. What numbers will we be looking for. Well, staff calculations are that it would take hiring of roughly 50,000 to 75,000 a month to maintain the unemployment rate at 5.1 percent if the participation rate were to drift downward in parallel with its structural trend, and that it would take hiring of roughly 125,000 a month if the participation rate were to hold steady. We might want to build in a cushion for these numbers, but they seem to me the right place to start, and I think we need some more clarity on this issue before the end of the meeting. As usual, the staff has done an excellent job in producing the Tealbooks.  I believe the general feeling that things are not going well economically, as well as more generally, in the United States—which we sometimes hear around this table and elsewhere—is based in part on the expected slowing of economic growth.  One of the many interesting features of staff growth   forecasts is the powerful effect of declines in participation on the aggregate growth rate.  That is clearly seen in the table “Decomposition of Potential GDP,” on page 26 of Tealbook A, in which the contribution from participation is forecast to decline 0.5 percentage point a year through 2018. It’s also interesting that the contribution of the growth of multifactor productivity to overall growth is expected to rise only slowly from 0.3 percentage point this year to 0.7 percentage point in 2018, while the contribution of capital deepening to growth is expected to be constant at 0.8 percentage point—that is to say, more than double the rate of total factor productivity growth  from 2015 through 2017—and then to decline to 0.7 percentage point, the same as the contribution of TFP growth.  I take two messages from this.  First, economic growth is more in the hands of others than of the FOMC, something we all know but may, from time to time, forget.  Second, the effect of investment is potentially more powerful than I, at least, had thought.  These are messages we’re entitled to broadcast to a wider public. On inflation, I have little to add to my previous comments, which were essentially that once the transitory effects of energy price and non-energy and food import price declines pass, we will be close to our target range.  Further, if the staff forecasts for the unemployment rate are correct—namely, a decline by 2017 to 4.7 percent unemployment—I believe we’re likely to move all of the way to 2 percent.  And we should also remind ourselves that not all shocks to inflation are negative.  They used to all be positive, and we will again see positive inflation shocks.  We just don’t know when. I think we should also consider the risks to the forecast, but I’ll leave them aside for now and perhaps return to them during the general discussion of where we’re going. I’d like to conclude with a few words on our communications coming out of this meeting.  I believe we should aim to influence expectations to the point at which the public and market  participants expect us to move in December if our conditions are met, which could be translated into wanting expectations—and now I’m talking about probability—of an increase in the federal funds rate to rise to 50 percent or above after this meeting. But—and now I’m talking not about communications to the public, but about what we need to do—we need also to begin preparing ourselves for the possibility that we will decide not to move in December.  And here, in the presence of President Kocherlakota, I think he must feel like Moses looking at the Promised Land with what I’m going to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 221.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO. He’s, regrettably, being exiled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage shows no indication of contention or disagreement. The presence of laughter suggests a light-hearted or humorous atmosphere, which typically does not involve disagreement.


Passage number 222.
 MR. FISCHER.  If we say nothing other than what we implied after the June and September meetings—that we will continue along the same path, waiting for the economy to strengthen—we may give the impression that we will not any time soon find conditions that would persuade us to move.  The message that three times—in June, September, and December—we’ve decided that the economy is too weak to raise the interest rate sends a disturbing message.  If we don’t move in December, we may need to say both to ourselves and to the public that we simply don’t like the path that the economy is on, and that we think we need to see stronger economic growth to be confident that inflation will return to our goal.  In short, we should consider moving to an expansionary monetary policy, one that will involve at least some of the measures that might be expansionary:  first, forward guidance regarding the path of the federal funds rate, provided that guidance is real or else carefully and expertly qualified; second, extending the maturity of our portfolio by lengthening the maturity of the Treasury obligations we hold, a move that Vice Chairman Dudley has mentioned several times; and, third, reducing the IOER rate and possibly the target range for the federal funds rate, though I doubt the wisdom of moving to a negative interest rate.  No doubt there are other measures to consider.  But part of  the reason I’m concerned is that there is no other game in town than the Fed when it comes to policy relating to the macroeconomy at the moment.  We’re it—the only active policy player in town.  If we sit on the sidelines after we’ve reached the conclusion, for the third time, that the economy cannot withstand normalization, that message will be reinforced.  Rather, we should help get the economy to a situation from which it can normalize, for we are certainly not in a normal situation at present.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 223.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot provide an answer without the passage.


Passage number 224.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I continue to prefer to take the first step in policy normalization at this time as described in alternative C.  At our September meeting, I argued that realized and expected progress toward our goals warranted liftoff.  Incoming data reinforced that view.  Labor markets continued to improve.  Even at the slower pace of job growth we saw in the most recent report, we’ll overshoot full employment next year in my forecast.  Other economic indicators, such as consumption and investment, are in line with my projections from our September meeting.  Importantly, downside risks have also abated substantially as concerns about risks to the global economy have ebbed. Of course, inflation measures do remain low.  This is partly attributable to transitory factors, including dollar appreciation and drops in commodity prices, and those should dissipate over the course of this year and next year.  The waning of downward pressure from these factors, along with the continued improvement in the labor market, give me confidence inflation will move back to our 2 percent target over the medium term.  All in all, given the reduced downside risks from the global economy and my assessment that we’ll reach our inflation target and exceed our full employment mandate over the medium term, optimal policy dictates starting to raise rates soon.  Indeed, most standard policy rules suggested raising rates some time ago.   While I find a case for liftoff at this meeting at least as compelling as December, I am willing to delay, again, what I would consider to be the appropriate policy action and go with alternative B as written.  One of my staff members had suggested to describe my mood as “grumpy.” I was a little fearful that people would find one of the other dwarves to describe my mood or my behavior.  [Laughter]  Picking up on some of the themes that Governor Fischer mentioned, we cannot continue this waiting strategy indefinitely.  We’re keeping financial markets on tenterhooks and, I think, sowing confusion. I gave a lot of speeches and met with a lot of people, both our boards and members of the public, since our September meeting, and I was struck by how many times I heard, “You know, we thought you guys were raising rates, and we thought it made sense.  Now we really don’t understand.  Do you know something about the economy that we don’t know.”  I said to my own board members, “Well, you know me.  We’re not that smart.” But it is striking how difficult it is to convey—especially, I think, in our September statement, which I thought was actually a very good statement—this message that we are just sitting and waiting for something that people really don’t quite understand what we’re waiting for. Now, as our discussions make abundantly clear, the data and analysis will never be bulletproof.  There will always be uncertainties.  But, based on what I expect to see in the data in the next six weeks, I’m convinced it’ll be appropriate to lift off in December and—picking up on President Rosengren’s comment, which I agree with 100 percent—to signal when we go to C a “go slow” approach to further tightening over the next year as conditions unfold.  I am not only convinced that r* for the next couple of years is very low, but I also think there are significant odds that the longer-run r* is low.  Those are arguments for being clearer about a very gradual or shallow path when we do raise rates. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by one individual expressing their preference and reasoning regarding policy normalization and interest rate hikes.


Passage number 225.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  The current language suggests to me, and may signal to financial markets, that unless the incoming data surprise to the downside, the Committee is prepared to raise rates at the December meeting. While this language nudges expectations toward raising rates in December, a nudge that I think is appropriate, it embodies the necessary flexibility to defer actions if incoming data indicate a more pronounced domestic slowdown than we currently expect.  I do view the current language as signaling “probable” rather than “possible,” and that’s actually where I am in terms of my views. Like President Williams, I strongly prefer a gradual increase in removing accommodation.  Waiting longer risks the need to remove accommodation more quickly, and, given the uncertainty discussed yesterday about the equilibrium real interest rate, a more rapid increase might run a greater risk of overshooting the equilibrium rate.  In fact, I prefer a tightening cycle that is closer to the path currently predicted by the market, which would be a bit slower than the median SEP numbers in September.  With inflation persistently lower than our 2 percent target, we have the luxury of removing accommodation more slowly than in previous tightening cycles. I would make the steepness of the interest rate path conditional on our confidence in reaching the inflation target.  Even my currently expected gradual path is contingent on improved confidence in reaching the inflation target.  Should our confidence in attaining that goal not improve in coming months or should we be surprised by a more rapid return toward 2 percent, we should be ready to adjust the pace of tightening accordingly.  An additional benefit from moving in December with a plan to move gradually is that we will have time to analyze the effectiveness of our monetary policy tightening tools. If we were to wait longer and need to potentially move rates at each meeting, we might have less flexibility to respond to surprises about the effectiveness of our tools or potential financial surprises from the initial tightening.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and provides their reasoning behind it. They also mention their preference for a gradual increase in removing accommodation and explain the potential risks and benefits associated with different approaches. Overall, there is no disagreement or contention among the speaker's statements.


Passage number 226.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll be brief because I want to make sure to save my voice for the roll call.  [Laughter] At our September meeting, I was convinced that economic conditions warranted an increase in the interest rate target range, based on my sense that labor markets were in line with our past assessment of what constitutes full employment and on my confidence that inflation will move back toward 2 percent once the most recent disinflationary impulse is past.  Since then, as I discussed in our earlier go-round, economic reports haven’t appreciably altered the assessment for me, and the more worrisome consequences related to global economic developments now seem less likely.  So I continue to see a rate increase as warranted, and I support alternative C, although I suspect we will not adopt that alternative today. If alternative B is adopted, I think the additional language emphasizing December as a live option would be useful.  Market expectations regarding liftoff appear to have overreacted since the September meeting, and it would be helpful to push back on that.  I had an experience very similar to that of President Williams during the intermeeting period, hearing from many commentators.  Maybe these people weren’t up to date on the federal funds futures markets, but they seemed to view us as highly likely to change going into September and came away from our decision a bit confused while wondering about our criteria, with many of them taking a negative  signal for the economic outlook from our decision.  But it would be useful to add that language only if December is a serious possibility.  Listening to your comments at the end of the day yesterday, Madam Chair, I thought it seemed as if you were setting a relatively high bar.  That’s how it struck me.  I’ll go back and read the transcript when it comes out.  But if December doesn’t have a substantial chance or it isn’t probable, in the words of President Rosengren, we’re risking a big hit to our credibility to go into that meeting with this language coming out of this meeting and not move in some circumstances. In that case, if that’s our intention—to set a fairly high bar—we’d probably be better off leaving this language out of the statement.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement by Mr. Lacker about his views on the interest rate increase and the language to be used in the statement. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 227.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B at this meeting.  I am in favor of the changes in paragraph 3 that include the bracketed language making reference to the December meeting.  Like others I’ve already heard, I think signaling that December is in play for liftoff is particularly important at this meeting. It’s entirely plausible that we’ll get to the December meeting with employment growth that is at least as strong as in the past quarter, with real-time GDP growth in the 2½-ish range, and with an inflation trend pretty much as it looks today. If these conditions appear to be in place at the time of the December meeting, I believe it will be appropriate to pull the trigger. Based on my view of the appropriate policy course if economic conditions evolve as I expect, I think an appropriate communication would have public expectations centered on a roughly 50–50 probability of liftoff by the time of the December meeting.  To me, roughly even odds after this meeting is what we need to see to support a truly data-dependent decisionmaking process as we approach the next meeting. Market participants are clearly placing current odds of a December move well below 50–50.  Coming into this meeting, my view was that we shouldcraft a statement that would communicate a posture of preserving liftoff in December as a live option but not a certainty.  It’s my judgment that my preferred outcome, this roughly 50–50 perceived chance of a December liftoff, is most likely with a statement that makes explicit reference to December as a decision point using the language “at its next meeting.”  My guess is that the proposed paragraph 3 language without this reference will not send a strong enough signal to move market expectations from where they are today. Should the Committee go in a different direction and decide on a version of paragraph 3 without any reference to our next meeting, there is a word change that I think is important.  Without the bracketed reference to the December meeting, the phrase “In determining whether it will be appropriate to raise the target range” is a construction that may be construed as implying an indefinite delay of liftoff.  In the event that the bracketed language of paragraph 3 is omitted, I suggest the statement be adjusted to read “In determining when it will be appropriate to raise the target range.” As to the specific options in alternative B, I think the “slightly” modifier in paragraph 1, describing the decline in market-based inflation compensation, is accurate.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart, could I ask you a question. In the brackets in paragraph 3, there are two choices—“later this year” or “at its next meeting.”  You indicated a preference for “at its next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 228.
” MR. LOCKHART.  “At its next meeting.” CHAIR YELLEN. Of course, that refers to December, but “later this year” also refers to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lockhart's statement and Chair Yellen's response are in agreement about the timeframe mentioned.


Passage number 229.
 MR. LOCKHART. Well, I see no difference between the two, so I don’t know why we would play around with “later this year.”  We’d just say “at the December meeting.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Because it’s a phrase that we’ve repeatedly used.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lockhart simply expresses his confusion regarding the use of different phrases. Chair Yellen then provides a reason for their choice without expressing any disagreement towards Mr. Lockhart's statement.


Passage number 230.
 MR. LOCKHART.  But my point is, if we choose not to put that in, then I take some issue with “whether” and suggest substituting “when.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Lockhart expressing his opinion or suggestion.


Passage number 231.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You’re asking a slightly different question, though.  Could you live with either of those constructions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It indicates that the question being asked is slightly different, suggesting a clarification or a change in perspective.


Passage number 232.
 MR. LOCKHART. Yes, I can live with either one. CHAIR YELLEN.  You can.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Lockhart and Chair Yellen express agreement and understanding with each other's statements.


Passage number 233.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I think they’re basically the same. CHAIR YELLEN.  That was really my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Lockhart and Chair Yellen seem to agree that the two things being discussed are basically the same.


Passage number 234.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I prefer being as explicit as we can, so the word “December” would be in it.  But I can live with either one. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks.  That’s very helpful.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 235.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, and, in a moment, I’ll refer to the language issues that have been raised.  I want to say a couple of things first, though, and they center on this issue of whether we now have to move because people have suggested we’re going to move and there was some expectation that we were going to move.  I think the optimal approach to policymaking is, before you say something, to be pretty sure that what you say is what you’re going to do.  But the second-best is not to go ahead and do something that is ill advised because you suggested to people beforehand that you might do it.  The second best is to treat your earlier suggestion as essentially some variation on a sunk cost and then go ahead and do what makes sense. The first point I’d make is that this, to some degree, is a self-inflicted wound.  I agree with people who have said that there’s a lot of confusion out there, and that there was an expectation as well as a lot of discussion centering on September.  How could the markets and the commentators not be focused on September when so many of us were out talking about September. This notion that, “Gee, the markets have focused on September—we’d better do it,” is somehow linked to the way in which our public statements have been date and calendar centered rather than talking about the narratives, as I put it yesterday, or the outlook, as many of you refer to it, that would guide our sense of when it’s appropriate to move.  There is a lot to what President Williams and others have said about there being some sense of, do we know something that the markets don’t know.  But I think we’ve created that problem, and we’ve created it by talking about dates.  For so long, President Bullard was trying to get us off dates and onto state contingency.  We finally got off of dates, and then we immediately went back to talking about them, which I just don’t think has been helpful. The second point is, I’m still having some trouble with “act sooner so that you don’t have to make a big move later.” When I say I’m having some trouble, I don’t mean I reject it, but I am having some difficulty understanding it for two reasons.  One reason is—I assume we all agree with this—the effect of an increase of 25 basis points in the target range will be substantially greater than what the models say an increase of 25 basis points in the federal funds rate will be. The increase is reversing a lot of positions.  It’s reversing a psychology.  It’s going to have a big effect.  I keep getting told by CEOs to expect a lot of turbulence when it happens.  Now, that is not a reason not to do it.  I agree with Jeremy Stein’s notion that we cannot be driven by what the bond market reaction is going to be.  We sometimes just have to fly through that. But I do think there’s going to be an effect, and there’s going to be a tightening of financialconditions well beyond what 25 basis points would normally suggest, particularly when, as yesterday’s discussion pointed out, 25 basis points is probably a good bit of the way toward what almost everybody would agree a neutral rate is. It’s not as though we think, “We’ve got a long way to go, so this is just a little bit.” Now let me turn to the language itself.  I don’t have a view on paragraph 1, Madam Chair.  Whatever you want to do on that is fine with me. On paragraph 3, I would have preferred no change to the language at all—that is, keeping what we said in September—but it’s obvious that that’s not where the center of the Committee is.  So I actually thought that the formulation of shifting toward saying the question we’re asking is whether—or, in President Lockhart’s formulation, when—it’s appropriate to raise rates, as opposed to talking about how long to maintain the existing target range, is, as I said, a clever way to signal that the question of an increase is now on the table.  I believe that language change cannot help but be noticed by people and will have the desirable signaling effect.  Although, again, my preference would be no change in language, understanding where the Committee as a whole is, I think this was a much better way to do it than the formulation that was in the original alternative B that was circulated.  However, on the inclusion of “later this year” or “at its next meeting,” coming from my policy position, I’m likely to be biased against making it probable as opposed to possible.  I think President Rosengren is right. It will make it seem probable, and that’s not where I want to be.  I’m not sure that’s where the Committee is prepared to be right now as to wanting to keep it on the table. By the way, if there’s a sentiment favoring removal of the reference to “later this year” or “at its next meeting,” I think President Lockhart’s suggestion to say “when” rather than “whether” would be fine. Finally, for the reasons John has already articulated—which will keep my intervention shorter—I don’t think “based on incoming data” is helpful because, to the degree that we want people to think that we’re looking at the data, they already know that, and John said well why.  It may give an undue emphasis on a couple of pieces of data. That’s it, Madam Chair.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Did you have a view, Governor Tarullo, on “later this year” versus “at its next meeting”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Tarullo expresses his disagreement with the inclusion of "later this year" or "at its next meeting" in the language. He believes it will make a rate increase seem probable, which is not where he wants to be. He suggests using "when" instead of "whether" to keep the possibility of a rate increase on the table.


Passage number 236.
 MR. TARULLO.  Oh, do you mean if my impassioned plea to omit them is ignored by everybody else. CHAIR YELLEN.  Correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tarullo is asking a question in a somewhat sarcastic or humorous manner, but there is no genuine disagreement or contention between Mr. Tarullo and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 237.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes, under those circumstances—“Once we’ve decided we’re sending you to Elba, what kind of house would you like to live in.”  [Laughter] I think probably “later this year,” and the reason for that is, I believe it maintains a little more optionality for us, because we have to drop “later this year” in December, one way or another.  If we drop it but like the formulation, we can substitute “at its next meeting” and the world will think, “Oh, they just couldn’t say it, but it’s the same formulation.”  If we decide—as President Lacker was suggesting and as Governor Fischer, in some respects, was suggesting—that you have to reorient if we’re not moving, it gives us the opportunity to do that as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 238.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Given our economic forecast, my position on policy remains that we should raise rates this quarter and we should better prepare markets for that event.  I think the language in alternative B will help accomplish this goal. I believe it will be interpreted as the Committee signaling that a December move is very much on the table.  Currently, markets are heavily discounting the probability of any move this year, making it  harder to act.  My fear is that we are losing credibility for liftoff, and alternative B will, I hope, get market participants to change their beliefs, at least to some extent. The continued, consistent underlying economic strength, in spite of recent headwinds, leads me to believe that we will see steady and modest economic growth.  With that in mind, and as I stated yesterday, my assessment of r* is that it is currently around zero and perhaps a tad positive, which is pretty much in line with much of the evidence presented in the memos.  Subsequently, I anticipate that r* will gradually increase to around 1.75 percent.  That implies that our current policy stance is overly accommodative and will become increasingly so if we do not begin raising the funds rate.  However, I also continue to believe that the process of normalization should be gradual, and that starting sooner makes that scenario more likely.  Thus, I anticipate that monetary policy will be characterized by some degree of accommodation over the near term, but that the current degree of accommodation is excessive. Although I can’t quantify the effect it will have, I think raising rates this year will send a reassuring message and bolster confidence. It will strongly reflect the view that we have indeed come a long way, that the fundamentals are sound, and that we are approaching a degree of normalcy that has been absent for eight years.  Indeed, it increasingly appears to me that the most abnormal aspect of the economy is the current stance of monetary policy.  Thus, I support alternative B.  In support of President Lockhart’s view, I would prefer “at its next meeting,” but I could live with either.  I also support President Williams’s and Governor Tarullo’s view concerning dropping the phrase “based on incoming data.”  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and there is no mention of anyone else's views or conflicting ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 239.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B today.  On the statement language, I would like, if I could dial this in perfectly, to have the market price in a  percent probability of liftoff in December. Then I would like the data to move it up and down from there as we move toward the meeting.  For that reason, on the language, I like the red language “whether it will be appropriate to raise the target range,” and I like “later this year.” I could live with “at its next meeting,” but I like “later this year” for the reasons that Governor Tarullo articulated.  I am actually attracted to President Williams’s idea of eliminating “based on incoming data,” because, in this context, it puts a bright spotlight on the two I employment reports and I don’t think that’s how we should make policy.  So I could lose “based on incoming data.”  That’s what I would do there. Implicit in that is that if the economy continues on the current path, with job growth sufficient to continue to materially reduce labor market slack, I would support liftoff at the December meeting, and I would present such a decision in a context of a very broad agreement among the membership of the Committee that the path of rate increases will be a gradual one. For me, the tightening cycle can be very slow.  The market path does not trouble me, although, of course, the data will dictate that. The question is, why move at all in December. Why not wait another three months or six months—or even a year or two years.  And I would offer two considerations.  First, I believe that the test that we’ve articulated will be met if we get one more cycle of solid data.  I also believe that a well-telegraphed move of 25 basis points, presented in a context of a very broad Committee consensus favoring a shallow path, should not have a sustained material effect on financial conditions. Second, I would point to the Committee’s own communication, and let me be clear: I’m not arguing here that we should mistakenly do this because we’ve said we would.  I’m arguing that, in a close call, I would lean toward going if we get a chance to do that.  I don’t think it   would be a mistake.  The reason is, we’ve carefully guided the public to expect liftoff this year.  Many on the Committee, including me and many others, have publicly embraced that expectation.  The September SEP has 13 of the 17 of us supporting liftoff this year.  In the September SEP, we had median expectations regarding second-half real GDP growth of 2 percent and unemployment at 5 percent.  Those will be met, hypothetically.  I think there will be a cost to appearing to change our minds, and we would simply need to weigh the benefits against that cost.  I guess I would really like to move past this essentially tactical decision about the precise date of liftoff and shift the focus toward the very broad agreement about the gradual path. With that backdrop—and here I echo what others have said—I suspect that a decision not to move in December will not be, and will not be seen by the public as, just another step in a data-driven, meeting-by-meeting evaluation of policy but rather a fundamental change in the Committee’s framework as it’s been expressed in communications this year. One implication would be a sense that we are seriously troubled by the path of the economy.  An additional implication would be a significant further period at the effective lower bound.  Any restatement of our objective function risks setting the bar at a level that may not be met for a year or more. In addition to the costs of appearing to change our mind, I am concerned with the buildup of financial and economic imbalances over time if, in fact, we’re going to remain at the zero lower bound for an extended period. The question is how high to set the bar for incoming data between now and the December meeting—particularly on two payroll reports, if I can admit that.  I would simply say that I would not be setting it excessively high.  I’ll end with the thought that I really do believe it’s essential that for the period ahead we see economic growth above its trend rate.  Otherwise, I’m   not sure why we are raising the federal funds rate.  But if we do see that by some reasonable margin, I will be prepared to go forward.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Powell is expressing his support for alternative B and giving reasons why he believes the target range should be raised in December. He also disagrees with the idea of making policy decisions based solely on incoming data.


Passage number 240.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  Based on how it’s written now, pointing to the December meeting or later this year for our increase in the policy rate, let me mention three or four data points that I and my staff will be particularly looking at. Number one, on inflation—and forgive me for mentioning Dallas—we will certainly be crunching our numbers for the headline inflation and then crunching our numbers for the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas trimmed mean inflation.  We are looking for that number to stay within a range of 1.6 to 1.7 percent.  If it fell below that, that would concern me.  With a range of 1.6 to 1.7, which is basically where it is right now, we would continue to feel confident about our  forecast for 2016 of 1.8 percent inflation and continue to be confident that we would reach 2 percent inflation by the end of 2017.  So we’ll be looking hard at that. Number two, on the jobs report—and Governor Fischer alluded to this—we’ll be looking for job creation in excess of 100,000.  I don’t think we’ll be disappointed if it’s only 100,000.  Why.  Because we’ll see that as being sufficient to certainly not increase unemployment, and if job growth is 100,000 or more, it may, based on our numbers, slightly help it improve. Number three, we’ll be looking at the ISM series for not only manufacturing, but also services.  We expect manufacturing to be weak.  We’re expecting that in advance for many reasons, including global overcapacities and the strength of the dollar.  What we’ll be looking for is that it doesn’t get weaker than it is.  If it stabilizes, that would be great, but we’re not expecting very good manufacturing numbers in this next series of releases.  We will, though, be looking hard at services to see that that sector is still healthy and strong and continues to be solid. Lastly, we’ll be looking at the various data series on consumer spending and so on. If the data come in along the lines I’ve just described, I’d be inclined in December, then, to say we should, in fact, raise the federal funds rate.  I agree with President Rosengren that we should emphasize, though, in that statement that we will remain highly accommodative and make clear that the path of the federal funds rate is going to be very shallow. I also think it will be very important for all of us in our public comments to emphasize the things we agree on rather than the things we disagree on.  To my ear, listening around this table, I think we have a very strong agreement that we should remain highly accommodative for some extended period of time.  I know there’s disagreement on some of the tactics and the first step, but it would be good publicly to emphasize where there is a consensus around this table rather than to emphasize the differences. I do agree with the comments that the process—we’re talking about liftoff and then pulling back—has probably gotten to the point at which it is no longer serving us well.  It was probably necessary to provide us with the optionality, and the world has obviously been very complicated.  However, I believe the process of stepping up and then pulling back has created a greater fear of the unknown and magnified the perceived importance of this initial decision, maybe out of proportion to its likely economic significance.  I get a number of comments also from people saying, “Gee, I thought liftoff meant 25 basis points.  Does it mean something more than that.  I guess you see something that we don’t see in the economy.  What am I missing.” I see these comments as fairly widespread. This thinking has caused businesspeople to doubt what they’re seeing in their own businesses and, in some cases, to pause or pull back somewhat from confidently making decisions and to maybe even shorten their time horizons. I do agree with the comments that were made today that, if we decide in December we are not going to raise the funds rate, it’s going to be very critical to look again at the paradigm for our communication.  In particular, what I’d like to see us avoid is this thought: “We’re about to take action right around the corner—just wait.  But it’s data dependent.” I’d like to see us get out of that cycle depending on what we decide in December.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing his support for alternative B and outlining the data points that he will be looking at before making a decision. He also emphasizes the importance of remaining highly accommodative and finding consensus rather than focusing on differences.


Passage number 241.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, and I agree with Governor Tarullo’s comments that, in paragraph 3, it would be acceptable if you omitted the bracketed language “later this year” or “at its next meeting.”  On the other hand, if I’m being issued a ticket to the same location as Governor Tarullo, I’ll take “later this year” as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their agreement and support for alternative B and also expressing their willingness to accept the bracketed language "later this year."


Passage number 242.
 MR. FISCHER.  That might influence Governor Tarullo’s decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a possibility (something that might influence Governor Tarullo's decision), but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflict presented.


Passage number 243.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  FRASER, man.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between Mr. Kocherlakota and Fraser. It simply introduces Fraser as a man.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 244.
 MR. BULLARD.  I agree with those around the table who said that the goal here is to reel in the market expectations of when the liftoff will occur.  The goal is to put some more probability on December.  If we could get that above 50 percent, it would be good.  If we can’t, then we might have to follow up with communications after the meeting.  I don’t know how that would work.  But I think the basic idea is that September was perceived as more dovish than at least my interpretation of where the Committee is, and that the markets have moved way out, some into 2017, on when they think liftoff will occur.  This is part of what’s making me very concerned that we’ll just get stuck with ZIRP long term. I agree with Governor Fischer on the implications of not moving in December.  I think the words he used were, “That would indicate we just don’t like the economic outcomes we see,” and I believe that’s right.  The argument about normalization is an argument about cumulative progress.  To mix that up with what’s going on day to day in the economy is mixing two types of arguments.  If we don’t like the way the economy is performing, that’s fine, but the Committee should just admit this and then chart a new course for policy.  Governor Fischer laid out some possibilities in that case. I agree with John Williams and others—we can’t continue to wait indefinitely on this.  We’re sending a pessimistic signal on the economy that might be unwarranted. Governor Tarullo has made comments about the “data dependent” sentence, and I actually agree with him on this.  In this context, having that data dependence is really going to put a lot of pressure on the various reports that come out.  Most likely, they’re going to be muddled.  We’d do better by saying we’re going to focus mostly on cumulative progress.  I agree with everyone who says you don’t want to make this interest rate move in an environment of a slowing economy.  I appreciate that. But as long as we can make the case that we’re okay and we can cite cumulative progress, we should be able to get off zero in December.  I agree with the Governor even though I have been the big advocate of saying, “We need state-dependent policy, and we’ve got to depend on the data.”  But it does have this feedback to us that every little wiggle in the data is something that’s going to change FOMC policy. I agree with Governor Powell that if we don’t move in December, we’re going to have to consider a fundamental change in the policy outlook advanced by the Committee—how we’re thinking about normalization and how we’re thinking about our framework as we go forward.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker agrees with some points made by others around the table, but also expresses some differing opinions and concerns.


Passage number 245.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I can support alternative B today because it leaves our options open for the December meeting.  Based on what we know today, however, I continue to see a strong case for raising the funds rate.  Final private domestic demand is growing at a healthy pace; unemployment looks to be at or near its natural rate; and inflation, though below target, in our forecast is expected to rise over the medium term as energy prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar stabilize.Moreover, all of our reference rules are telling us that the liftoff is overdue.  The memos on r* were surprisingly consistent in suggesting that, while various measures of r* are currently low by historical standards, they are all generally above the current level of the real federal funds rate. In addition, I was struck by just how far the Tealbook-consistent r* is above the current real federal funds rate.  The difference in those two rates is now almost 2 percentage points, a gap that has persisted for some time.  For example, over the past decade, 12 of the 14 largest gaps between Tealbook-consistent r* and the real federal funds rate have occurred since June 2014, a sign that we’ve kept monetary policy exceptionally accommodative for some time. Finally, my own policy views aside, I would strongly support those who have urged better communication and clearer direction on the Committee’s expectations regardingnormalization and the path of rates.  I’m happy to see the Chair lead on this front at any of her upcoming opportunities. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of the speaker's support for alternative B and her belief that there is a strong case for raising the funds rate.


Passage number 246.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I see the state of the economy as well as the outlook as very similar to what we faced in September.  Improvements in resource utilization look to be gradual, and the recent data on inflation continue to suggest an underlying trend below our 2 percent target. Important downside risks to the outlook for activity and inflation remain, with global economic growth decelerating and key foreign economies continuing to face difficult challenges. It’s not yet clear what effect on U.S. activity the recent slowing in global growth will have.  As a result and with the deterioration in inflation compensation, I’m not yet reasonably confident that inflation will return to 2 percent over the medium term, and I think it’s appropriate to keep the federal funds rate in its current target range while we receive more information on the resilience of the underlying momentum in the economy. For some time, there’s been a conversation concerning the normalization of monetary policy that equates normalization with moving off the zero lower bound and tightening.  I think the discussion of the natural rate of interest yesterday grounds that discussion in terms of the distance of the effective federal funds rate relative to a time-varying natural rate of interest. We’ve discussed a host of reasons why that natural rate of interest might be low at the moment and might remain somewhat low in the medium term, ranging from the empirical estimates that have been circulated to the Committee, to the persistent financial headwinds of the crisis, to the observation that world interest rates appear to have moved quite low and exerted a downward pull on U.S. interest rates by the exchange rate and financial market channels.  On balance, the materials developed for the Committee’s consideration suggest important reasons why our current monetary policy stance may be closer to neutral than may be implied by conventional monetary policy empirical regularities based on historical relationships. Importantly, the asymmetry in risk-management considerations also argues for being somewhat cautious.  The persistence of the forces holding down r* suggests it will remain low relative to historical norms.  This, together with downside risks from abroad, points toward an elevated risk of being constrained in the future by a lower bound on policy rates.  In those circumstances, prudence dictates ensuring that momentum in real activity and inflation is robust enough to withstand adverse shocks before initiating a tightening cycle. If risks were skewed in the opposite direction—if there were a sufficiently large chance that policy would have to tighten unusually rapidly in response to an abrupt tightening in resource utilization and a substantial buildup in inflationary pressures—then it would be prudent to begin lifting off to guard against the risks to the stability of the economy.  However, given that inflation has run persistently below our target, that inflation breakevens have moved down  substantially and persistently, that wage and other indicators suggest that slack is diminishing but still remains, that estimates of the effect of resource utilization on inflation are relatively modest at present, and that r* is estimated to be lower than historical norms, I believe that risk to be somewhat modest.  Even rapid tightening in today’s circumstances would be well within the norm of historical tightening cycles. A possible reason for lifting off is a desire to move away from the zero lower bound, perhaps because there is a stigma or a discomfort associated with that policy setting.  I think those who are influenced by this view but are also concerned about risk management, given a low medium-term r* and substantial downside risks to demand, might recommend lifting off and then moving very slowly.  That has some merits, but it also carries substantial risks of resulting in excessive tightening in financial conditions, especially given the possibility of an excessive reaction through foreign exchange values.  My own perspective on this, I’d have to say, is colored by the many episodes in other advanced economies of raising, reversal, and regret. These considerations lead me to want to be somewhat more confident before we initiate a tightening path, which argues for waiting another meeting or two to gauge the underlying momentum of domestic demand.  Since March, we’ve stated that the timing of liftoff is data dependent, and I believe it is advisable to maintain this stance.  It’s possible that the data we receive between now and the December meeting will justify lifting off or keeping the policy rate at its current level. With regard to the communications and recognizing there is considerable sentiment in this room in favor of a December liftoff and legitimate concern to ensure that markets are on notice, I agree with the desire to make sure that a liftoff in December is viewed as possible, although not too probable.  So maybe I’m in the 55 percent range.  As against this, I believe it is  inadvisable to reintroduce calendar-based guidance after working so carefully and deliberately to eliminate it.  For those reasons, I’m a bit concerned about introducing language regarding “later this year” or “at its next meeting,” which we will then potentially have to remove if it gets stale very quickly and which in turn risks reinforcing perceptions of “lurchiness” in our communications.  I actually think the new version of the sentence in paragraph 3 without either version of the bracketed language will clearly put market participants on notice that the Committee is actively debating a rate rise at the next meeting.  The suggestions by President Lockhart and by President Rosengren did a nice job of balancing these two considerations, and I would probably put those suggestions above either of the versions currently on the table.  With regard to my preference for the wording of those bracketed items on the table, I would probably put “at its next meeting” slightly above “later this year,” because of the possibility that we could carry it forward. The final thing I would say is, I think the perceptions of “lurchiness” in our communications had as much to do with intermeeting communications by participants as they did with the way that we reacted to incoming data.  I, for one, would have been very reluctant to utter any calendar-based statement in the days and months leading up to this meeting, and I would be very happy to continue taking a pledge not to utter any calendar-based statements myself if other members of the Committee also wanted to leave to the Chair the sole voice on any calendar-based prognostications between now and December.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN. Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. BRAINARD is simply providing her perspective on the state of the economy and her reasoning for maintaining the current monetary policy stance.


Passage number 247.
 MR. TARULLO.  A dedicated tunnel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "a dedicated tunnel" without providing any additional information or indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 248.
 MR. LACKER.  To Montclair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It simply mentions a person named Mr. Lacker going to Montclair.


Passage number 249.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. In conclusion, there are two things I want to stress. We need to be fully ready with a plan should our base-case expectations not materialize.  So I think there is some work for the staff to do in terms of developing recommendations.  There’s some  work for us to do in terms of communicating with one another about what our preferences and orderings would be.  We want to give the Chair as much ammunition as possible if she has to go to that press conference after not having lifted off in December. Finally, as Vice Chairman, I want to say a few words of thanks to Narayana.  I thought what was said yesterday was very much on point.  You’ve been an absolutely terrific colleague—very collegial, thoughtful, a great listener, and someone who is attentive to other people’s perspectives. You’ve also been very creative and offered different perspectives that have been very useful for all of us to consider and evaluate.  Most noteworthy to me—and this is something the Chair touched on yesterday—is how your thinking has evolved over time.  You’ve responded to new evidence, and you’ve rethought about how the world works, not just in theory, but also in practice. You have been a great role model for all of us in terms of how to be open minded as we parse this complex work. Narayana, you’re going to be very much missed on this Committee, but we’re quite happy to have you in the Second District.  [Laughter]  And I’m looking forward to paying you a visit at the University of Rochester in the near future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It primarily consists of expressions of appreciation and future plans.


Passage number 250.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Bill.  I look forward to your visit. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks.  We’ve had a very rich and full discussion of the issues.  I’ve heard widespread support for alternative B for today, but we do have a number of wording issues that I’d like to take up individually and resolve. Let’s start with paragraph 1.  The first issue is the bracketed “slightly.” In light of the fact that inflation compensation has declined 10 basis points, as I think Thomas told us, to me, it seems reasonable to put in “slightly.”  I heard some support for this, but a number of you didn’t   weigh in, so let me ask, is there anyone who would have a problem with “slightly”. [No response] Okay.  Then let’s go with unbracketing “slightly,” which we’ll put in. Second, I did hear a suggestion, and a second of the suggestion, to substantially change the discussion about labor market performance. But it was a very substantial edit that was proposed.  I did not hear broad-based support for it around the table, so I want to give people an opportunity to comment.  If you think it really is appropriate for us to change the wording about the labor market and what we’ve seen in the intermeeting period, would you let me know. [Show of hands]  Okay.  President Bullard and President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The chair is simply seeking input and feedback from the participants, and there doesn't seem to be any pushback or disagreement.


Passage number 251.
 MR. BULLARD.  I did pick up on it because we crossed out the “labor market continued to improve,” and maybe that would be a signal that we thought the labor market was getting worse.  I’m not sure that that’s really what we intend to communicate. I agree that it was a more involved edit than we usually do at this stage, but that’s the part that caught my attention. CHAIR YELLEN. A reason for having it was that there were mixed signals.  We do have various labor market conditions indexes. We did have a good discussion.  President Mester raised some important points about that index that we need to take up with the staff.  Nevertheless, while I would agree—and I think the staff would probably agree—that the pace of job gains for the past couple of months remained above the level that is needed to produce further gains in the labor market, there were other things that moved in the wrong direction.  For example, the labor force participation rate fell, hours fell, the quits rate moved sideways, and job openings declined, and these things show up with weight in the labor market conditions index.  We do refer to looking at many indicators of the labor market.  That was partly the motivation for the wording we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Bullard and Chair Yellen are discussing different aspects of the labor market and the reasons for certain edits. They are providing additional information and perspectives rather than disagreeing with each other.


Passage number 252.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question about this, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans simply wants to ask a question, and Chair Yellen grants him permission.


Passage number 253.
 MR. EVANS. It sounds relatively benign to point out that we are expecting a step-down in employment growth at some point in a mature recovery, so this is just acknowledging that.  We don’t report in the SEP what payroll employment numbers we expect to see associated with our outlook.  But if, all of a sudden, people think that now it’s likely that the number is actually moving down, wouldn’t that suggest the unemployment path is not going to be going as low as we previously had it.  It doesn’t really sound as benign as just the simple observation that, eventually, we’ll get there.  I don’t know if that’s a feeling around the table or not.  That’s why I’ve been puzzled by the discussion. CHAIR YELLEN.  I would agree with what you just said—that it does have implications for the unemployment gap and for policy.  Paragraph 1 is supposed to report the facts. And it did seem to me that the description is not inaccurate. It is a judgment about “the labor market continued to improve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speakers are simply discussing their interpretation of a statement made in paragraph 1 and its implications.


Passage number 254.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let’s put it this way, Madam Chair. It’s easier to support the statement “the pace of job gains has slowed and the unemployment rate has leveled out” than it is to support the case that “the labor market continued to improve.”  I think that, on balance, it’s a lot easier to support the statement we have than to go back to the other statement. CHAIR YELLEN.  I agree. My own preference would be to keep it as it is in alternative B. I see two or three people in favor.  Are there others who support changing it. [Show of hands] Okay.  Seeing that it is a minority view, I recommend keeping the wording we have. Let’s go to paragraph 3.  There are a number of decisions to be made here.  I think the first is whether to include one of the bracketed options pointing explicitly to the December   meeting.  I did hear some sentiment in favor of getting rid of what’s in the brackets. But, on the other hand, I heard quite a bit of support around the table for including one of the bracketed phrases on the grounds that, if we want December to be a live meeting, we probably need, in light of market expectations, to signal it but to do so in a soft way that doesn’t indicate we’ve already made a decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 255.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Can I suggest that we first decide whether we want one of the two bracketed languages. CHAIR YELLEN.  That’s what I’m suggesting.  Why don’t we first decide whether we want some reference to the next meeting.  Do we want one of the bracketed options, or some other option.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests deciding whether they want one of the two bracketed languages, while Chair Yellen suggests deciding whether they want some reference to the next meeting. This indicates a disagreement or contention between the two speakers regarding the order of decision-making.


Passage number 256.
 MR. POWELL.  Madam Chair, the market newsletters clearly indicate that the market is looking for a clear signal from us that December is on the table. The market loves to discount our words these days.  If neither of these is in here and we just changed “whether” to “when,” I would predict that the probability of liftoff in December will go down.  Now, the risk of putting one of these in is that it goes up more than we want.  But I think the data will drive the answer, so I strongly encourage keeping one of the two in. CHAIR YELLEN.  Is there anybody else who wants to comment on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Powell and Chair Yellen are discussing the potential impact of changing the language in their statement and expressing their views and concerns. They are not arguing or disagreeing with each other.


Passage number 257.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes.  I share those views. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Both Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen agree on the stated views, suggesting there is no disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 258.
 MR. KAPLAN.  I agree with everything Governor Powell just said.  But I also agree with the comment that leaving either one of them in, which I’m fine with, makes this much closer to probable in the mind of the outside world than a lot of people around the table would like.  I’m fine with that, and I’m prepared, in terms of what data I’m looking for in the next 45 days, to   have maybe a lower bar than others.  But if we leave it in, people need to be prepared that, if there are choppy data, we are saying it’s still probable.  I’m okay with it.  I’m not sure everybody else is, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 259.
 MR. TARULLO.  I was going to defer to what you were inclined to do, Madam Chair.  But after Jay’s and Rob’s comments, I feel as though I’m being pushed into opposition, and that we’re making the decision now. CHAIR YELLEN.  I would like to say that my own view is what it literally says here— that, at our next meeting, we will make a decision about whether it is appropriate to raise rates, and that that decision has not been made.  Now, we’ll come to the “based on incoming data,” but I do not regard this decision as having been made at this meeting.  But I believe this language is intended to place December squarely on the table as a meeting at which we might make this decision. Yes, there is a bias here in favor of moving, in the sense that we wouldn’t include this language unless we thought there was some reasonable chance we would see data that would make us comfortable.  If we thought the odds that we were going to see data that would make us comfortable moving were very low, it would not, to my mind, be advisable to include this.  For example, if the staff forecast bears out, then, in my view, it is appropriate to move.  And if we take that as a modal forecast of what we’re going to see, that’s sufficient justification to have it in there.  But it isn’t decided, and, to my mind, it really does depend on the data.  I don’t want, at this point, to get into exactly what number of jobs or other things we need to see, but I think it depends on the data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are expressing their individual views and discussing the factors that would influence their decision on raising rates. There are no conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 260.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The argument for having this language in here is the fact that the current probability seems lower than the Committee’s own assessment, so we clearly  want to move in the direction of pushing that probability up.  The question is, we don’t know how far this is going to do it.  But I would argue that, if the market were to overreact, it would be pretty easy to underline that this is possible, not probable, in public communications. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, especially given that I’m going to testify next week.  If we saw an interpretation emerging that this was a done deal and decided, my own inclination would be to push back on that.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential benefits and uncertainties of including certain language, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 261.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 262.
 WILLIAMS.  Can this problem be solved through the minutes.  Would the minutes summarize the sense of how the voters interpret this. I actually don’t like this “possible” versus “probable.”  I think that is actually separating us.  “Probable” sounds like “highly likely,” and “possible” sounds like “unlikely,” depending on which side you’re on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Williams, expresses disagreement with the use of the words "possible" and "probable" and believes they create division among the voters.


Passage number 263.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it’s almost 50–50.  I’m where Governor Powell was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion that the situation is almost evenly balanced, similar to where Governor Powell stood.


Passage number 264.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not providing any information or expressing any opinion, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 265.
 WILLIAMS.  That’s what I was about to say.  It could be something indicating that we saw that the odds were roughly equal, or some kind of description in the minutes that described it as being the way you said, that we’re trying to get the probability up to a value implying there’s a good chance of something.  Is there a way to do that that lessens some of these concerns. CHAIR YELLEN.  Of course there is.  The staff will certainly try to draft something that you’ll have a chance to review that accurately portrays where the Committee stands and what the range of views are.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speakers are discussing a potential way to address concerns and accurately reflect the range of views within the committee. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 266.
 MS. BRAINARD. Yes.  If the minutes were to state that we saw roughly equal odds, that would be very meaningful.  But I’m not sure I was hearing that around the room.  But if people think that’s something that could comfortably appear in the minutes, I believe that does do what Jay was suggesting, which seems effective. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. With those provisos, my recommendation would be to keep in one of the bracketed options, and then that takes us to which bracketed option to keep in.  I heard support for both of the options.  I think we’re a little bit divided on that.  Either way, both of these options point to December.  “Later this year,” I think, can only be our next meeting.  I guess a reason to have that language is, it’s language we’ve used—I’ve used it repeatedly—so it’s playing off that.  An advantage, in a way, is that it is a one-shot-only thing.  It has to be removed in December.  My own view is, if we’re not comfortable moving by December and we feel the economy is too weak, then we really have to change our communications substantially.  To me, that’s an advantage, and I heard some of you echo that thought.  “At its next meeting” is also very explicit about December.  It is language that we could keep meeting after meeting, but, frankly, even though we could, I think it’s unlikely that it would be desirable to do so.  If we don’t move in December, we really need to rethink our communications and not keep markets on tenterhooks all the time, thinking that we’re just on the verge of moving.  But I can live with either one of these things.  So let me ask, how many people prefer “later this year”. [Show of hands]  How many people prefer “at its next meeting”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is division or disagreement among the participants regarding which bracketed option to keep in the minutes.


Passage number 267.
  [Show of hands] MR. LOCKHART.  Madam Chair, you could always say “at its next meeting later this year.”  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  I actually see more support for “at its next meeting.”  Is there anybody who just can’t live with “at its next meeting”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement among the participants. The laughter in response to Mr. Lockhart's comment may indicate a light-hearted tone, but there is no direct disagreement presented. Chair Yellen simply observes that there is more support for the phrase "at its next meeting" and asks if anyone strongly opposes it.


Passage number 268.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They mean the same thing, substantively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that two things are equivalent in substance.


Passage number 269.
MR. HARKER.  The other question is, who can live with both.  Because I would prefer one versus the other, but not strongly. CHAIR YELLEN.  Is there anybody who feels strongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Harker and Chair Yellen are expressing their own preferences, but there is no conflicting or contradictory information present.


Passage number 270.
 MR. EVANS.  I could go with whatever your favorite is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 


Passage number 271.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m happy to defer to the Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  “Later this year” are words we’ve used repeatedly. But, on the other hand, “at its next meeting” is extremely straightforward and clear.  If “later this year” is December, why not just say “December” or “at its next meeting”. So I suppose, the more I think about it, “at its next meeting” sounds good.  Can people live with “at its next meeting”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for the suggestion of using "at its next meeting" instead of the previously used phrase "later this year."


Passage number 272.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Let’s go with that.  Then the final issue is “based on incoming data,” and those are words we could remove.  Now, a reason for having them there is, I really think it does hinge on incoming data.  This is a decision that could go either way.  My own view is that I am going to be looking at incoming data very carefully because my own sense is that we have an economy that seems as though it’s growing at a rate pretty close to trend.  For me, I need to think the economy is growing above trend, and I’m going to be looking at data on that.  I want to make sure the labor market is improving at a sufficient pace.  That’s crucial to me.  But I also agree we’ve had a lot of problems with data dependence and trying to have the world understand that data have to feed into a view about the medium-term outlook.  I realize there is a downside of “based on incoming data.”  Even if you were to get rid of it, the new language makes clear that December is on the table, but it hasn’t been decided. I could certainly be supportive of getting rid of “based on incoming data,” but, having heard a number of people say they preferred   to get rid of it, I’d like to go around on that again. Does anybody want to speak on the issue of “based on incoming data”. Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statements made by Chair Yellen and Mr. Fischer seem to be in agreement with each other.


Passage number 273.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Well, as I said before, we’ve been saying that we’re data dependent, so I just don’t understand why, all of a sudden, we want to drop it.  It seems to me that we want the market to adjust their probability of their assessment in December based on information that we receive between now and the meeting, and that’s per Governor Powell’s point.  By having it in the statement, you’re basically telling people, “Pay attention to what’s happening to the incoming data in terms of how they inform the economic outlook.” CHAIR YELLEN. And it does explicitly say that we’re assessing the outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and questioning the sudden change in decision, but not engaging in a debate or argument with anyone.


Passage number 274.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right.  It’s not the data just for the data’s sake.  It’s the data in terms of how they affect our view of the progress toward our goals. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the importance of data in relation to achieving goals.


Passage number 275.
 MR. LACKER. Yes, I think the principles discussed by Kocherlakota and Laubach are relevant here. Obviously, it’s true, but if we leave it out, it’s obviously true, too.  We’re selecting what to emphasize here.  To Bullard’s point, we laid out a criterion a year ago in terms of cumulative progress, and this makes it sound as though we’re waiting for the last little smidgen of employment gains.  That tilts me toward leaving it out. CHAIR YELLEN.  When you say that things are based on cumulative progress, I’m not sure I totally understand that.  That’s part of it, but our outlook regarding where we’re going is very important.  In particular, it’s important to having reasonable confidence in the inflation outlook.  I can’t be entirely backward looking when it comes to evaluating that.  And to be forward looking, I need to be revising my outlook based on incoming data.  So I’m not sure I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The participants are discussing their own perspectives and preferences, but there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 276.
MR. LACKER.  Well, Madam Chair, I think one of the things often said in the wake of September is “moving the goalposts”—that there’s some confusion about what our criterion is.  We said “considerable improvement in labor market conditions.”  We put that phrase down there.  That was our criterion, and that suggests a cumulative quantum of progress. CHAIR YELLEN. On net.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: Both Mr. Lacker and Chair Yellen seem to be discussing and explaining the same point of view regarding the criterion for determining "considerable improvement in labor market conditions." There is no evident disagreement or contention between the two speakers in this passage.


Passage number 277.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We also said “reasonable confidence” about inflation though, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "reasonable confidence" was expressed about inflation.


Passage number 278.
 MR. LACKER. Right.  Yes, we did.  We had both of those.  Granted, the way we conduct policy has to do with the outlook and all of those things, but we laid down these more specific tactical criteria for lifting off. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, but reasonable progress and reasonable confidence are forward looking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Both speakers have a similar understanding and are discussing the criteria for lifting off.


Passage number 279.
 MR. LACKER. Well, on inflation, but on the labor market side, it was “considerable improvement.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Lacker and Chair Yellen agree that there has been a considerable improvement in the labor market.


Passage number 280.
 MR. TARULLO.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "Madam Chair" suggests that Governor Tarullo is addressing Chair Yellen with respect.


Passage number 281.
 MR. TARULLO.  John and I were the original progenitors of this idea, and, speaking only for myself, I think it’s a secondary issue.  I don’t think it’s probably worth, in the end, having a fight about it.  If you’re more comfortable with it, I’m fine with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Tarullo acknowledges that he and John were the original proponents of the idea, but he states that he personally sees it as a secondary issue and is willing to defer to what others are more comfortable with. Overall, he expresses a lack of interest in having a fight or argument about the issue.


Passage number 282.
 MR. EVANS.  I agree with that as well. If you’re more comfortable with including it, I’m fine with that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Let’s see.  There are other people.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen express agreement and indicate a willingness to include something.


Passage number 283.
  MR. KAPLAN.  Yes, I’m sorry—I hate to pile on here.  But, to me—and I’m coming at this as a, for lack of a better word, businessperson or market participant—this data dependence is confusing and sends the wrong signal.  It’s implicit that we’re going to be data dependent, but, by saying it, it suggests that this is more of a short-term decision than I actually think it is.  They understand that we have a long-term narrative, which is a very fundamental view of what’s going on in the economy, and that the data are a part of it.  But, at least to a layman participant, it’s somewhat confusing.  It suggests it’s much more of a short-term assessment than I actually think is reflected in the way we’re going to go at this. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a personal opinion and confusion about the use of the phrase "data dependence" in a decision-making process.


Passage number 284.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I could live with it either way, but the fact that we’re inserting it after so much emphasis on data dependence strikes me as a little gratuitous.  It’s going to generate a whole lot of intricate analysis—“What did they mean by that.”—when we have made this point before.  So, on balance, I favor not including it. I can live with it either way. CHAIR YELLEN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lockhart expresses his opinion and states that he could live with either outcome, while Chair Yellen does not provide any counterargument or disagreement.


Passage number 285.
  President Kocherlakota, did you want to— MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  No, I do not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. In the given exchange, President Kocherlakota directly responds with a firm "No, I do not" to a question, indicating his clear stance and lack of disagreement.


Passage number 286.
  [Laughter] MR.TARULLO. That’s the wisest last intervention in the history of the Federal Reserve. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement about President Williams' intervention being the wisest is made in a light-hearted manner, indicated by the laughter that follows the statement. It is not a serious argument or disagreement.


Passage number 287.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without further context.


Passage number 288.
 WILLIAMS.  I’m going to repeat what Governor Tarullo said.  I agree with him. First of all, you should do on this what you think is best.  I’m not trying to fight the fight, but I am going to react a bit to your interaction with President Lacker. The fact is, the September statement says that “the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.”  That sentence has everything youwere asking for.  What this does is, it inserts into that the additional phrase “based on incoming data.” CHAIR YELLEN. Which is always implicit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Williams agrees with Governor Tarullo and is reacting to President Lacker's interaction, but there is no conflict or argument present.


Passage number 289.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 290.
 WILLIAMS. Which is always implicit. You were reacting to President Lacker a little bit like, “Well, we have to make sure we talk about inflation.  We have to make sure we talk about the outlook.”  This sentence has the outlook.  It has inflation.  The sentence has everything you said we should have.  The only question is—and to President Lockhart’s comment—does it help on the margin to add in this extra clause “based on incoming data”. When I read “assess progress, both realized and expected,” maybe I’m just wedded to this language too much, but I think it captures what Governor Tarullo and I have been talking about a little bit yesterday and today.  This is the right way to think about monetary policy.  And I agree with President Kaplan.  It sounds as though there’s something short term that we’re looking for, too.  I realize this is your choice, and you should be comfortable with the language. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. Well, as I said, I’m actually comfortable taking it out.  I do understand the point here, and I think it has merit.  I am comfortable taking it out.  I do recognize that we sometimes focus markets on every little data point, and we want them, of course—as you’ve said, Vice Chairman—to be responsive and to know that we are thinking December is live.  We’re thinking about it.  Obviously, we haven’t made a decision.  Obviously, it depends on the data.  There’s an open question as to whether we’re going to move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing a minor change in wording and expressing their comfort with different options.


Passage number 291.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I really don’t think this is a big deal.  I don’t think the markets are going to be way in one place versus another whether we have this in or out.  So I’m happy to defer to your judgment. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their opinion but defers to the judgment of President Mester.


Passage number 292.
   MS. MESTER.  I want to remind people that the next sentence basically tells us that “this assessment will take into account a wide range of information.”  In some sense, you’ve already said we’re looking at a lot of information here in making the assessment.  So I think you could take it out without doing damage. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Mester is simply stating her opinion about removing a sentence from the assessment while Chair Yellen does not express disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 293.
 MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair, it’s up to you, of course, but I agree with Presidents Lockhart and Kaplan here.  I think it is a bit confusing, and we already had this language in here. CHAIR YELLEN. Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Bullard expresses disagreement with Chair Yellen's position.


Passage number 294.
 MS. BRAINARD.  I’ll defer to you as well.  I think the reason that it’s inserted here is as a counterbalance to inserting what seems like calendar-based language. All it’s doing is reminding people that, although we’re now being very explicit about December, we are also continuing to be data dependent.  That’s why I think it is actually a balancing concept within this sentence even though, in the broader context, people have already been put on notice.  But I would defer to the Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. MS. Brainard is deferring to the Chair and expressing her understanding of why the language is inserted.


Passage number 295.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm not able to generate a response without the passage. Can you please provide the passage you would like me to analyze?


Passage number 296.
 WILLIAMS.  We’re putting you on the spot. CHAIR YELLEN.  What do you think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between Williams and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 297.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just don’t think it’s that important, frankly. As people have said, it’s really a question of whether you want to underscore that it’s not about December per se—it’s about the incoming information.  With regard to Governor Brainard’s point, the question is, how much do you want to lean against the time element. That’s really the fundamental question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It reflects a discussion about the importance of a particular issue and explores different perspectives on it.


Passage number 298.
 MR. FISCHER.  I think there’s more to it. There is a question of whether we’re giving ourselves another way out, and leaving that impression is not something we want to do.  We’ve   got enough to form a complete judgment based on everything that’s in here.  So then the question would be, “Why did they say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer is expressing his opinion and discussing a potential question or concern, but there is no explicit disagreement between multiple parties.


Passage number 299.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, I think it is not a done deal.  It’s a close call, and the data will inform the view of whether you’re over the line or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and stating that the decision is not yet finalized. They acknowledge that it is a close call and that further data will help determine if the decision is valid or not.


Passage number 300.
 MR. FISCHER. But, Vice Chairman Dudley, as President Mester pointed out, following that, there is everything we’re going to look at. CHAIR YELLEN.  It says it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 301.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s fair, that’s fair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement or acceptance by repeating the phrase "that's fair."


Passage number 302.
 MS. BRAINARD. But that’s not new. This sentence is new. CHAIR YELLEN.  All right. It could go either way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both speakers seem to be in agreement with each other.


Passage number 303.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So when in doubt, don’t put something new in. CHAIR YELLEN.  I agree.  Let’s get rid of it. Let’s get rid of “based on incoming data.” Before we take a vote, if you would permit me a couple of words to wrap up the policy round, I would like to say a few words about communications.  The dealer survey this time contained grades on our communications performance and detailed comments that made for very painful reading.  We all bear responsibility here, myself included.  Looking forward, we have seven weeks to go before the December meeting.  And I believe it’s exceptionally important to maintain discipline in our communications.  Following up on what President Kocherlakota said earlier, I think our objective should be to try to make clear where we stand as a Committee. That principle is the very first guideline contained in our policy on external communications— namely, every Committee participant has an obligation to enhance the public’s understanding of monetary policy, including its rationale.  I think today’s statement means that, although no decision has been made on December, it very well may be appropriate to move at our next meeting if nothing new and unexpected happens to alter the outlook and the incoming data support our expectation that the economy is growing above trend and will continue to do so, with the labor market continuing to improve at an acceptable pace. Our statement indicates to the markets that December is a “live” possibility, but also, importantly, that no decision has been made.  I would urge you all to keep an open mind regarding the December decision and not to declare a position publicly before our next meeting.  I recognize that there may be some need for me to communicate about incoming information.  I mentioned earlier that, during the intermeeting period, I will be giving Congressional testimony twice and a speech. I think we also agree that, in spite of the intense focus on the timing of the first move, what matters for financial conditions and the outlook is the entire path of policy.  Importantly, based on the discussion we had about r* and in the policy round, we broadly agree that it will probably be appropriate for policy to follow a gradual path.  I did hear suggestions that we reconsider what’s now in paragraph 5 if we lift off, and we will work during the intermeeting period to do that.  But I want to remind you that, in a way, we live or die on the basis of these SEP numbers.  That dot plot is probably the most important form of communication we have about our expectations, and, if we move in December, it will play a disproportionate role in signaling to the markets the Committee’s expectations concerning the path of the policy rate.  So, in that regard, I think yesterday’s discussion about r* was very valuable and well timed, and I hope everyone will give a great deal of thought to what they write down in the SEP in December, understanding it is a very important communications device.Let me stop there, and I’ll ask Brian to read the statement and directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


