Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 18, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 18, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHellerJohnsonKeehnKelleySegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum,Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account8/18/87Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Zickler, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Hendricks, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof ClevelandMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis,Ms. Munnell, Mr. Thieke, and Ms. Tshinkel, SeniorVice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,San Francisco, Richmond, Cleveland, Kansas City,Boston, New York, and Atlanta, respectively-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof August 18, 1987MR. JOHNSON. In the absence of the Vice Chairman of theFOMC, I'll try to kick things off. I think we need to begin, though,with nominations for the chairmanship of the FOMC. And I'd like tonominate Mr. Greenspan as Chairman of the FOMC.MS. SEGER. And I'd like to second.MR. JOHNSON. Are there any objections? [Laughter.] Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That was a longer pause than I expected.[Laughter.] I'd like to entertain a motion to move the minutes.MS. SEGER. I'll move that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no objections, then theyare approved. Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Comments anyone?MR. JOHNSON. I have one, Mr. Chairman. I was looking thismorning at the Telerate. A lot of the reasons given on the dollar'sdecline are that oil traded down yesterday and oil prices are droppingthis morning in foreign markets. And I wonder how much of aninfluence that is having on the exchange rate too; it seems to move inparallel fashion.MR. CROSS. It has been mentioned that oil prices haveclearly softened. This morning's price is almost half a dollar belowwhat it was yesterday and it's almost a dollar below where it was aweek or so ago. This has been cited as another factor. Most of thepeople that our traders have been talking to seem to think thattoday's decline in the dollar is perhaps related to that, in part, butafter the initial impact of the decline, it seems to be more areflection of rather sour trade figures. Yesterday in New York, inthe latter part of the afternoon, the dollar began to soften withoutanything very dramatic happening; it was just gradually declining.And we are told that the Japanese are saying that when their marketsopened, they began to think that maybe they should cut some of theirpositions, so there was some selling both in Japan and in Europesubsequently, which brought us down to current levels. It's possiblethat oil prices are now a factor but more talk seems to be given tothis general attitude resulting from the continuing serious problemwith the trade deficit and the larger number announced on Friday.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. To what extent is the general apparentreduction of tensions in the Persian Gulf, which was obviously thecause of the decline in the oil price, actually the cause of thisretrenchment? In other words, periodically, when we see tensions inthe world, everyone rushes into the dollar; and, it looks to me as ifwe are just unravelling that particular position. It strikes me asrather difficult to believe that there is a secondary reaction to a8/18/87 -2-published news event. Is it possible that the markets are just easingbecause of the decline in tensions, and people are just reaching forexplanations of this sort? Or is there some reason to believe thatit's really more than that and that there has actually been someJapanese reevaluation, rather than this view being just somebody'shypothesis.MR. CROSS. Really, we don't have enough evidence, other thanwhat people are telling us. When the Middle East tensions flared uphere a couple of weeks ago, it was hard for us to see why that, initself, should have caused the dollar to go up so rapidly. We sawsome increase in [the price of] gold, but it came back down. We didnot see evidence that it was lots of [unintelligible] flows. It couldbe that there is a kind of writing down of the dollar in light of thesomewhat less troublesome situation in the Middle East. But we don'tsee much evidence of a lot of movement from this back and forth whichwould lead to that conclusion; it's possible that people's attitudesare influenced by it and, therefore, they are changing their viewsabout what is the proper level for the dollar, to some extent. It ispretty much a matter of guessing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What happened to the DM this morning?MR. CROSS. Well, the dollar fell in terms of both the DM andthe yen. It's now trading at about 1.85-1/4 DM and 147-1/4 yen. Soit has declined about 3-1/2 percent, I guess, from the levelsprevailing toward the end of last week before the trade figures wereannounced and whatever has happened that relates to them. It's asubstantial move.MR. PARRY. What about in relation to sterling?MR. CROSS. I don't have the sterling quote today. Butsterling has been under its own pressure because of the[unintelligible].MR. PARRY. That may indicate whether or not it is related tooil.MR. CROSS. Well, sterling sometimes acts like a petro-currency and sometimes it doesn't. You can't rely on it reflectingwhat happens in the Middle East. Well, sterling is up to 1.60-1.65.MR. PARRY. That's not oil.MR. CROSS. But it should not move that way if you followedthe hypothesis.MR. PARRY. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything else? May I have a motion toratify Mr. Cross' actions?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, they're approved.Mr. Sternlight.8/18/87MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. JOHNSON. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to second thatrecommendation for the additional amount.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we hold that until we getthrough the total discussion of Mr. Sternlight's remarks. We'll go tothat later.MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, in light of the increase in Japaneseinterest rates, have you detected a decline in Japanese participationin either the debt or equity markets?MR. STERNLIGHT. At times, there certainly did seem to be anabatement in their interest in the debt market; as for the equitymarket, we are continuing to hear that they are pretty active. Andthey have certainly continued to participate in Treasury auctions; inthis last auction they were there in the 10- and 30-year issues. Asfor purchases in the secondary markets, at times over the period wewere hearing of some pulling away from buying in our market as theirown rates were pushing higher.MR. HELLER. Can I follow up on that one? Both in Germanyand Japan, do you see the run-up in rates as mainly a result of policyactions taken or do you see it as a result of general economicconditions in the country changing?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, Sam Cross or Ted Truman might be in abetter position to comment. At least as it was passed along to me, Igot a sense that it was a bit more of the policy move type of thing.MR. CROSS. In Japan, the short-term rates haven't changed;the long-term rates have gone up sharply. It seems to be a littleelement of both of the factors that you talked about. Certainly, themarket forces led to a substantial increase in their longer-term ratesand they have been quite concerned about the vulnerability of theirfinancial situation given the stock market rise, the increase in realestate prices, and so forth. They also have allowed changes in someof these rates, like the long-term prime; they tell us they areresisting this, but at the end of the day it is clear that the long-term rates have gone up substantially. In Germany, I think there hasbeen a little snugging, but again, it is hard to say how much, becausethere have been some other things going on.MR. TRUMAN. I don't have anything to add to Mr. Cross'comments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further comments?MR. JOHNSON. Peter, on your concerns about September: Arewe anticipating, or is the Treasury anticipating, a cash balanceproblem?MR. STERNLIGHT. We are anticipating a sizable buildup. Iwouldn't say it's an unmeetable problem at this stage. I don't thinkwe'll approach the record levels that we had last April when theirtotal balance got up to $54 billion or so, and the balance at the Fed8/18/87 -4-was $30 billion. I think their total balance could get up to the $40-50 billion range and that could put the balance at the Fed somewhereat $25 billion, or something like that. It could be a substantialreserve-draining factor.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything else? I need ratification oftwo items. First, I'll entertain a motion to ratify the open markettransactions since the July meeting.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any objections? Secondly, we needanother motion to approve the increase in intermeeting leeway.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I move on that.MS. SEGER. I second that.MR. ANGELL. I guess the question is: Why not ask for enough?If $10 billion might not do it, why not ask for $12 billion?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I considered that. But for almost anynumber I would pick, Governor, I could imagine circumstances thatwould take it a little beyond that. So, I'm picking what I thinkmight well do it, but I just want to put the Committee on notice thatit could conceivably come in beyond that. If I presented $12 billion,I'd like to feel more confidence than I can feel at this stage of[unintelligible].MR. ANGELL. My question is: Is there any real danger oferring on the side of having too much leeway to be able to manage theaccount the way we want to manage it?MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't see it as a danger. I think itmay just be that the Committee would want to keep close to thesituation and realize that if some even larger increase were needed,you'd like to be informed in some formal manner and have a chance tonote that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell is raising the rightquestion. This is an extraordinary circumstance. If it happens, Idon't think there's any reason not to expand it, so why don't weincrease it--what did you want?--to $12 billion.MR. STERNLIGHT. As best our projections look.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Give us a number which you sleep wellwith.MR. STERNLIGHT. I was shrinking from that, Mr. Chairman,because I just did not have that degree of confidence, but I'll stickmy neck out at $12 billion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is a technical problem which doesnot confront the Committee very often.8/18/87 -5-MR. STERNLIGHT. It does get published and people will lookat it and say: "Gosh, did they really think it was going to go thathigh?"MR. ANGELL. And I guess the answer is yes. [Laughter.]MR. JOHNSON. The answer is, we want to be prepared if itdoes.MR. GUFFEY. It is a simple matter, however, to get thatauthority by wire if the need exists.MR. STERNLIGHT. There has never been any difficulty ingetting the authority as we needed it, if a situation arose.MR. ANGELL. Do you want to formally recommend?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have to formally change the motion.Was it Jerry Corrigan who made the wrong motion? [Laughter.]VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think I can make it $12 billion.[Laughter.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I assume it is approved. Thank you.Mr. Prell.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. PARRY. I have two questions about the forecast. If youwere to take another look at your forecast for the third quarter--incorporating the most recent data with regard to employment, retailsales, and production--do you think the number you'd come up withwould be higher? And is it possible that the weakest quarter of theyear, in fact, could turn out to be the second quarter?MR. PRELL. Well, we won't know for sure what the secondquarter looked like even in next week's numbers. At this point, theincoming expenditure flow numbers don't point clearly to an upward ora downward revision. For the third quarter, I suppose if we were torecalculate today, our best guess is that our number would befractionally higher; I would say that it would not necessarily differsignificantly from the second quarter. But, just on the basis of theretail sales data, we could see a number that would be closer to 3percent.MR. PARRY. My second question involves inflation. You havea very sharp drop-off, as you did last month, in the second half'sinflation rate in terms of the GNP fixed-weight deflator. It seems alittle surprising to me, particularly given the revisions to GNP datathat we saw in the last month and also the somewhat brighter glow tothe economic statistics. I'm not sure I understand what's causingthat.MR. PRELL. Well, if we dissect the forecast, thedeceleration is primarily in the consumption area and, in part, thatreflects better food prices, as I noted. And, unless something goesseriously awry, the increase in energy prices in the second half willbe distinctly slower than in the first half. We may get a little8/18/87bulge in the near term, but for the second half as a whole, we areexpecting considerable slowing. Also, we have been moderatelyencouraged by the trend in the non-energy services area for consumerexpenditures; it seems to have decelerated a bit over the last 6-12months, so that has carried through for a little while longer in ourforecast.MR. PARRY. But you have more than a doubling of the growthrate of PCE, and final sales are up very substantially in the thirdquarter.MR. PRELL. Of course, part of that surge in consumptionexpenditures--and certainly a large part--is in the automobile areawhere, to get that surge, they're going to have to give someconcessions in the way of lower interest rates or a more generousrebate program.MR. BOEHNE. I'd like to explore a couple of areas. You madethe point that 6 percent unemployment, more or less, is getting intothe kind of full employment zone where you start to get inflationpressures. It seems to me that as you look across the country, andeven within regions, there is such a variability of unemployment ratesthat this average can be awfully misleading. Take my District, forexample. We have a number of areas where the unemployment rate isaround 3 percent. We also have a few areas where the unemploymentrate is 8 percent. And I would guess that across the country, youwould find unemployment ranges from 3 percent to, maybe, 10 or 12percent. Doesn't a lot depend on where the additional growth comesfrom? For example, we're going to see the growth coming inmanufacturing. Does that 6 percent mean what you would think it wouldmean, on average? It seems to me that is the kind analysis which,while it has an appeal, is greatly oversimplified, given thevariability. That is one area you might talk about.MR. PRELL. Well, I did try to highlight some of thegeographic disparities in the chart show [presentation to theCommittee] last month, where I showed that, regionally, theunemployment rates are substantially different and we have been seeingdifferent wage trends. Clearly, the Northeast is the area where theaverage unemployment rate has been distinctly lower, and we have notbeen seeing the wage deceleration, judging by the employment costindex, for example, over the past couple of years. Historically,obviously, the economy has never been perfectly level. We try tocompress this into one statistic, but there are always disparities inunemployment rate levels. At the present time, the disparity might bea little greater than it typically has been. But, when you get intothe question of where the pressure points are going to be, this ishard to say. Clearly, there is some slack in some of the prime heavyindustry areas of the country. On the other hand, some of theindustries that may benefit from the improvement in trade are locatedin areas of the country where the labor markets are a little tighter.For example, some industries in the Northeast will probably bebenefitting from increased competitiveness. We approach this questionwith a degree of humility. We can't state precisely what the naturalrate of unemployment is; we assign a fairly broad band, and werecognize that the question of bottlenecks or fortuitous precisematching of the increase in demand to the areas that have the mostslack could create some variation in those spots. Basically, though,8/18/87we think the anecdotal evidence is there. It's sort of a SportsIllustrated story: Once you're on the cover, it's the kiss of death.The Business Week type of headline that we are now in a crunch isoverblown a bit. We have a sense that the labor market has tightened,though we have not seen the pressures on wages in--MR. BOEHNE. The other area I'd like to explore is the tradenumbers. You made the point that, in the forecast, we count onimprovement in foreign demand to more than offset the weaker domesticdemand. And yet, if we're moving sideways in terms of real exports--in a context of weak activity in Germany and real doubts in Japan--howdoes all that fit together? How do you get a boost from the foreignside when real net exports are moving sideways and you have weakness?MR. TRUMAN. In nominal terms, you have a slight weakness. Weare expecting, after all, that in the translation that you go through,we will end up later this month with a trade balance for the secondquarter which is essentially the same, in nominal terms, as we had inthe first quarter. But you would still have some small improvement inthe second quarter in real terms on top of improvements in both thefirst quarter and the fourth quarter [of last year]. Basically, theeffect of the sustained period of exchange rate depreciation that wehave had, despite the slower growth abroad which you quite correctlypoint to, is now giving an added boost; in fact, it's strikingsomething off.MR. BOEHNE. So you expect the improvement in real netexports to continue. Is that--MR. TRUMAN. That is correct.MR. PARRY. Not in the third quarter.MR. TRUMAN. In the third quarter, we think we're going tohave this special effect with the oil--MR. BOEHNE. But out beyond that?MR. TRUMAN. Beyond that, we expect essentially the sameforecast as this time--most of it accounted for by the exchange ratedepreciation, taking account of the weak growth abroad.MR. MORRIS. I have a gut feeling that the economy in thelast half of this year and going into 1988 is going to be strongerthan we have projected, and I've been examining numbers trying tofigure out where the greater strength will come from. It seems to methat it could well be from the producer durable equipment sector whereyou show a continued rise in manufacturing capacity utilizationthroughout the period. In recent months, we've seen a very strongtrend in new orders for capital goods. Yet in your projection, afterthe current quarter, you show only a very modest growth rate. Do youview this as an area of vulnerability in your forecast?MR. PRELL. I think if we were to identify the areas inwhich we would be most likely to get some upside surprises, that isone. Our forecast for this year for nominal business fixed investmentcontinues to be below what the surveys were indicating a few monthsago, and it's clear that orders are picking up. Basically, we have a8/18/87forecast, though, that seems in line with historical patterns, givingconsideration to the cost of capital and what presumably would be arather modest accelerator effect here. We don't have output growth onthe whole as all that strong, so we have a moderate increase in fixedinvestment. But that certainly is one of the areas where a surprisewould be less shocking to us.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I guess I just want you to play a "what if" gamewith me. With respect to oil prices--I'm not an expert on foreignaffairs or any kind of affairs--but the disruption in the PersianGulf, I think, definitely has had an impact on oil prices, as youmentioned earlier. But what if they sweep the mines away and thetensions are relieved. Then, if we were to see oil prices comingdown, let's say, to $15 or $16 per barrel--that's not my estimate,just assume that would happen--what would that kind of change in thisone factor do to your overall forecast? It just seemed to me, as Iread through this material a number of times, that the high oilprices, and rising oil prices, were driving many of our concerns onthe forecast over the rest of this year and into next year.MR. PRELL. If I may turn briefly to Mr. Morris' question,one thing that we've had in our minds as a sort of cautionary note onthese orders figures and so on, is that we can't tell how much of thatmight be potential exports; so, at this point those numbers need to beread cautiously. Our view on the oil situation, as I tried tosuggest, is that we could see a downside risk. Evidently, there hasbeen a considerable move to stockpile oil. If we get into another oneof these swings where there's a movement toward destocking, and theOPEC swing producers don't cut back promptly enough, we could see atleast a temporary drop in crude oil prices, maybe to an even lowerlevel than you've suggested. But, basically, we think we haveperceived, since the end of last year, a reasonable enough coherencein the OPEC countries in containing production within levels thatenable them to sustain prices at their target level. So we tend tothink that any crunch is likely to be relatively short-lived andwould, perhaps, introduce some [unintelligible] in prices of finalproducts, petroleum products. But we would be quite surprised to seesomething that was permanent enough to produce a significantly lowertrend in energy prices over the forecast horizon.MR. TRUMAN. Governor Seger, we have not raised our oil priceassumption for next year; in fact, it's the same one we had inFebruary. So, in some sense, you have to have some drawback in orderfor our forecast to be correct. Obviously, there are some risks: wewere talking about the risk that the OPEC agreement that they madelate last year would fall apart and that--MS. SEGER. I think there's no honor among thieves. As thoseprices rise, I think those people are going to be more and moretempted to cheat, and they will continue to cheat. They're cheatingnow in that they're exceeding their own quotas--ones that they setamong themselves. I guess I'm not prepared to think that they'll getreligion real quickly.MR. TRUMAN. Well, that's one of the reasons why you'redamned if you do, and damned if you don't; it's one of the reasons why8/18/87we had essentially stuck with an assumption that was close to whatthey were targeting six or eight months ago. What will come out overthis forecast period, not certainly that there was cheating among--.The real issue has to do with the behavior of the key producers in theGulf region--[whether] Saudi Arabia, just as it is now producing moreoil, will cut back sufficiently to sustain the price at something like$18 a barrel. One of the factors which is [unintelligible] productionover this period more than is necessary to take off being driven bythe stockpiling.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that the Saudis are a self-correcting mechanism because they have maintained that posted $18 abarrel light Arabian crude price, and if the spot price goes under it,their liftings will fall, because no one is going to pay $18 if thespot is $17-1/2. So, it's a sort of self-correcting mechanism, whichworked in the very beginnings of this. And I think that's one of thereasons the cheating is really an issue and was relevant to bringingcrude price from, say, $22 a barrel down to $18. But the Saudis havedemonstrated that they can lock the price at that level.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, of course, [unintelligible].Governor Seger, if you wanted to adjust your thinking on this in termsof our rule--MS. SEGER. That's not my forecast.MR. PRELL. But in terms of our rule-of-thumb, $5 a barrel isworth something like a percentage point on the CPI over the course ofthe year, and significantly less than that, obviously, in GNP prices,in domestic output prices.MS. SEGER. Wouldn't that also help our trade balance?Again, it seems to me that the higher price of oil that we areimporting has been a negative. I would assume that that would cutcurrent dollar imports, anyway, if nothing else changed.MR. TRUMAN. In the short run, I think it's going to be theother way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me comment that Ithink our forecast parallels the forecast that appears in theGreenbook this time. But a question, I guess to Mike: With regard tothe really sharp swing that you have between the third and fourthquarters in personal consumption expenditures, and the resultingbuildup in inventories, which we have somewhat [unintelligible] forthe period ahead, is that in your forecast totally as a result of theauto sales picture that you've described?MR. PRELL. Effectively.MR. GUFFEY. No other factors--MR. PRELL. That's the key factor.MR. GUFFEY. The other question I would pose has to do withyour outlook on inflation and your rather sharp jump in the unit labor8/18/87cost that appears between the third and fourth quarters and continueson out through the projected period. It's my impression, at least,that other than the autos that come up in September, the union-labornegotiations [calendar] is very thin, and we can't see where you'regetting that kind of a jump in the output, the decrease inproductivity, and so forth.MR. PRELL. Well, maybe we didn't successfully answer this,but the productivity numbers are being bounced around by ourexpectation of what the timing of Labor Day will do to the hoursnumbers in September. We feel that this is a sound enough arithmeticpoint, in terms of our understanding of how the data have run over theyears. We have a very low September level in these numbers, whichaffects the average level of hours in the fourth quarter; so we havethis gyration of 2 percent growth in productivity in the third quartergoing down to 1/2 percent in the fourth. On the compensation side, wehave the beginnings of an acceleration in compensation over the secondhalf of this year, but there isn't a big third- to fourth-quarterjump; the big jump there is in the first quarter next year when higherpayroll taxes take effect.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. We have already touched on this, but have youdone some analysis of the impact of higher energy prices on theacceleration in inflation we have seen so far this year?MR. PRELL. Well, I'm not sure what kind of analysis you havein mind. It's clear that it has been a very significant factor. Forthe year as a whole, we have energy prices contributing 2-1/4 percent,roughly, to the acceleration in the prices of consumption andinvestment goods. It's clear, though, that the first-halfacceleration in consumer prices is largely in energy prices; foodprices haven't done so well, but that's a rather small contributor tothe first-half acceleration; it's primarily energy prices.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Mike, I wanted to ask about short- andintermediate-term business demand. How do you conceptualize theslowdown that is occurring there? How would you explain that?MR. PRELL. Short- and intermediate-term business credit?MR. MELZER. Yes.MR. PRELL. Well, part of it, we think, is the move tolonger-term financing after we had an interruption of the flow, so tospeak, when rates backed up earlier this spring. The rates came downa little, and maybe [unintelligible] corporate treasurers began tothink that they shouldn't be waiting for still more decline. Theyseem to have come to market in significant size. As best we can sortthese things out, that's the one thing we can put our finger on thatthe data would seem to support very clearly. We don't see it asreflecting a sudden drop-off in inventory accumulation, for example;the data just don't show that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.-10-8/18/87MR. HELLER. Michael, in the federal deficit reduction to$123 billion that the Administration is projecting, can you provide uswith more details? Is it mainly on the expenditure side or therevenue side?MR. PRELL. I haven't had an opportunity to commit all thisto memory yet. You're focusing on which year?MR. HELLER. On your handout, there is a drop from $158billion to $123 billion, and then you say with policy action--MR. PRELL. Basically, we assumed, in addition to someCongressional action that has already occurred, that something akin totheir program will be adopted--an action which gives you on the orderof $35 billion in deficit reduction. That's on a par with theCongressional budget resolution number as well. The outlay number for1988 that they have now is $8 billion a month above their Januaryestimate. Obviously, the revenue is the other thing, and the receiptsnumber is $7-1/2 billion below the January estimate. That's largely areflection of the downward revision in their forecast of corporateincome tax receipts. That's the major [unintelligible]. On theoutlay side, they have had to respond to the higher interest ratesthey have seen. They're expecting somewhat higher interest paymentsand they're also responding to the higher inflation that we've had,which will feed through to a larger cost-of-living adjustment forsocial security recipients and federal pension recipients. These arethe major features of the changes of the baseline for the 1988 budgetnumber.MR. HELLER. Thanks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff has done anunusually good job in describing the outlook, and I know Mike has donea very exceptional job in handling some very difficult questions. Iguess I come out pretty close to where Frank Morris is on this. Ithink that the recent spate of statistics indicates that the economyis really beginning to strengthen quite a bit and a lot of thatapparently is resulting from improved exports. I would sort ofdiscount the last figures we got from Census on the trade balance onthe grounds that you have a lot of price increases of imported goodsin there, and price increases on oil, and probably some anticipatorybuying because of the oil problems and also because of protectionistlegislation. So, if this is true, then I think we could see somebigger figures than the staff is projecting. We are approaching theend of the fifth year of economic expansion at a time when we wouldexpect bottlenecks to begin to appear, and I think they are in someindustries. This is the kind of environment in which we could seewage and cost pressures begin to turn around from what we have beenfortunate to have had in the immediate past, along with this furtherheightening of inflationary pressures and attendant upward pressure onlong-term interest rates. So, I think it's a situation where we haveto increase the care with which we look at the situation; we're now ina different era from where we were a couple of months or so ago.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Forrestal.-11-8/18/87MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our forecast haschanged very, very little since the last FOMC meeting. We still havegrowth in '87 turning out to be in the 2-1/2 to 3 percent range; ifthere is any change in the forecast, it is that we now think we mayvery well get closer to the 3 percent level than to the 2-1/2; so, theforecast really is for growth to be just a tad below 3 percent. If wehave any differences with the Greenbook, they're very minor. In '88,I think we may very well get somewhat higher growth. I'm also not asoptimistic about the deficit picture; I just have a gut reaction that,given the election year, and so on, it may be difficult to achieve anymeaningful improvement there. Last month I mentioned that we had asizable difference of opinion with the staff about personalconsumption expenditures; I see that the staff has adjusted theirnumbers up, but I still think they're a bit on the low side; but thestaff has come a little closer to our forecast, anyhow. On balance,Mr. Chairman, we don't have much difference with the staff forecast ongrowth.As far as inflation is concerned, we have the deflator risingto about 4 percent or a little more in 1988 and, I must say, thisgives me some cause for concern. I think that we were all hopefulthat the low numbers we saw in price gains in 1986 were permanent, butI'm beginning to think they are not; and I think that we still seem tobe stuck with a trend of inflation that's somewhat higher than wewould like to see. At earlier meetings over the past couple ofmonths, I was worried that economic activity could fall on the shortside of the forecast. Now I've changed my mind in that I thinkperhaps the risks are on the other side, as some other speakers haveindicated. Revisions to the earlier data and higher activity in thefirst half suggest that the appreciable decline we have seen in theunemployment rate probably is not a fluke. We kept thinking thatthere was something wrong with those numbers and that the unemploymentrate would go back up. But it hasn't done that. And with the rate at6 percent, I think we are awfully close to the point where somepressure on wages is likely to emerge, as the staff has indicated.So, in this environment, it seems to me that the inflationary risks ofeconomic activity turning out higher rather than lower are fairlysubstantial; and it wouldn't take very much, in my judgment, forexpectations to build pretty significantly for higher inflation.I'd like to say a word about the District. Economic activityin the Sixth District continues to be fairly good and, in fact, it'sgaining momentum. The weak areas in the economy, particularlyLouisiana, are beginning to show improvement partially, or perhapsprimarily, due to the increase in the price of oil. For example, thenumber of active rigs in Louisiana and in the Mississippi coast areaof Alabama is the highest in two years. So that is fairly good news.The other thing that is perhaps interesting to note is that, whereas afew months ago, people that we talk to around the District were notreporting any significant price increases, now they are indicatingthat the prices of their raw materials, for example, are going up.And for the first time, we're hearing people say that they are, infact, able to pass through some of these price increases to theircustomers. That's a significant change from reports that we had hadpreviously.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.-12-8/18/87MR. KEEHN. Our forecast is certainly quite consistent withthe staff forecast as it relates to this year. However, I will saythat our outlook for 1988 is somewhat stronger. And, I would jointhose who have commented that, as we go along, the revisions arelikely to be up rather than down.Our District has lagged the rest of the country in therecovery, but since the end of last year that has not been the case.As we look at our industries and our indicators, we are tending atleast to equal the national numbers. This year, for example, as wehave gone through the year, employment increases in our five stateshave been consistently equal to the national increases. The increaseshave tended to be on the nonmanufacturing side, but even in themanufacturing category, we are significantly above the low level ofmanufacturing employment prevailing at the end of 1982. Unemploymentcontinues to be a little higher than the national average, about apercentage point higher; nonetheless, that margin seems to be comingdown. And, I do think that some of the manufacturing sectors thathave been going through a very difficult period are showing reallysurprising strength. In steel, for example, which is a very toughindustry, the steel plants that are producing sheet steel are about atcapacity. Those producing structural steel are lower than that, butnonetheless stronger than you might expect. And, there are a numberof other categories in the machinery side that are showingimprovement. A large manufacturer of diesel engines in our area isnow really having a hard time keeping up with the demand; constructionequipment is stronger; and even the railroad equipment business, whichhas been absolutely moribund, is beginning to show some signs of life.All of this, of course, excludes autos, though the sale numbers forautos, as Mike is suggesting, continue to look like 10 million or more[unintelligible] this year or next year. The production schedules inthe third quarter will be down by about 13 percent; and for the fourthquarter, though the schedules are not final, it looks like they'll bedown about 5 percent. And the inventories do not seem to be out ofline.On the agricultural side, I have just a quick comment. I amalmost hard pressed to say that, certainly, we have stabilized; andthere are even some signs of improvement. The land values, which inthe first quarter were level, at least, did show improvement in thesecond quarter; those land values continue to move up a bit, albeitfrom very, very low levels. Nevertheless, transactions that aretaking place show some sign of strength in land values. There was, asyou know, a recent revision in farm income; and the outlook for thisyear is for a significant increase and, therefore, those farm incomenumbers look pretty good. Surprisingly--or at least I find itsurprising--the increase in farm income is not a result of highersubsidies, but rather of a decrease in production costs, which is anencouraging sign. So that part of the agricultural sector lookspretty good. Admittedly, we have a long way to go before the harvest,but at this point the growing conditions look good. We wouldanticipate good crop yields per acre and, in some areas, there will berecord production. The overall production will be down by 12 percent;the acreage is down even more-- say, 14 percent; but, again, we have anet improvement in yield. So, I do think the conditions in theDistrict are much improved for the rest of this year and into nextyear.-13-8/18/87But, as I pointed out, there are a couple of key areas. Onthis trade balance issue, I've had the feeling all year that we wereseeing a correction; the people I talk to suggest that that is thecase. The June numbers were certainly disappointing. I hope there'snothing fundamental there. But if the major economies in the world donot turn around and begin to pick up and take our exports, thisobviously will have a big impact. On the inflation side, we areseeing some of the price increases that Mike mentioned. They are in acouple of categories. Specifically, in steel, one manufacturerincreased prices 4 to 6 percent and this time they're sticking--again,at very low levels. But if these price increases begin to becomepervasive, and then go through to the labor side, I think the outlookfor inflation will be quite different. I don't yet sense that. Allthe people I talk to who are negotiating labor contracts arecontinuing to get very good results: reasonably modest increases on anannual basis, and importantly, very good work rule changes, so thatproductivity and unit labor costs seem to be better. But, I do thinkthese are, of course, the two key areas: the trade balance andinflation. Net, I think the economy, both nationally and in ourDistrict, continues to look good and seems to be improving. As we goalong here, there is the opportunity for increasing the growthforecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, our forecast is in basic agreementwith the Greenbook forecast, but I'd agree that the risks, in terms ofgrowth, are on the upside, for many of the reasons that have beenmentioned. For example, we have assumed the $25 billion deficit-reduction measures which are indicated in the Greenbook, and it'spossible that some portion of those measures will not be enacted.That's another area, in this case resulting from the governmentsector, where we could see a greater boost to GNP, at least until someof the secondary impacts of a greater deficit are felt. Moreover,when we look at the 12th District, the data to us, particularly in thearea of employment and retail sales, indicate strong growth. And thediscussions I've had over the past month with directors--not only atthe head office but also at our four branches--indicate a greateroptimism about business prospects than I have ever seen in the yearand a half that I've been with the System. I'm more pessimistic oninflation than the Greenbook, since I believe that the fixed-weightprice index will continue to advance at a 4 to 4-1/2 percent rate inthe last half of this year and remain in that range in 1988. It seemsto me that recent tightening in labor markets raises the chances ofprice increases in 1988, and it certainly heightens my longer-runconcerns about inflation. It would appear to me that, at this point,our room to maneuver is rather limited, with the labor market aroundfull employment, nominal short-term interest rates rising about 100basis points next year--at least in our forecast--and real interestrates rising only slightly. The current forecast that we have and theone that is in the Greenbook hold out little or no prospect of theinflation rate subsiding in the near future.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, our forecast also is pretty muchin agreement with the staff forecast. We have strengthened ouroutlook for the national economy for the rest of this year and going-14-8/18/87into next year. We think we do have a rate of expansion that issustainable. Subjectively, it is a little hard for me really tobelieve all that, given what has been going on in our particular partof the country. While we are seeing a little improvement, wecertainly are lagging the rest of the country. Both anecdotally andstatistically, we can kind of show that we are working through thetrough; but the recovery, to the extent that there is one, is sofragile that it would not take very much to have us continue thedownturn that we've been in for the last couple of years. Referencehas been made to energy. We have seen a little improvement there,certainly, in terms of perceptions. There has been a littleimprovement in construction, but it's not in building; it's in roads,public construction, that sort of thing. Manufacturing looks prettygood. In agriculture, we are continuing to see cropland valuesdecline and we are not through yet; of course, we came into this ayear or two after the Midwest, in particular. And, of course,everybody reads about the conditions of the financial institutions.One concern that we are hearing, primarily from people in mid-sizedand small businesses, is that they're very concerned that they're notgoing to get credit. And without credit, they're not going to be ableto grow and expand and create jobs. This is something that we'rehearing more and more. The banks are not willing or able to lend, anda cutoff of credit has occurred; and they don't see very much end toit.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Is it because banks and thrifts aregetting super conservative? Is that the idea?MR. BOYKIN. That's a lot of it, Jerry. The bankers say thatthere just is not any loan demand. The small and mid-sizedbusinessmen say we have the demand but banks won't take the risk. So,I think it's probably somewhere in between--the banks are not seeingthe kind of demand in the loans that they are willing to make.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I agree in general with what the Greenbook saysand what I've heard about the outlook. I do think it's picking up; itlooks better and there is some growing upside risk. However, I have anumber of concerns that really cause me to question this viewcompletely, and there are a few problems that I have with theGreenbook forecast, in particular. So, I'm still uncertain, overall.First, the growth that we see appears to be primarily due to theimprovement in real net exports; export volume is causing the stimulusthat we see right now. And, if that is indeed the case--if most ofthe growth is coming in the external area rather than in domesticaggregate demand--you have to really ask yourself how much of thepotential Phillips-curve type effects on pricing you can get from thatkind of growth. And that modest expansion in aggregate demand, Ithink, is being verified somewhat by the aggregates, as well as byother types of evidence for consumption. You really have to ask howmuch inflation pressure can be produced by that type of a scenario.When you look at the broader inflation indexes, the CPI, excludingenergy, shows some pressure, but the PPI shows no influence outsidethe energy area. As a matter of fact, it has been decelerating thisyear, ex-oil. So you really don't see a broad buildup yet on theprice side.-15-8/18/87The staff forecast has rising interest rates, and I thinksome of their policy assumptions are inconsistent with the forecast.That rise in interest rates, at least if the aggregate models arecorrect, is going to produce a further weakening in the monetaryaggregates. Looking at a further weakening in the monetaryaggregates, you have to ask yourself: How much nominal GNP can youget out of those kinds of aggregate growth rates, and does thevelocity number that is consistent with that make any sense at all toyou? I don't think you can get too much from a rising interest ratesscenario out of the aggregates to produce enough nominal GNP toproduce a serious risk.The other point I have is on the movement of the dollar. Oneproblem I have on the dollar is what I pointed out yesterday in theBoard meeting: we really have had no net depreciation of the dollarthis year. Now, there's always the possibility, and I continue toworry about the downside risks on the dollar. I know it has come offa little today; we've talked about some of the reasons. But the factof the matter is that there has been no net dollar depreciation thisyear and we're late into the year. The forecast is contingent upon a10 percent depreciation in '87 to produce the lagged effects on pricesin '88. Of course, there are still four months of opportunity forthat. But you have to ask yourself, if you're not going to realizethat kind of dollar depreciation this year, how are you going to getthose lagged effects for '88? The other point is that if the oilprice is expected to hover in the $18 range--and it's my feeling thatthe dollar is being influenced some by the oil price--an oil price inthat range will keep the dollar high relative to the currencies ofmajor industrial surplus countries like the mark and the yen. And ifthe dollar stays stronger because the oil price hovers in the $18range, how are we going to get the dollar depreciation? On all ofthese questions, I'm not saying that they can't be overcome, because Isee the outlook picking up some, too. But I really haven't resolvedthese questions in my mind and I think they are serious alternativeissues to deal with. So, given these problems, I don't think we haveenough evidence to expect a big upward move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. In many ways, Manley, you've made my speech,because I think what I hear you saying is that there is moreuncertainty than some of the comments might indicate. It does seem tome that it's appropriate for us to assume that inflationary pressuresneed to be dealt with, and that it's appropriate for us to have amonetary aggregate growth path such as we have been having. To me, a4 percent M1, M2, and M3 path is, in itself, a rather significantantidote for these inflationary pressures that exist. Even thoughthose inflationary pressures are there, and we are far from havingturned the corner in abating these price increases, there might besome possibility that we will be successful if we are willing tomaintain a monetary aggregates growth path such as we have. Andthere's something that I notice when I get out in the country and Italk to farmers and people in the oil business and realtors: there isa sense of unease that's in our country that really goes against whatyou were suggesting, Si, in regard to farm income. It is true that1986 was a record year for net cash farm income; and 1987 is going tobe another record above that record. But what I notice is that thereis a conservatism, or even a super conservatism, that exists. Those-16-8/18/87people who are the survivors, and those businesses that aresuccessful, are the ones that kept their borrowing down. I notice norush to borrow; I notice no stories from the entrepreneur types abouthow it makes sense to borrow money to do this or to do that. I noticeinstead that the fast-food business is not quite what it was, and thatowning houses doesn't seem to be quite the way to profit. And Inotice some unease and a scare out there that moderates behavior.So, it might be that this growth path of the monetaryaggregates could bring a stop to the commodity price rises that we'veseen during the last year, beginning last August. And if thesecommodity price rises do abate and the inflation expectation goesaway, there is some possibility that deflationary forces could onceagain return. I think what we need to do at this point is to be open:to look at the various possibilities and to see if we can do the trickof getting commodity price rises stopped in sufficient time beforethey feed back into the wage/price cycle. If that can beaccomplished, then it seems to me that a 4.1 percent GNP deflator anda 4.5 percent increase in the fixed-weight index for 1988 is totallyunacceptable. We just must not let that occur. But having said that,let's not get ourselves too ready for an overkill.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I am considerably more comfortable with theGreenbook forecast at this meeting than I was in July, because itseems to me that the thrust of the latest statistics on the economy,with the revisions, serves to bolster the underpinnings andcredibility of that forecast, at least in my mind. I think therevisions are important, as well, in this story because I think theyhelp to put things in a more consistent picture. Throughout theexpansion, it seems to me, we've had consistently strong increases inemployment and we were seeing weaker increases than I would haveexpected in GNP and so forth; and at least in my mind, some of thatgap has been reduced. I think we are looking at an economy thatreally has been performing rather well.That's certainly consistent with what's going on in the NinthDistrict. I have talked before about the two-tier economy and thedivergence between what's happening in the urban areas, which aredoing well, and the rural areas. But the latest developments suggestthat that gap has diminished; that is, the rural economies are doingbetter, in part because agriculture is doing better, and in partbecause other aspects of the natural resource industries that therural area of the Ninth District depends on are doing better. Andthat's encouraging. I might also comment on the fact that I'vereceived a number of unsolicited reports from businessmen in theDistrict about increased interest in export opportunities--that is,potential foreign customers coming to them to explore thepossibilities of sales abroad of various products. This is everythingfrom the high-tech end of the world to some very basic commodities.Again, I think that's consistent with what we have seen happening inthe economy recently and what our forecasts suggest.I do think that, with all that good news, we probably areapproaching a critical point when it comes to inflationary pressures.As Mike indicated, I think you can attribute much of the accelerationin the broad price indexes so far this year to the effects of higher-17-8/18/87energy prices. But I think that looking forward, we have a number ofthings on the horizon that give me some pause even if energy priceslevel off or maybe even come down a bit from here. One is clearlywhat we're seeing in the bond market here and elsewhere around theworld, where there are some signs of heightened inflationaryexpectations that manifest themselves in long-term rates. Secondly, Iguess I'm not confident at all that in fiscal 1988 we'll achieve aFederal budget deficit significantly below this year's level. Infact, it could could be higher, if we're not a bit lucky. And,finally, as far as the labor market goes, I don't know what thenatural rate of unemployment is, but whatever it is, we certainly haveto be a lot closer to it today than we have been recently. And notsurprisingly, if you look at unemployment by various demographicgroups, as you would expect, we are at the lowest rates ofunemployment in general since 1980 and, in some cases, since 1977.For some groups you have to go back to 1977, at least using quarterlyaverage data, to find unemployment rates that low. I think we havebenefitted heretofore from the rigidities in the wage determinationprocess with which we are all familiar; I'm not talking just aboutwhat goes on with unions, but just the way business is run. But Idon't think that we can count on those rigidities in that wagedetermination process always working in our favor, particularly ifprice indexes start to move up here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our views ofeconomic conditions closely parallel the staff's forecast in theGreenbook. As some others have suggested, there are a couple of areaswhere we differ a bit. One is in the growth of income, and the otheris in consumption. On balance, it appears to us that the economy ispicking up strength. Employment, output, and exports are expanding,as we see it, and we have noticed a jump in prices. Comments by ourdirectors and others support this view. Even the hardest hit sectors--commercial construction, agriculture, and metals--are said,particularly by our directors, to be enjoying a period of stabilityand possible turnaround. So it's not surprising, I guess, that wewould suggest that our forecast shows more strength, on balance, thanis indicated in the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I hope that the staff forecast is right ontarget, but I do have some questions and some doubts, I guess. One ofthem that I expressed yesterday at the staff briefing [to the Board]involves our emphasis on the trade turnaround. I'm just not convincedthat we will get as much of a boost to the overall economic picturefrom the trade turnaround as we are counting on in the forecast eitherfor the rest of this year or in 1988. It was mentioned earlier thatsome of the trading partners have economic situations that are farshort of robust. So I think that's a key factor. Also, no one hasmentioned it, but there are trade barriers out there that businesspeople tell me about. And some of the obvious ones involve trying toget into the Japanese market. Also, I'm not convinced that the dollaris going to fall as much as we're assuming in our forecast. I realizeit can be banged down but, as Governor Johnson said, there are thingsgoing on that may prevent that from happening. Also, the staff istalking about some gradual upward drift in interest rates. That may-18-8/18/87happen, depending, of course, on what policy stance we take. But Iguess I don't see as much of a bite on the economy from that upwarddrift as I might have expected. Looking at autos--and this would bemore of a near-term situation than for '88--I think it's going to be alot tougher to reduce those inventories than apparently you think,Mike. Some of the specific makes have over a 100-day supply; that'snot worked down easily even at 1.9 percent interest rates. One of thereasons they have so many is they haven't a lot of sex appeal in themodels; they may have to just give them away on some Saturday night, Idon't know. Anyhow, I think it's a lot greater challenge than --MR. JOHNSON. That's pretty awful.MS. SEGER. That's right. I don't like it myself. My finalcomment involves inflation, and here Governor Angell made my pointabout commodity prices. I don't think it's guaranteed that these aregoing to just keep rising. We all know that commodity prices are veryvolatile and influenced by many, many things above and beyond monetarypolicy. And I believe, as he said, that there are factors at workthat may, as a matter of fact, keep those under control. Particularlywhen I think about the crude oil situation, I'm not certain that we'regoing to get what's in the staff forecast. On the labor marketshortage, I just don't think there is a labor market; I think thereare all sorts of labor markets--for different skills, for differentindustries, and for different geographic areas. So I don't know thatit makes any sense even to talk about a natural rate of unemploymentbecause I just don't know how to use it as a guide. Finally, one ofthe things that I really don't think we're emphasizing enough is thereal change in managerial attitudes. I see more backbone amongcorporate executives in their labor negotiations than I've seen in mywhole working career, which goes back a long time. And I'm reallydelighted to see that they no longer assume that they can just passthrough these higher labor costs--which they used to do, particularlyin the major industries. Also, the company heads are more and moreaware of import competition, more and more aware of the need to beefficient and to get even more efficient. They're pushing theemployees for moves that would enhance productivity. This is going onall the time in the auto negotiations. The emphasis is on jobsecurity; there is even talk of freezes on actual wages. To theextent that there are pay adjustments, in a number of major companiesthey are making sure that the productivity gains do offset thembecause the 1.1 percent--or whatever the overall national number is--is not what the productivity gains are in specific companies. And so,I think, they are tending more and more to tie their own wagesettlements to their own productivity enhancement moves. And I thinkthat's all to the good. I put all that together and I don't see zeroinflation, but I don't see 4-1/2 percent heading towards 14 percenteither. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we'llprobably get a little better sense of things when we get back to workin earnest in September and businesses start doing their planning for1988. But, as I look at things right now, first, I think that theoutlook for the economy is better--not that I thought that it was allthat bad to begin with. And second, I have to conclude that theinflation risks have risen. In terms of the "body english" that can-19-8/18/87be put on that, some can say--as I think Mike Prell did a long timeago--that one way to look at it is simply with a higher degree ofconfidence that something approaching 3 percent real growth could berealized. I would simply add that, in the current circumstances, I dothink we have to keep in mind that something like the staff forecastfor real growth isn't far from what is optimal, considering the needto effect the external adjustments that we have all been talking aboutand to maintain some hope that the inflationary process does not getaway from us, as a number of people have suggested.On this all-important question of the external adjustment,for what it's worth, the New York staff forecast is a little strongeroverall in real GNP. Interestingly enough, it is also one in whichthere is no assumption of further dollar depreciation in 1988, butdespite that, we get a better showing in the trade account and thecurrent account in nominal terms and end up at about the same place inreal terms. Now, the reasons for those differences, I think, areimportant. One is that we do have slightly stronger growth--not agangbuster pace by any means--but marginally stronger growth in thenon-U.S. industrialized world than is in the staff forecast. A secondfactor, of course, is that without the second or third J-curve effect,the nominal effects work in the right direction. And finally, we dohave U.S. export prices going up more rapidly than the staff forecastdoes. Each one of those, obviously, is a big "if" and, takentogether, they are a lot of "ifs". But the key point is that they dosuggest at least the possibility that you could get an outcome that isbetter in nominal terms and about the same in real terms, withouthaving to rely on a further depreciation of the dollar, with itsinflationary implications and the risk, of course, that furtherdepreciation of the dollar could get away from us. I think that isimportant for another reason. I tend to look a lot at what I call "adomestic savings gap" in trying to figure out where we are in terms ofcapital and savings requirements. As things stand right now, andassuming a Federal budget deficit in 1988 somewhere in the $150 to$160 billion range, the fact of the matter is that we have madeprecious little progress in reducing the so-called domestic savingsgap. If the budget deficit next year is in that $150-$160 billionrange, and if total net private investment is only about 5 percent ofthe GNP, which is darn small, the savings gap relative to GNP is stillgoing to be 2-1/2 percent or more of GNP. It is still going to be$145 or $150 billion in absolute terms--not down at all from its peakin 1985 or 1986. So, that fundamental disequilibrium is still there.In fact, it has not improved much at all, despite the reductions thatwe have seen in the budget deficit, because the saving rate for theeconomy as a whole has slipped off its peaks of 1985 and 1986--notdecisively, but enough so that the problem, both in relative andabsolute terms, is still very much with us throughout the forecastperiod. That in itself says to me that we have to be especiallycautious, because one way or another that residual is going to have tobe filled from abroad, if interest rates and exchange rates are goingto remain consistent with the kind of economic profile that theforecasts are talking about.On the inflation question, I can be very brief and simply saythat a number of us, including myself, have fretted in the past aboutcrossing that threshold of 4 percent in the deflator and 5 percent inthe consumer price index; and it seems to me that the consensus view,though not the universal view, among private economists and others is-20-8/18/87that we are there. That, I think, is the reality. As things standright now, I can postulate conditions that would produce a resultbetter than that, but I certainly don't think that those are thelikely outcome. Indeed, I guess I'd be on the side that says that Icould also postulate conditions in which, heaven forbid, we could findourselves looking at 5 percent on the deflator and 6 percent in theconsumer price index. If we get to that point, then we are looking ata situation that inevitably carries with it the risks of highlydestabilizing consequences for the real economy here and around theworld. Indeed, I think the lessons of the past are clear: if you waitto see that kind of problem staring you in the face, the costs ofunwinding it are going to be exponentially greater than the costs ofchecking it in the first place.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the overallnumbers, which are rather satisfactory, are good not because theaggregate economy is really good, but because the sectors which havebeen weak so far are the sectors that are picking up. If you keepthat in mind, I think the inflation picture also will look a littledifferent than it does when looking at the aggregate economy as awhole. We are eliminating the sectoral imbalances in trade and in thegovernment sector as well as in the regional sectors that were pointedout before. Overall, I think that makes for a healthier economybecause, in essence, we are pulling the weak sectors up without reallyhurting the strong sectors at the present time. Consumers are stillmoving forward but at a rather subdued 4-1/2 percent pace in theoverall forecast. And I agree with what President Morris saidearlier: that the investment picture may actually be a little betterthan the numbers of 3.8 to 4.2 percent next year suggest. I'd beslightly more optimistic there, but not all that much. On the exportfront, I think also that our growth will be sustained in the double-digit area; 12 percent in the Greenbook is certainly sounding good.Turning to the price area, because we're having that pickupin sectors that previously were very subdued, we should not experiencethe burst in prices that would be associated with an overall Phillipscurve. Therefore, I also think the employment gains which have beenachieved are in areas and in sectors, such as manufacturing andagriculture, that were previously very, very depressed indeed.Overall, I think the producer price index, as has been pointed out, israther stable. And I agree with what Mr. Corrigan just said: thefinal user prices, the GNP prices, are drifting up at a 4.5 percentrate. But then again we have to ask ourselves--this really should bereserved for the next part of our discussion, but let me bring it up--if we're having monetary growth right now of 5 percent and we'rehaving price increases of 4 to 5 percent, what does that mean for thereal economy if you want to make that equation square? I certainlydisagree with the view of the world that we're having a zero growth.So something else will have to give. Either we have to produce a lotmore money or price increases will not be sustained at a very healthyconsolidation phase of the economy; and I don't really see very majorrisks on either side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.-21-8/18/87MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I've already madecomments with respect to our outlook and our general agreement withthe Greenbook forecast. I'd like to make this very brief, in view ofthe time. The regional economy that we're experiencing in the TenthDistrict has some positive outlook to it in the sense that, as othershave already commented, the agricultural sector is having and willhave one of its best years, with this major rise in net farm income.There has been a good crop. The red meat industry is in very, verygood shape. As a result, there has been some uptick, or at leastmodest turnaround, in what had been falling agricultural land values.One survey shows that from the first quarter to the second quarter,agricultural land values have increased about 1-1/2 percent; andthat's to be contrasted with a long period of declining land values.I would just note, however, that the sales that have translated intothat greater land value number are one of two kinds: 1) cashtransactions in which neighboring producers are picking up depressedor troubled land ownership; or 2) the Farm Credit System is offeringvery attractive financing rates to move land off of their books inorder to avoid any additional loss. I would just note that, as aresult of this, the margins in the production of red meat are verygood at the moment. However, the inventory is beginning to build, andwe would expect that there would be little or no additional pressureon prices from the food sector as a result of the [uninteligible]--noreal hope of increased commodity prices either in terms of crops orred meat. Lastly, there is some optimism being generated in theenergy sector. There is some drilling now taking place; the rig countis up modestly from a month or two ago. So, psychologically, givenwhat we see, we would expect things to continue to improve but at avery slow rate. In the commercial real estate area, we haveoverbuilding in Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa, which is depressingthat market; and those conditions, obviously, rose out of thedepressed conditions of agriculture and energy that they depend ongreatly. We believe things are looking up, but we have a long upwardpull to get back to better conditions than we have now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I wanted to pass on just one piece of anecdotalinformation that bears to some extent on what Jerry and Bob Hellerwere saying: one businessman in our District in the shoe businessmentioned to me that they're running at essentially 100 percent ofcapacity now. I sense that's close to true in textiles, and, at leastin some respects, in the steel area. So I mention that. I guess whatconcerns me, when you think about this external adjustment processthat Jerry talked about, is that we shut down capacity so quickly overthis period of years that I think we are bumping up against capacityconstraints in those industries a lot sooner than anybody could haveanticipated. I asked a logical follow-up question to this executive:"Well, are you going to expand capacity?" In that case, they haveclosed facilities that they could probably reopen without a majorcapital investment. But, basically, the message was that chiefexecutive officers and financial officers, having been through thisperiod of shutting capacity down for so long, are going to be veryslow to make the investment to reopen. As a result, even in theseindustries that have been depressed, I think the pressures on thelabor markets are apt to build a lot faster, because the investment isnot going to follow as quickly as it might have in a more orderly-22-8/18/87period, if you will. I wanted to pass that on; I thought that wasinteresting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to spend justa second on a little different perspective. There has been a verygood staff forecast and a lot of very good comment on it. But itmight be worthwhile to put our attention just a little on whether ornot there may be some very fundamental long-range changes runningunderneath the surface of the world economy and our economy. Ifthere's an analogy there, it may be what happens in the sea: you havethe Gulf stream running up the East Coast from south to north; thestorms come and go and calms come and go; and the tide shifts back andforth with the Gulf stream still running north up the coast. It kindof dominates everything in the long run. I wonder if there's any ofthat effect going on in the world economy. I see several things outthere that could be fundamentally deflationary in the long term.That's not to quarrel with the kind of forecast that we're seeing hereover the forecast period. But it seems to me that if we can avoidfalling into the protectionist sinkhole--and maybe we won't--thatthere is a super abundance of pretty capable labor across the worldthat's waiting to produce, and it's currently grossly underemployed.And there's capital that's mobile enough to get there to set upfactories and economic capabilities, and do whatever is necessary toemploy that still quite low-cost labor. And we're going to becompeting with that labor. In a great many commodity areas there is aworldwide abundance of capacity. Absent political events, there'splenty of energy for the next few years at least. The world is cominginto a surplus of farm commodity production on an aggregate basis;there are lots of metals, and so forth. The third factor may be thatit probably was inflationary to increase the enormous levels ofinternational debt that we now are struggling with, but it probably isgoing to be deflationary to try and service that debt, now that wehave it. There's a lot of pressure on a lot of economies to producein order to earn foreign exchange to try to service their debt. Sothere are some things out there which seem to me to possibly beexerting a [unintelligible] deflationary effect. And, while I see thepressures that we have over the forecast period, and I would notquarrel with those, I think that maybe these long-run deflationaryeffects under the surface might damp that, as they play through in theinflation numbers.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Boehne, do you have any commentsyou'd like to make at this time?MR. BOEHNE. No, I have none.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to make just a fewobservations. We spent all morning, and no one even mentioned thestock market, which I find quite interesting in itself. I think it'simportant in the sense that as an economic force, history tells ussometimes it works, and sometimes it doesn't. It's conceivable to me,however, that this may be one of the times in which we may begin tosee some opening up in the capital goods markets. It's very dull;appropriations are not expanding at a rapid rate, but they areexpanding. And I think what the new orders are showing is a mixedbag. Mike mentioned that there may be some exports in those orders,-23-8/18/87but we also may be seeing an increase in the share of the totaldomestic capital investment markets because, remember, those figuresare orders at domestic facilities only. And the one thing that seemsto be appearing in the numbers, in real terms, is that irrespective ofthe nominal trade figures, the share of capital investment coming fromabroad has been increasing dramatically, although it's now beginningto taper off. That will create a much stronger set of new ordersfigures for equipment, as we see in the aggregate appropriationnumbers and the aggregate investment numbers. I'm a little concernedthat we may be looking at more than the opening up in this area thatthe staff numbers show, in part, because I think profit figures aremoving fairly quickly. The ability to pass through prices is anotherway of saying margins are opening up. And we are beginning to seevery clear evidence in a number of areas that we are picking up someform of potentially significant profit expansion. That would lead meto conclude that we could very well be running into trouble at thesemonetary aggregate levels; but my impression is--at least my hope is--to get to it a little later. But we may be looking at thepossibilities of a turn in velocity numbers at this stage. I thinkthe presumption that velocity will stay somewhere down in this area,or even approximate the staff forecast, may be wishful thinking. Ithink there is more of a potential on the inflation side, on thenominal GNP side, at fairly low credit and monetary aggregateexpansion than I think we're willing to admit, if for no other reasonthan I think we're merely projecting the most recent past. I thinkthat is turning; and if it turns, we'll have some possibly significantdifficulties.On the exchange rate question, even though the staffforecast, as I understand it, has implied profit margins on importedgoods flat at very low levels--meaning that the import prices of goodsshipped into the United States are essentially reflecting very littlechange in profit margins--I think history tells us that that doesn'thappen often either. The evidence suggests that, from these levels,the likelihood is for more of an increase in those margins--meaning anincrease in import prices relative to the exchange rate. What Iconclude from all this myself is that, while the staff forecast is ina way the most likely forecast, I'd be inclined to suppose that therisks are clearly on the upside, both on volume and on price. And mylast forecast is that that's likely to be the way Mike will come outthe next time around.MR. KELLEY. I wouldn't be surprised.MR. HELLER. Got the message?MR. ANGELL. Sometimes he's hard to influence.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In case there's any doubt, I think thereal world is going to influence him. If there are no furthercomments on the economic outlook, let's move on to Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Why don't we break until 10minutes to 12.[Coffee break]8/18/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As we sit here, the dollar seems to bedropping. Maybe we ought to adjourn for awhile. I would like to openthe floor now for a general policy discussion and some indications onthe directive and borrowing requirements and any tilt that you wouldlike to express as we go on. The Vice Chairman starts off.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can berather brief. As I said earlier, in the totality of circumstancesthat we face, I view something like the staff forecast as about asclose to optimal as we can get right now. But I also regard the risksin that forecast as being strongly asymmetrical on the side of theeconomy being stronger and the inflation rate being higher. Because Ihave that view as to the asymmetries of the situation, and because Iregard the risks of that type of an outcome to be potentially sosevere, I would favor, at this point, a modest move in policy thatwould take the borrowing level to $600 million--in other words,something between "B" and "C". It's not that I think that kind of amove in and of itself is going to be decisive; but I do think that itwill be enough of a move to show through in the marketplace, and toconvey a sense of concern on the part of this Committee as to thepotential for things working in an adverse way. I see that kind of anapproach as relatively risk-free in that the initial change that itwould carry, whether in terms of interest rates or things like that,is inconsequential as far as the forecast for the economy isconcerned. I do not regard signal value as being inconsequential.So, on the theory that a stitch in time may indeed be worth nine, Iwould proceed along those lines.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I think that there is a case to bemade for some tightening for all the reasons that have been stated:the risk of inflation in the economy and also the history of probablywaiting too long. I am not ready to make that move at this point. Ihave enough doubts, and I think there are enough uncertainties, aboutthe outlook for inflation and other aspects of the economy. Thesentiment around this table has fluctuated a good bit in recentmonths, and I think we very well may be heading into a period wheresome tightening is appropriate; but I think it is premature at thispoint. I would favor a directive that would maintain the $500 millionof borrowing, something along the lines of alternative B. However, Iwould give the directive an asymmetrical tilt indicating that ifpolicy needs to be changed in the intermeeting period, that we wouldmore likely lean in the direction of some snugging than some easing.So, I would be for no change, alternative B, with some asymmetricalwording that would tilt it in the direction of some tightening, shoulda change be necessary.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I was going to say that,ordinarily, I would have been in favor of some slight tightening, butI also was going to say that I would be reluctant to do that in lightof the dollar's strength in the foreign exchange market. However,given what you have just said, perhaps my thinking will change alittle. I also was going to say that I thought the strength of thedollar was temporary, so I guess the markets are proving me right inadvance. Given my view about the economy and what I see as the8/18/87potential for more inflation, particularly in early 1988, I think thatwe probably should make the move now, recognizing that there are someuncertainties in that forecast. I wouldn't want to do anything verydramatic, but I would opt for what I would describe as alternativeB-plus with borrowing at about the $600 million level. That impliesthat I am willing to accept M2 growth that is below its range for theyear; and I think it is pretty doubtful that we would be able to getit up to the bottom of the range in any case, unless we did a verypronounced easing of policy. I am willing to accept lower thanintended growth, certainly, in preference to easing policy at thistime. As far as the directive is concerned, I would suggest that wetilt slightly toward firming and keep an asymmetric directive thatwould enable us to firm even more, if circumstances required. As forthe various clauses that the staff has indicated in the Bluebook, Iwould stress the indications of inflationary pressures and generalbusiness activity the most and downgrade the dollar. Also, I wouldkeep that sentence in the directive that would allow for greater M2and M3 growth--that we would tolerate that if it occurred.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would like to raise a point withrespect to that. This directive goes through a very short period oftime. And I'd raise the question as to whether or not it is really anoperational directive at all, because by the time this is actuallysomething that is likely to happen, we are beyond the period which weare focusing on, with respect to policy in any event. That's at leastmy view; I don't know how the rest of you read that.MR. JOHNSON. Sounds like a good case for early release.MR. BOEHNE. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, I guess I don'tunderstand the point that you are making.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I am referring to the sentence"Somewhat faster growth in the broader aggregates would be acceptablein the absence of indications of worsening price pressures andsubstantial weakness in the dollar, given the shortfall of theseaggregates from their annual averages." What I am basically saying isthat we are not going to learn a great deal more about what thoseaggregates are doing between now and the termination of the time frameto which this directive applies. So, I am not quite certain whetherthe directive has any operational significance because of theshortness of the time frame.MR. MORRIS. [Unintelligible] with respect to the aggregates,not interest rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, no, no. Just the aggregates.MR. MELZER. I read that, at one point, to mean the oppositeof what it is intended to mean. I think it could be interpreted thatway. If you were worried about the slow growth, you might actuallyencourage--MR. STERN. It seems to me, if anything, that is certainlytoo open-ended the way it is currently written.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is all I meant. President Parry.-26-8/18/87MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I believe a strong case can be madefor alternative C and I would characterize that, at least in terms ofanticipated effects on interest rates, as being a small move. InJuly, several Committee members expressed the view that a tighterpolicy would be necessary in the coming months and I thinkdevelopments since then strengthen that view. Most data releasedsince our last meeting suggest that the economy and inflationarypressures are picking up. Inflation in the first half was over 4percent and real growth was at a very strong 3-1/2 percent rate. Datathat we have seen so far on economic activity in July--particularlyemployment data, retail sales, industrial production--indicate thatthe economy remains strong in the current quarter. Given that ittakes a long time for our actions to affect inflation, I believe weshould make a policy adjustment. If we delay much longer, untilinflation has really gained momentum, more severe action will berequired to bring inflation under control. For those reasons I wouldsupport the adoption of alternative C as presented by the staff.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. $700 million on borrowings.MR. PARRY. $700 million.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would support Mr.Corrigan's formulation of a modest tightening--a $600 millionborrowing level. I think that we might need to move further in theevent we get a period of pronounced weakness in the dollar. There hasbeen so much talk in the foreign exchange market about theinevitability of a further leg down in the dollar that that seems tobe the conventional wisdom. For that reason, this recent weakness inthe dollar has the potential, I think, of generating a test of theearlier lows; that's just potential; I am not forecasting that. Ifthat should turn out to be the case, we probably would have to makeanother move prior to the next meeting. But I think the evidence ofgreater strength in the economy would certainly support a modest moveat this time of the sort that Mr. Corrigan outlined.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we need to remind ourselvesthat these minutes will be published six weeks from now, around thetime of the next meeting. It just seems to me that we ought to besomewhat careful about making asymmetric statements when there is thismuch uncertainty. I think the real question is what do we do, not thequestion of symmetric or asymmetric. I would prefer a symmetric "B".Now, that puts me at the far end of those who have been speaking sofar. I do believe that the monetary aggregate growth paths are quitedifferent from those we had in the period that led to the pricepressures we are now seeing; and I think it is a mistake for us toreact with the monetary aggregates behaving in this nice 2 to 4percent growth range, which might very well be the right path for thelong run. Yet, as you anticipated, Mr. Chairman, and I would agreewith you, we do have this change in velocity. It would be a mistakefor us, then, to go to $600 million on borrowing, because $600 millionwill certainly be a vote for a lower monetary growth path. Themembers of the Committee know that I have not favored returning themonetary growth paths back to within our target ranges for the year; Ihave favored coming in below the ranges. But, just as a year ago, wewere undoubtedly somewhat careless in not recognizing the 15 percent-27-8/18/87monetary growth path when we made that discount rate change lastAugust, I think it could be just as much a mistake for us to move nowbefore we see the need. I am prepared to make adjustments as might beneeded if commodity prices and the exchange value of the dollar wereto move in such a direction as to make inflation and our worst fearsrealized. I would want to move at that point, but I am not willing totake a hard position now for minutes to be published six weeks fromnow based upon our feelings.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative B. Iwould favor basically no change from current policy, and I say thatbecause I guess I am not totally convinced that the economy is goingto be quite as strong as perhaps some others believe. I question thatinflation is a problem at this point. Granted, when you determine orrealize it is a problem, you are pretty far down the road, so that acertain amount of anticipation is desirable. But, given the fact thatthe interval between this meeting and the September meeting is prettyshort compared to some of the intervals, and that the need for apolicy shift is less than convincing--to me, at least--I would stickwith alternative B, the $500 million borrowing assumption. Ratherthan being symmetrical, though, I would have a sentence in there thatwould allow a little tightening by the Desk, if that should becomenecessary.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I would be in agreement with theposition that Jerry Corrigan laid out. For reasons that have beenwell stated, it certainly seems to me that the economic opportunitiesat this point are on the upside and not on the downside. On theinflationary pressures, though admittedly far from conclusive, we maybe going through something of a bubble here. Nonetheless, the signsare there and I do think it is appropriate that we begin to moveagainst that. I find the aggregates' performance this year to havebeen erratic. They may emerge on a more predictable basis, but as yetI don't see the evidence of that. Therefore, I find the alternatives,in terms of aggregate growth rates, to be a little awkward.Accordingly, I would prefer to deal with the borrowing level and,given the circumstances, I think a borrowing level between "A" and"B", namely, $600 million, would be appropriate. In terms of thewording of the directive, I would be in favor of "would" for [greater]restraint and "might" for lesser restraint. And I do think that thissentence on the next page [of the Bluebook] does, at leastpreliminarily, convey the reverse meaning. I think we might fiddlewith the language on that to get a more appropriate wording.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. As Bob Parry indicated, Mr. Chairman, a number ofus at the last meeting thought that we were probably going to have tolet interest rates rise over the next 12 to 18 months if we were goingto prevent this underlying rate of inflation from accelerating. Andit seems to me that this expectation is even more likely now, in viewof the information that we have had since then. At the same time, Iam not exactly sure when it will be appropriate for us to take thataction; but I believe that it will probably be sooner than I would-28-8/18/87 -29-have thought at the time of the last meeting. I am also well awarethat the history of the System has been that, generally, we have notmoved fast enough against inflation. So, I tend to try to compensatefor that. Despite that, since there is a good deal of uncertaintyout there, I believe the best case for now is to stick withalternative B. I would make it asymmetrical with the "would" on thetightening side and the "might" on the other. I think the Boardstaff's statement with regards to the "as well as" clause does suggestthat it would be helpful to shift that around to deemphasize theborrowing side; as for the weakness of the dollar, that may deservesome further thought. I think there is also another argument: that weought to put restraint of the business expansion high on that list ifwe are going to change the list around. And I would not put in thatsentence on the undershoot of the aggregates at all. And I say thiswith the sneaking suspicion that later on down the road, I am going tolook back and say, "I wish I had been where Jerry Corrigan and thoseothers were".CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Basically, I am for no change, as I saidearlier. I believe that we are in a period of sectoral catchup andthe monetary growth is very subdued at the present time. So, I wouldlike to keep it at alternative B with a $500 million borrowing targetand I would do two changes: 1) I would upgrade the importance ofinflation, and maybe give it sole prominence in the first sentence;and 2) I would downgrade the dollar, as Presidents Forrestal and Blackmentioned earlier. We are way above the lows that the dollar reachedearlier, and to say that we want to react now to weakness in thedollar would probably be inappropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, as I suggested earlier, I think that theprincipal risk we are likely to face, over time, is higher inflation.The key question in my mind is one of timing. I don't have the sensethat the inflation problem is a fait accompli. On the other hand, Idon't think we can afford to sit back and wait until it is obvious,for reasons mentioned earlier about the cost of undoing it once it isin place. Balancing those two considerations, I am not prepared to goas far as alternative C, but I do view something between "B" and "C"as perhaps a positive, helpful, preemptive strike at this point intime. That entails, in my judgment, relatively little risk to theeconomic outlook; also, if it turns out that we were wrong, it wouldnot be terribly difficult to undo. And from that perspective, I thinkit merits consideration as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that $600 million?MR. STERN. Right around there, yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'm in favor of no change, which is alternativeB, $500 million borrowing target, for three main reasons. One is, asI think Governor Angell emphasized, the uncertainties that we arefacing. Another reason is that there aren't that many weeks betweenthis meeting and the next FOMC meeting; we have another chance, very8/18/87soon, to look at things and change our approach, based on additionalreadings of the economy. The third reason is that I just don't seethat the economy is currently boiling. The forecast certainly doeslook pretty good; but, again, I question whether or not we're going tosee the hit from the trade turnaround in the way that many areexpecting. So, for those reasons, I would like to propose keepingreserve pressures as they are. And, in the statement, I woulddeemphasize the impact of the dollar on what we are doing. Also, Idon't want to tilt the directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. We see a further acceleration in prices thisyear and next, and believe that the risk is on the upside. Therefore,I believe it's reasonable, at this point, to increase the pressure onbank reserves by moving toward the "C" path. I'm not particularlypicking the C alternative, but favor a $600 million borrowingobjective.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I definitely would put the priorities on theside of worrying about inflation as opposed to the recovery. I wouldfavor "B" with a tilt toward tightening. I could certainly accept a$600 borrowing target, although I'm not voting, so I don't need toaccept it. I'd feel particularly strongly about moving if I felt thatwe were sort of maintaining a 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent funds rateagainst a very strong demand for reserves. Now, as you pointed outbefore, Mr. Chairman, on the velocity argument, maybe we won't seethat. We're certainly not maintaining a lower funds rate than wouldotherwise prevail through rapid reserve injection here; but that'swhere I come out. I would be inclined to leave language in thereabout the dollar. I think if we lost control of the dollar on thedownside, we could kick off that whole cycle that we dealt with just acouple of months ago; and I'd be very sensitive to weakness in thedollar in the language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would prefer stayingwith "B", largely for the reasons I outlined a few minutes ago. Ithink that the underlying trends are going to tend to damp both theinflation that is showing up and also, perhaps, the robustness of theexpansion that we're in. However, I do recognize the short-termtendencies toward some inflationary movement here. So, I would alsolike to see the language be asymmetric in the direction of tightening.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What do you want [on borrowing],alternative B?MR. KELLEY. I would stay with "B", the $500 million.MR. JOHNSON. I guess I see some firming signals and, as Isaid, a little more upside risk than I did before. But, a lot of theearly warning signals--some of the financial market signals--are notshowing us as strong a concern as they did at our last meeting. So,I'm a little reluctant to see us stick our neck out too far. I guessI'm somewhere around alternative B with asymmetric language to give us-30-8/18/87the option of a potential tightening if we see firmer signs. But,sort of like Wayne, I'm not sure I want to commit myself to anythingon instinct; I've got to have a little more evidence. When peopleread the minutes in six weeks, they'll look at what was going on whenwe made those decisions. The thing that has happened since the lastmeeting is that the real economy is showing more firmness, but that'sabout all I see right now. Maybe we'll be ready for a tightening movelater, but for now I favor alternative B, with asymmetric language. Iam for deemphasizing the dollar a little because, as I said earlier, Isee it somewhat influenced by the oil price; and I'm not sure that thedeclining oil price, which might send the dollar down, is something weshould be worried about. The dollar declined significantly,consistent with the decline in oil prices in 1986, and we sawinflationary expectations break in the face of that; we tried toresist the dollar's downward move; it certainly wouldn't have been aresistance against inflationary expectations. I'd like to avoid thatkind of a problem. I think the dollar is still an important issue,but I think it depends on what's influencing it. So, I would ratherhighlight inflationary expectations and just leave the dollar as aproxy for that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. $500 million?MR. JOHNSON. Yes, $500 million, with asymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A good deal of commenthas already been made about the growth--that it's perhaps a bitstronger than we were expecting last month. But, I would just notethat if you believe the forecast, and I think virtually everybodyagrees with the Greenbook, you're only looking at 2-3/4 percent growthin the third and fourth quarters. That doesn't seem to me to beoverly expansive. And, there is considerable uncertainty as to theinflation outlook, at least in my mind. To be sure, prices are quitelikely to be up, but as a result of feeding through on import prices;and I'm not at all sure that a bit tighter monetary policy is anappropriate prescription under those circumstances. As a result, Iwould favor "B", with $500 million borrowing, until some additionalevidence comes along. I would note, in that respect, for those whobelieve that the aggregates are important and that there is someinformational content in them, that they're growing at a very nominalrate now. As a result, to further tighten at this point, inanticipation of some higher prices, seems to me to be inappropriate.So I would go for "B" with a $500 million borrowing level until somemore information surfaces that would lead us away from that. Lastly,I would prefer to leave the language with respect to the dollar in thedirective because, in my view, monetary policy has to act against adepreciation in the dollar that becomes fast, no matter what thecause. And, as a result, I would leave it in, and I would even leaveit at a fairly high level of visibility in the directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. If we averaged everybody,we'd get a different result than if we averaged the voting members bythemselves. I don't know if this is a typical result of this type ofactivity.-31-8/18/87MR. ANGELL. The people who don't vote don't have to beresponsible.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'll put that on the record. It'sfairly obvious that this is a unanimous vote for alternative B, and Iwould read it as a mild--maybe slightly more than mild--majority for atilt in the language. There is some desire to move inflation andbusiness expansion up in the language and the dollar down. Theaverage borrowing requirement amongst the voting members is a shadeunder $550 million. For those of you who are keeping score, I'd optfor "B" with $600 million and a definite tilt. Basically, my own viewis that the risk of snuffing out this expansion at this stage withmild tightening is extraordinarily small. My view is not so much thatwe know a great deal about what's going to happen in the fourthquarter and beyond. I just find it rather difficult to perceive a setof forces which can bring this expansion down when you have thefollowing: lead times in the delivery of materials and investmentgoods as short as we have now, which presupposes that the markets arebasically tight on inventories; clear evidence of an expanding capitalinvestment market; and, in effect, pretty much a full adjustment inconsumer expenditures [unintelligible] I think we are likely to get asa result of the income adjustments from the tax bill and otherelements. I do not believe that this is strictly a [unintelligible]trade issue myself, but I think there is more to it than the tradebalances that are emerging. And when you begin to see order impactsin some of the basic raw materials, such as in steel and aluminum, andthe extraordinary behavior of the textile industry, which issurprising even with all the restrictions, I wouldn't join mycolleagues here who consider this a set of very uncertain things. Ithink what is uncertain is how it materializes; but, I've seen thisbefore, and this doesn't look uncertain to me. I may eat those wordsin six weeks, but it has a tone to it which I, frankly, find notreally inflationary yet; there is no evidence in the wage data that Isee. In any event, that's the way that I come out; and that's the wayI read everybody else. I guess we can structure some language which Isuspect would pretty much grasp the issue. Let me describe it. Onthe operational paragraph, it would read: "In the implementation ofpolicy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain theexisting degree of pressure on reserve positions." As you know, wecan either put this in terms of "somewhat greater reserve restraint"or "slightly greater reserve restraint". As I listened to thediscussion, I read it as "somewhat greater reserve restraint would orslightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable depending onindications of inflationary pressures, the strength of the businessexpansion, behavior of the aggregates, and developments in the foreignexchange market. I don't know whether or not that would be acceptableor whether anyone would suggest some rephrasing. I think I wascapturing what I heard, but I will accept revisions.MR. ANGELL. I wasn't quite certain what the vote was inregard to the dollar's position. I would be among those who wouldlike to leave the dollar as being an important indicator, somewhatmore prominent. But I may be out-voted, I'm not sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Frankly, it's a close vote.MR. STERN. I agree with Wayne, in part because when thisdirective is published it would seem to me to be an awkward time to-32-8/18/87have downplayed the dollar if the dollar continues to do what it hasbeen doing the last three or four days. I don't think you gain much.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with that, Mr. Chairman. I don't thinkwe ought to downplay it. We may be feeling more comfortable about thedollar just now, but it wouldn't take very much for us to findourselves in a very uncomfortable position. And six weeks from now itwill be more attention-getting if we change the emphasis than if weleave it alone.MR. HELLER. Let me speak on the other side. I don't thinkwe're writing here for the press release only; we're talking about theoperational paragraph. If we have the dollar right up front, as soonas we get the kind of weakness that we are getting now, if sustainedfor another day or two, it could be seen as an indication that we haveto tighten monetary policy. And that is not what the majority, atleast of the voting members, was agreeing to. So, I agree with theChairman in moving the dollar to a lower position. Let me note thatit still is in the same sentence. We haven't split it into twosentences, as we have done many times before. So, it's a very modestdowngrading; it's just the order in which we are reading it ratherthan a cardinal distinction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I ask a question? We had thestrength of the business expansion at the bottom of the list the lasttime. As I read it, there's a fairly strong consensus to move thatup. Would there be any objection to moving that as #2 afterinflationary pressures?SEVERAL. That would be good.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So the question really gets down to twothings: the relative positioning of the foreign exchange markets andthe behavior of the aggregates "as well as" phrase. If we move thebusiness expansion issue up, I would be willing to leave the sentencethe same as it was the last time.MR. BOEHNE. That makes a lot of sense.MR. MORRIS. I agree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there agreement on that? On theissue of the M2 and M3 growth rates, which were 5 and 5-1/2 percent,there were some suggestions of going to 5 to 6 percent in thiscontext, which would be reasonable as far as not wanting to besplitting M2 and M3 apart. As I read the data and alternative B, Iwould assume that we might want to say through the September period--that this approach is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 andM3 over the period from June through September at annual rates ofaround 5 to 6 percent.MR. ANGELL. I would really favor making that broader andgoing 3 to 6 percent. It seems to me that you could have acircumstance in which the aggregates were growing at 3 percent and,for other reasons, you still might want to tighten.-33-8/18/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the problems is that it's such ashort time frame that that issue can be difficult to implement. Doesanyone else have views on this?MR. HELLER. As long as we don't read a move to 3 to 6percent as an indication that we are aiming for 4-1/2 percent, orsomething like that, and that is where the policy should be directed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought that maybe the 5 to 6 percentwas really a forecast of what is likely to happen, irrespective ofmonetary policy.MR. ANGELL. I guess I'd want to hear Don Kohn's comments onthat.MR. KOHN. Well, our best guess was that under alternative"B" we'd have M2 growth of 5 percent and M3 growth of 5-1/2 percent;but, as you well know, there is a wide range of error around that. AsI said in my briefing and the Bluebook, that presumes that money andincome grow a little more closely together than they have over thelast couple of quarters. That could fall short; I can't rule out thatpossibility. The question is whether you would want to react; butwith the aggregates after the "as well as" clause at the end of thesentence, I'm not sure how strong any reaction would be, in any case.MR. ANGELL. How about going to 4 to 6 percent then? It justseems to me that 5 to 6 percent is so narrow.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me ask another question. In yourjudgment, what is the average lead time between monetary policy andthe aggregates.MR. KOHN. Well, it's several months, clearly; as I think Iindicated, whatever we do now will have its principal impact in thefourth quarter. But it is also true that this goes the other way alittle: that is, whether incoming data that suggested the aggregateswere running outside a range of 5 to 6 percent or 4 to 6 percentshould have any influence on a proposal that Mr. Sternlight might makeon the borrowing objective is not quite the same as saying you'reactually going to have the effect. You can react and then assume thatyour effect would be somewhere down the road.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me ask you this. Does anybodyobject to 6 percent as the upper limit? Are there any objections to 4percent on the downside?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I wouldn't object. I would justoffer a historical caution, for what it's worth. I think we have tobe a little bit careful about jiggling around these quarterlyobjectives at mid-quarterly meetings, especially when we are so nearthe end of the quarter. It can convey something more than I think wehad in mind.MR. JOHNSON. I'd like to second what Jerry says.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it's better to leave themclose to where they were at mid-quarter.-34-8/18/87MR. JOHNSON. I agree with Wayne's point that it is likelythat they could come in there. I would want to change the wholelanguage in terms of clarifying what we are saying if we go to 4 to 6percent. I would want to make clear that though we're assuming nochange in policy, the aggregates may come in in the 4 to 6 percentrange. But that's not what it could imply. So, I'd rather just leaveit alone.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Leave it alone, meaning what?MR. ANGELL. You're going to leave it at 5 to 7-1/2 percent?MR. JOHNSON. Well, 5 to 6 percent may be okay.MR. ANGELL. If we're changing the top one, why is there anyharm in changing the bottom one?MR. GUFFEY. The alternative is to state it in terms of about5 percent for both.MR. ANGELL. About 5 percent would be fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would 5 percent be acceptable toeverybody? What's the general view on that next sentence?MR. STERN(?). Take it out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The general view is for just droppingit. Anybody object to that? Strongly? That leaves us with the fundsrate.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN & MR. BOEHNE. Keep it the same.MR. ANGELL. 4 to 8 percent.MR. HELLER. I think that this is something we shouldconsider sometime in the future. That 4 to 8 percent is such a barndoor; it's very wide. At some future time we may want to narrow thatdown a little.MR. JOHNSON. That has always been the range used in thepast, just to convey within the reserve target--MR. HELLER. Wrong direction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you narrowed it, you are reallysaying that you're targeting--MR. ANGELL. --the federal funds rate. I think it would bethe wrong signal, in light of the 1976 experience.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just ask, we haven't quite got tothe borrowing target--MR. ANGELL. I thought there were seven votes for fivehundred; that was the way I counted.MR. HELLER. $525 million.8/18/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't like people who are good atarithmetic. $525 million?MR. ANGELL. I don't think anybody will know it's $525million; you don't tell anybody.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you know something, I don't knowthe answer to the question. The point being that I don't know whatthe convention is here--whether you average these things, which youcan, or whether you take the majority. What has been the convention?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The convention, I think, Mr.Chairman, is that you do not average that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you don't average, then the figure is$500 million.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The majority is--MR. JOHNSON. That is going to lead to other[unintelligible]. If it turns out to be an average number, you'regoing to have people low-balling it until it clears the average.MR. HELLER. $536 million is the average!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it is hard to average it.One other thing that is done, in terms of trying to sense where thecritical mass is, if I could put it that way, or where the Committeemight stand, is that the Chairman has been known from time to time toask people what their preferences are as opposed to what they couldlive with. In this particular case, you may have some shadings ofopinion around those borrowing numbers, for example, based on thequestion of symmetry or tilt that would go with them--in other words,the "woulds" and the "mights". I, myself, certainly would notdissent, at this meeting, over the difference between $600 million and$500 million in the context in which there was some tilt along thelines that Governor Johnson has suggested. So, you do have some play;but I don't think that most members of the Committee would becomfortable with averaging the borrowings. I think that can get to bequite awkward when there are larger differences, as there may be, thanthe difference between $500 million and $600 million.MR. MORRIS. You also have the authority, of course, to calla telephone conference meeting to reconsider the borrowing level inthe event, say, we get extreme weakness in the dollar, which I thinkis a possibility.MR. ANGELL. We already have that in the tilt of thedirective, anyway. That is, you can go firmer, based upondevelopments, without calling a Committee--MR. HELLER. If you start out with a base of $600 million andthen you have the language with the tilt, it gives you a verydifferent environment than if you start with a base of $500 millionand have the tilt in. $500 million with a tilt in it gets you rightto the range where everybody may well want to be--in the $520 to $550million range, or whatever--while $600 million with a tilt in it wouldget you a lot closer to---36-8/18/87MR. KELLEY. The tilt is worth $25 to $50 million dollars.MR. BERNARD. In the operational paragraph, there's a problemthat Mr. Cross and Mr. Truman pointed out on the factual portion oflines 24 to 26. The dollar, at least as of an hour ago, instead ofhaving risen further, was unchanged. I don't know what the latestfigure is, so that needs to be changed to make it factually correct.MR. HELLER. Roughly unchanged.MR. BERNARD. About unchanged.MR. CROSS. It's, on balance, unchanged; it has been up anddown.MR. ANGELL. I think that would be appropriate. Change that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like it reread just to be certain.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Somewhat greater reserve restraintwould or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptabledepending on indications of inflationary pressures, the strength ofthe business expansion, developments in foreign exchange markets, andthe behavior of the aggregates. This approach is expected to beconsistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from June toSeptember at an annual rate of around 5 percent. Growth in M1, whilepicking up from recent levels, is expected to remain well below itspace during 1986. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation ifit appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserveconditions during the period before the next meeting are likely to beassociated with a federal funds rate consistently outside a range of 4to 8 percent.MR. KOHN. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, I thought I heard theCommittee express the view that they wanted to retain the "as well as"in front of the aggregates. Normand, just read--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Right.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I read it, the next meeting isSeptember 22. Thank you for your patience, ladies and gentlemen.END OF MEETING-37-