Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 10-11, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 10, 1987, at 3:00 p.m. and continuingon Wednesday, February 11, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. GuffeyMr. HellerMr. JohnsonMr. MelzerMr. Morris 1/Ms. SegerMr. Keehn, Alternate for Mrs. HornMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Stern, and Timlen, 2/ AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Kohn,Lindsey, Prell and Siegman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account1/ Entered the meeting after action to approve the minutes from theDecember meeting.2/ Attended Tuesday afternoon session only.2/10-11/87Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director forMonetary and Financial Policy, Board of GovernorsMr. Simpson, Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Kusko 1/ and Mr. Moran, 1/ Economists, Divison ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office ofStaff Director for Monetary and Financial Policy,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Scheld, Rosenblum,Ms. Tschinkel, and Mr. Scadding, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Chicago, Dallas,Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of BostonMr. Keleher, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of AtlantaMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof February 10-11, 1987February 10,1987--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The minutes for the December meeting havebeen moved and seconded and are approved] without objection. Now wewill get our report on foreign currency operations out of the way.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.] Thank you, Mr.Chairman. Also, we need approval of intervention of $50 million thatwe did on one day.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We ought to approve that and then go tothe questions and answers.MR. ANGELL. I move we approve it.MR. MELZER. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Now, let's turn to thediscussion. You recited all this and a lot of it sounded like ancienthistory. History repeats itself about every 3 days.MR. BOEHNE. What have you noticed about the inflow ofinvestment funds from abroad through all of this?MR. CROSS. The Japanese tell us that their total long-termcapital outflows are continuing at the same level as last year. Wedon't know, but there seems to be more diversification; to a greaterextent there is Japanese investment in Australia and Canada and insterling also. There is also more diversification in the types ofinstruments, we think. But we don't have very good information.Another problem is that there is a tendency by Japanese investors toengage in hedging operations. Even if they continue the long-termcapital outflows, they may at the same time be hedging on the exchangerate side and that has effects on the exchange market. There seemedto be a considerable amount of hedging during the period when thedollar/yen rate changed from the 158-159 level where it had stood fora while. As it broke through that level, a number of Japaneseinvestors seemed to engage in some hedging. To summarize, theJapanese capital outflows seem to be more diversified, but there mightbe other things that are taking place which are offsetting some of theexchange market effects.MR. STERNLIGHT. If I could add to that: There was a lot offocus in our bond market on what the weak dollar might mean to foreigninterest, especially Japanese interest, in the current Treasuryrefunding. That turned out finally, after some backup in rates as theauction approached, to be pretty good interest.A footnote to that, though, is thatwith these firms becoming more internationalized not every thing theytake is necessarily for resale back in Japan; but, certainly, thegreat bulk of it is.2/10-11/87MR. FORRESTAL. Do you see any shift by the Japanese from thebond market to the stock market? Is there any evidence of this?MR. STERNLIGHT. Certainly, we hear those same comments ondiversification that Sam referred to: either into the stock market orfrom Treasury issues into other securities such as Ginny Mae's orcorporate issues--even some of the higher-yield corporate issues.MR. BOEHNE. Sam, did your reference to diversification meandiversification within the U.S. or diversification among countries?MR. CROSS. Both kinds are going on. There isdiversification among countries in the sense that more Japaneseinvestment is going into Canada, Australia and into sterling--we don'thave very good information [unintelligible]--than before. Secondly,there is diversification in the sense that Peter mentioned: thatinstead of the very heavy concentration on Treasury bonds, there is agreater tendency to buy corporate bonds, equities, real estate, orother forms of investment. So, we see both types.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No other questions? There probably shouldbe, because if we ever reach this great international understanding--with or without a meeting--I presume there might be a lot moreintervention.MR. CROSS. Well, I think so. There has been a great deal ofdiscussion of that possibility [here] and perhaps elsewhere, with thedeal presumably being more intervention on our side and more moves byGermany and Japan and others to stimulate their economies. There'ssome question about what the Germans could do at the present time,given the fact that they just got through their election and are stillin the process of trying to put together a government. The market hastaken some encouragement from the fact that the party that had agreater belief in stimulating the economy seems to have done well.But what that will lead to, if anything, is the point that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Meanwhile, the economy is doing less well.MR. CROSS. That is another point; the German economy isclearly doing less well than it appeared to be a month ago.MR. BOEHNE. This talk about the Germans and Japanesestimulating their economies in exchange for our intervention hassurfaced off and on for months. Is there any reason to believe thatwe are any closer to some kind of understanding now than we have beenin the past?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Closer, yes. Close enough, I don't know.Partly, I think, as a result of the election there is more pressure inGermany politically to do something. Plus, the economy quite visiblyis not doing so well. seems very resistant tochanging what the economy is doing in any short period of time; he isnot exactly a fine tuner. Nonetheless, he is bound to put somewhatmore pressure on that side. And I think the Japanese are more worriedthan they were. These countries get really worried about theirexchange rates but they sure don't move very fast to take what seem tobe the necessary steps. Actually, neither of them is going to doanything very dramatic. What you hear talked about in both cases is2/10-11/87probably a tax reform program--fixing it up so there is some revenueloss over the next year.MR. CROSS. If it is just a nod in the direction ofstimulation, then the chances of any meaningful success fromintervention, I think, would be a good bit less than if it weresomething more stimulative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon what you think of theexchange rate anyway--whether there's a reasonable, potentialequilibrium or not. But obviously, it has implications for theconduct of monetary policy not just here but abroad.MR. HELLER. It seems that the Germans are emphasizing[domestic demand] a lot as well as the GNP numbers that we focus onand that look pretty discouraging. Domestic demand is expanding at 4to 4-1/2 percent and the difference is going to imports. I thinkthat's where our perspective and their perspective are reallydifferent. They say as long as we have a 4 to 4-1/2 percent domesticdemand expansion, we don't mind the low production figure at home aslong as the rest goes into imports. That way we make our contributionto international adjustment.SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible].MR. HELLER. With the mirror, right.MR. JOHNSON. They are also starting to admit that theirdomestic demands may not be as strong as they had thought.MR. HELLER. Their GNP number is a lot lower. The 1-1/2percent they are talking about now is a lot lower than the 2 percentthey were talking about a couple of weeks ago.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three percent domestic demand is not muchin terms of what we would like to see. They'd have to get to fivepercent or something like that; four is better than three.MR. HELLER. With a shrinking population they'll say that istough to do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have all those great terms of tradein their favor. That helps them to consume more, but they are not bigconsumers.MS. SEGER. Export some credit cards to them and help themout.MR. HELLER. Credit cards?MS. SEGER. To be better consumers.MR. HELLER. Yes, but there are no credit companies in--MS. SEGER. I am saying we could export some of ours to themso they could use them.2/10-11/87MR. HELLER. Oh I see! Well, as part of the Bank of Americasale to BAI, they got a big credit card operation over inDeutscheland.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any more questions? If not, wewill turn to the domestic report.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions?MR. MELZER. Peter, with regard to these expectationaleffects that you were just referring to, I agree with you that whatyou described there is a major shift in psychology. Can that have apermanent effect on the level of the funds rate for a given borrowingtarget?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it can have a lasting effect. Iwould hate to say that anything is permanent, given the changeabilityof things. I wouldn't be totally astounded if the funds rate driftedback to something under 6 percent. Maybe that would come about asseasonal borrowings picked up more. But, at least barring some newfactor right now, as I said, I tend to think more of a funds rate inthe 6 percent area in association with $300 million of borrowing.MR. HELLER. If you had expanding credit demands--it is clearhow that can happen as it did in that year-end period--under ouroperating procedures you just can't adjust your projections ofrequired reserves quickly enough to adapt. On an on-going basis andin a more orderly fashion, can that phenomenon create greaterpressures in the funds market?MR. STERNLIGHT. In more normal times the revisions don'toccur with such speed. So, one can fold in the new revisions in anorderly way and they wouldn't have the impact that they had in thatDecember period.MR. HELLER. So, in theory, you ought to be able to keep upwith it if it is more or less orderly.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is a question as to whetheryou always want to keep up with it.MR. HELLER(?). Oh, I understand that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just from my own perspective--andthis is obviously one person's view and one person's alone--I franklyregarded that whole year-end thing as pretty darn wild. And there isa question that arises in my mind--not that I have an alternativeidea. To find ourselves in a position where we have to throw $20billion dollars into the market for individual banks, between openmarket operations and the discount window, seems to me to raise aquestion as to how far we should go in sanctioning the kind ofbehavior that we were seeing in that time frame.2/10-11/87MS. SEGER. Where would the funds rate have gone if wehadn't--101 percent or something?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I guess.MR. JOHNSON. I think it leaves--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In no circumstances would it be theend of the world if the funds rate did go to whatever level. I don'tknow; I am just saying that from my perspective the whole thing waspretty wild.MR. BOEHNE. Peter, I hear in the business community, amongfinancial types, a little more talk about inflation accelerating andat least some questions about how firm we might be. I noticed, Ibelieve it was in that Drexell Burnham survey, that there seemed to besome uptick in inflationary expectations. Is that noticeable at allin the bond market or in the conversations that you have?MR. STERNLIGHT. There has been a little of that. A lot ofit came in the wake of the oil price [moves] by OPEC and the othercountries lining up with OPEC in the last couple of months. Then thedollar weakening also fed those views that there was more to beconcerned about prospectively on inflation. I wouldn't say it was avery major factor but it was there.MR. PARRY. Peter, my impression is that the priceperformance of the long-term tax exempt market has been a lot betterthan the taxable market in this period. Is that due to supply or thefact that, with the new tax law, investors really don't have as manyopportunities to shelter income as they did before?MR. STERNLIGHT. My impression is that it would be both ofthose factors. There was some abatement of the supply of tax exemptsand, as you stated, there are fewer alternatives for shelteringincome.MR. BLACK. Peter, I guess that you would say the degree ofpressure on reserve positions is essentially unchanged, despite thehigher federal funds rate.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it depends upon your standard ofmeasurement. Measured by the borrowing target that we are aiming at,it has been unchanged. But I have to admit that a somewhat higherlevel has emerged, even screening out the super high levels around theyear-end.MR. PARRY. The fact that the Bluebook alternative B has a 6percent funds rate I guess means that you agree, Don.MR. KOHN. Yes, for the $300 million in borrowing, I agreewith Peter's analysis. I think there is, as Peter says, some riskthat it might stick a little above 6 percent; but we are so uncertainabout it that 6 percent seems like a good center of gravity.MR. JOHNSON. What is in our directive? We don't specify aborrowings number in our directive. We have an understanding of about$300 million or whatever we decide. But if we say constant reserve2/10-11/87pressure, what is that going to mean to us? Maybe we ought toinstitutionalize the borrowing number or the funds rate. Are we goingto--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have institutionalized theborrowing number.MR. JOHNSON. Borrowing number, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's some allowance for excess reserveswhen they are very abnormal, I suppose.MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's what I had assumed. An answer toyour question would be that we haven't changed reserve pressures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at it another way and measureit by the increase in the money supply it has been rather enormous.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To say nothing of the increase inreserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The funds rate has been where it has beenbecause of a $27 billion increase in the money supply in three weeks.MS. SEGER. Doesn't it take pressure on reserves to move thefed funds rate as it has moved? I realize that there were unusualcircumstances; nevertheless, there must have been some temporaryreserve pressure to have pumped it up so. I think you said the ratewas 38 percent at one time; that doesn't sound like it was excessivelyeasy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There were $2 billion of excess reservesthat week.MS. SEGER. Yes, but maybe they needed $2.1 billion.MR. HELLER. Zero in the evening!MR. MELZER. And there is probably one guy out there whobought them at 38 percent and sold them at zero.MR. BLACK. He's not with that company any more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It puts us in a real dilemma. How much dowe think this demand for economic activity [unintelligible]? If wewere under our old operating procedure, aiming for the money supply,the federal funds rate would have been 60 percent or 75 percent for afew days.MR. ANGELL. Peter said he was playing it by his gut. Iunderstand that, but my reaction is that you didn't do too badly,Peter. Given all the forces, it seems to me that you followdirections very well.MR. BLACK. I didn't mean to imply otherwise by my question.I felt that was the way you were going to answer, but I just wanted tomake sure that you still view it the same way. Because of the highspread between the discount rate and the federal funds rate, there2/10-11/87might be a little more demand for those borrowings, so there might bea little more pressure.MR. JOHNSON. It would be interesting to know eventually whypeople aren't borrowing with the higher spread. I would like to knowthat answer. I am not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much can you identify this simpledistribution of reserves that you have been talking about? We knowthe seasonal [unintelligible]. Do you see appreciably less borrowingby banks under $1 billion or--?MR. KOHN. We have looked at those data, Mr. Chairman. Thedivision that we have looked at is banks over and under $1 billion.You can see, actually, some [difference] all year--and I think thishas been connoted by the fact that the seasonal borrowing has beenless, to some extent--and then a widening of the gap over November andDecember. It is not a lot, but you can see--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose you look at banks under $10billion or so.MR. KOHN. We haven't done that. All we have done was overand under $1 billion. We can try other breaks, I think.MS. SEGER. What is happening to the administration ofdiscount windows?MR. KOHN. As far as I know, nothing.MS. SEGER. I see.MR. KOHN. They are instructed not to do anything.MS. SEGER. No new personnel?MR. JOHNSON. One little clerk who's doing it all.MR. MORRIS. I think we started, maybe a year or two ago, toget tougher with the big banks. We instructed them that they couldcome in on Wednesday, on a settlement day, if they really had a case.And that was it. My impression is that, at least in our District, wehad more borrowing from the big banks before that--before we startedthis Wednesday-only routine.MS. SEGER. I am glad you said that because I told Don that Ihear stories from bankers, too. And he tells me faithfully that wehaven't changed.MR. MORRIS. [We haven't] as far as the smaller banks.MR. BOYKIN. In his District, big banks don't borrow becausethey do not want it known that they may have come to the window forother reasons. So, the big institutions don't come in.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The big banks seldom, if ever,borrowed other than on a Wednesday anyway, though.2/10-11/87MR. MORRIS. I don't know what the numbers would show, but Ihave a feeling that the big bank borrowing is less now than it was acouple of years ago.MR. KOHN. I have looked at data over the last several years,and it doesn't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Borrowing is less than it was a couple ofyears ago.MR. MORRIS. That's true.MR. KOHN. You would have to normalize on the interest ratespread, and it hasn't shown any [tendency to run lower] for banks over$1 billion, which is the break we've been using. It hasn't shownanything, particularly in the last couple of years; it may be a littlelower but not much. Now, it is true that when we went tocontemporaneous reserve requirements (CRR) we said--as we always havesaid and as President Corrigan just noted--that most of the big bankborrowings are supposed to happen on Wednesday. That is when theyhave gone out and sought funds. And now it happens every otherWednesday. So, that may be what you are referring to. But in termsof their frequency of borrowing, or the amount they are allowed toborrow relative to deposits, and that sort of thing, there was anattempt made in the switch to CRR and the two-week reserve period notto change the standards. There was an attempt made to keep thestandards roughly comparable. Perhaps it wasn't successful, but thatwas an explicit goal.MR. JOHNSON. I don't see how that would explain the changeat the end of the year and the continuation now. I think there issomething over and above that CRR that is making them hesitant,because the funds rate was behaving fairly consistently before.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One thing that is probably at workis that they have more surprises now than they used to have. Just inrecent weeks the speed at which the turnover is taking place iscontinuing to grow. I am sure that they have more surprises that havenothing whatever to do with the discount window. They just don't knowwhere they are going to end the day.MR. MORRIS. This would make them more reluctant to use thewindow.MR. BLACK. A couple of our banks reported that they couldn'tfind the federal funds. The market had dried up, as far as they wereconcerned.MR. ANGELL. It increases the demand for excess reserves.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It would also be consistent withtheir being more reluctant to come to the window. They want to savethat for when they really need it. I think that is part of theexplanation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Moreover, I wouldn't exaggerate thesignificance of this moving around one quarter of a percent orsomething like that.2/10-11/87MR. JOHNSON. It probably has been very timely, given whathas happened to the dollar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to vote to ratify thesetransactions. [Without objection.] Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] We have had a lotof focus on the international side, so we are going to do somethingdifferent than we have done over the last decade; we are going toinvite Mr. Truman to speak next.MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.] Mr. Prell will nowcontinue our presentation.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.] Mr. Kichline will nowconclude our presentation.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] That concludes ourpresentation, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If anybody still remains wide awake, arethere any questions? Or was the presentation so complete that noquestions--?MR. BOEHNE. I have at least one question. First of all, Ithink you fellows did an outstanding job. This is not an easy taskand I think you outdid yourselves. Having said that, let me ask myquestion. The key to this forecast is what happens to theinternational sector--to the turnaround in the trade deficit. I guessif we have been disappointed, we've been disappointed because theturnaround hasn't come faster. So often things happen more slowlythan we think in economics; but then when they do begin to happen,they sometimes surprise us in that they happen so quickly. This is myquestion: Even though what we are dealing with in the trade deficit isoutside historical experience, is there anything in our own history orthe history of other countries to suggest that once the turnaroundcomes--even though it may have come more slowly than expected--that itmay occur faster than we think?MR. TRUMAN. Some time ago we looked at one part of thatquestion--whether anyone ever had a turnaround of this magnitude. Wefound a number of examples of countries that had turnarounds in aspace of 3 to 5 years of 3 percent or more of GNP. So that is notunheard of. The question is whether we would have for the forecastperiod as much of a turnaround as we have projected here. In fact, apassing allusion to that is 1978, which was shown on the first chart.In 1978 and 1979, as a share of GNP, there were slightly largerswings. Basically, from the first quarter of 1978 to the firstquarter of 1979 there was an improvement of something like 1-1/3percent of the GNP. And we have essentially 1 percent over severalquarters. In that sense, we have less of an improvement stretched outover a slightly longer period. However, I think it is fair to saythat we had a more conducive external environment in those periods.Both abroad and in the developing countries, particularly, [growth]was much more rapid in the late 1970s than we are seeing at themoment. That certainly is one reason why we had to scale back ourprojections somewhat. The other factor I would mention is that inputting projections like this together we look at what various2/10-11/87historical equations tell us, and maybe because we are a little gun-shy, we have chosen not to go with what the straight econometricequations tell us in terms of how much of an improvement we would haveover this period. That's for a number of reasons, some of which Ithink everybody knows, including the fact that we are coming back fromsuch a strong position. The third point I would make relates towhether this is disappointing. I guess in some sense it isdisappointing. But as I look back at the forecast that we gave a yearago, the forecast for the U.S. current account for last year, givenall the conditions, was reasonably close to what we came out with.Maybe people hoped there would be more of a turnaround, but I don'tthink the staff forecast as a whole was substantially outside anynormal range of error in terms of 1986.MR. JOHNSON. Ted, what are some of the models actuallyprojecting? I agree with you, I wouldn't--MR. TRUMAN. We would have another $20 billion in real netexports over this period if we went with historical equations for thevolume of nonagricultural exports. As anybody who has done thisknows, all equations have errors and it is partly a function of whatyou do with the errors that happened in the most recent period. Therehas been some error in the most recent period, and in putting theforecast together we have chosen, implicitly, to increase rather thanto reduce its size. That's partly because, given the relatively soggyenvironment in the rest of the world, we feel that there are limits onthe rates at which U.S. exporters can penetrate some of those markets.Looking back at it--and with the big qualification that the fourth-quarter numbers are still partly estimated--I think it is clear thatthere was a substantial improvement in our nonagricultural exports in1986. That's something that was borne out in the Reserve Bank surveysand also by the statistics.MR. JOHNSON. I think that the biggest issue is that a lot ofpeople you talk to expect most of the gains to come on importsubstitution, but we don't really show much there at all.MR. TRUMAN. Well, we have it coming on import substitutionin the sense that we have a still growing economy. In fact, in somesense you want to look at the production side, not the demand side.Production is growing at 2-1/2 percent, and normally that would beassociated with an increase in imports of 2-1/2 percent or more overthe course of the next two years. We essentially have none of that.So the substitution effect comes, in some sense, against a two-year 6percent import growth that otherwise would be there. That is quite alarge number, but we are not looking for an actual decline.MR. FORRESTAL. How much did the volume of non-oil imports goup last year?MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible.]MR. FORRESTAL. So, non-ag exports have been a little slower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I have a question for Mike Prell on personalincome and savings, chart 14. I think it may have some implications-10-2/10-11/87for the PCE forecast. The saving rate clearly has been coming down inrecent years. Your forecast would have that saving rate trendingdown--not looking at the quarterly pattern, but on average--in 1987and 1988. Of course, if that did not occur there would be someimplications, potentially, for the growth of consumption. Withdisposable income rising more slowly, I can understand why it might bea difficult environment in which to build savings, but at the sametime I have difficulty seeing the rates coming down to those levels.I don't know if you can ever find saving rates down at those levels.Continuing that trend would be of considerable interest andsignificance.MR. PRELL. Well, the periods in which you find sustained lowsaving rates are not periods that you would necessarily want to usefor purposes of analysis at this time--the Depression, for example, orthe early postwar period. I think you put your finger on one of thefactors in our thinking: that as real wages are eroded, there will notbe an immediate adjustment of spending patterns. We have durablegoods purchases growing at a very low rate. Our consumption growth ishistorically very low and we are assuming that this wealth increasethat we have seen at least is not erased. So, on the basis of thosewealth and income levels, we ought to be able to sustain a relativelylow saving rate. But certainly, we are in somewhat unchartedterritory and it's a potential risk in the forecast. We decided notto look back at [unintelligible] and say that's a potential risk.They are two sides of the same coin.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are assuming a little increase in thesaving rate in 1987.MR. PRELL. If you look at the annual totals it's gyratingaround.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a difference between the annualaverage and--MR. KICHLINE. The saving rate in the fourth quarter of lastyear was 2-3/4 percent. If you are visually looking at this chart, itdepends on the point you look at. One other thing that conditions ourthinking is that, historically, the income side tends to get revisedup in the national income accounts in July. They tend to find incomewith these revisions. We have looked at these data, and history wouldtell us that the 2-3/4 percent number for the fourth quarter is likelyto be over three percent, and perhaps appreciably over three percent;but we will know that a couple years from now. So, conditioning ourthinking is the fact that these numbers tend to understate the savingrate.MR. PRELL. This is where we were a year ago; it wasessentially the same sort of situation. It has happened repeatedlythat they find income and the saving rate does go up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I was stimulated to ask two questions,Mr. Chairman. First, given the relatively favorable numbers at theend of the year, I think there is some expectation that the GNP forthe fourth quarter might be revised upward. And some people are-11-2/10-11/87suggesting that it might even be revised substantially. If that wereto happen would that change your outlook for the year as a whole? Inother words, do you think you might revise your forecast?MR. KICHLINE. We had in mind when we put the forecasttogether that the fourth quarter would be revised up somewhat. Thequestion would arise if the revision were much larger than we hadanticipated. The major source of the change is our expectation thatnet exports will look a lot better, perhaps $8 to $10 billion better,than in the accounts now. But some more recent information coming outon business fixed investment and some other areas suggests that maybeby the time they put all of the numbers together the upward revisionwill be something smaller than that. So, our sense is that we mightget a 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent number instead of 1-3/4 percent.Implicitly, we had that expectation in mind when putting together thisforecast.MR. FORRESTAL. You have that built in. My second questionis for Ted Truman. I guess I am not quite clear why you think you aregoing to get depreciation of specific Korean and other Far Easterncurrencies against the dollar. I ask that given their propensity tokeep their currencies at a low level relative to the dollar. I guessthey haven't exactly pegged it but--MR. TRUMAN. Well, most of the action in this area comes fromKorea and Taiwan. They have already begun depreciating slightly forthe last three or four months. And basically, that's what we havebuilt into this forecast. They depreciate by 5 to 6 percent in realterms while some of the Latin American countries, essentially Braziland Mexico, [unintelligible] percent over the two-year period,[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Jim, or Mike, I forget which one of you mentioned[in the presentation] that if you had had the employment report youprobably would have upped your forecast a little. If you add to thatthe National Association of Purchasing Manager's Report, would thatcause you to change your figures?MR. KICHLINE. No, we had that information in hand. The onlymajor piece that came out that we did not include in our thinking wasthe employment report. We have 2-1/4 percent now, and I think if wehad had that report, we would probably have a number in the 2-3/4 to 3percent range for the first quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Mr. Truman, you have the interesting chart 5there, with real interest rate differentials and the U.S. dollar plusyour forecast for the real interest rate differentials.MR. TRUMAN. Forecast of the dollar.MR. HELLER. Pardon me?MR. TRUMAN. The red line is the forecast of the dollar.-12-2/10-11/87MR. HELLER. I'm sorry; I totally misread the chart. I wasgoing to ask if you forecasted real interest rate differentials whatthe underlying actual rates implied by that chart were.MR. TRUMAN. The interest rate differentials?MR. HELLER. Well, the actual interest rates that you werelooking at.MR. TRUMAN. We have long-term interest rates in the UnitedStates that are trending up slightly over the forecast period innominal terms and real coming down slightly now. And that is aboutoffset by the differential in inflation over the period. Essentially,you have the same midpoint, which is about 3/4 of a percent there.MR. HELLER. So it's a flat line.MR. TRUMAN. Basically, it will be flat. That's one of thereasons why I didn't put it in the chart.MR. JOHNSON. So why do you get the further depreciation?MR. TRUMAN. Economists argue about whether negative realinterest rates cause depreciation. If you have a lagged structuralmodel, I think you would argue that they probably do. At some point,however, it implies that you are going to have appreciation. In thiscontext, I think it would be a negative factor, on balance. The majorpoint is that, while we think there will be at least continuingdownward pressure on the dollar, the current account will not movefast enough as some combination of market participants and market[unintelligible] think is necessary.MR. PARRY. Mr. Truman, on chart 6, that wholesale pricechart, if that were net of oil, am I correct that probably you wouldhave seen more of a depreciation in the United States than you wouldin the foreign countries?MR. TRUMAN. We have more [unintelligible]. As a matter offact, we have it going the other way.MR. PARRY. But oil is denominated in dollars, so thedepreciation of their currencies must have had a very large impact onthose indices.MR. TRUMAN. In some sense you can see it in the next chartwhere you have the Economist Index of all commodities. You haveessentially [unintelligible] over the last couple of years; priceshave been flat in dollar terms. So likewise, in the oil case, you hada combination of a declining dollar price and it's magnified by theexchange rate.MR. PARRY. So net of oil, our inflation improvement probablywas better.MR. TRUMAN. No, I would say net of oil, probably ourinflation improvement is not as good. Because if all of the othercommodity prices were fixed in dollars, and the dollar was declining-13-2/10-11/87against deutschemarks, yen, and so forth, and you take oil out, youhave [unintelligible].MR. PARRY. I see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. My question is somewhat related to an earlierquestion regarding Japanese investors in long-term Treasuryobligations, and you probably have no chart or number for it. Youhave given the interest differential. Normally that's what we are[unintelligible]. But given the tremendous decline in the dollar[unintelligible], broadly how are those long-term investments lookingover any period of time? I guess the question is: Is there a way thatthey have been protecting themselves against a [depreciating dollar]?MR. TRUMAN. There are three things to say. One is that thestatistics do not show much in the way of net Japanese purchases ofTreasury securities over the past year. The statistics may be wrong,but they do not show it. Secondly, as I commented and as I think wasimplicit in what Sam was saying earlier, even if they buy them youdon't know what else they are doing and to what extent they areselling them. As to the question of whether there is going to beenough foreign investment in the United States over the next twoyears, I think it's a question of the price at which that investmenttakes place. Investment is going to be made in the United States.They don't have much choice. The question is what combination ofinterest rates or exchange rates brings that forth. If the Japanesewant to invest abroad but insist on protecting themselves, thenbasically they are saying [unintelligible]. They have to place yen-denominated investments abroad and someone is going to have to takethe other side of that currency position. If there are not enoughpeople to take that at the current exchange rates, the rates are goingto go lower. That's how I think of the model.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is another way of looking atthat. Chart 10, I think, is kind of interesting. Roughly speaking,if you take the three years 1983, 1984, and 1985, the cumulativecurrent account deficits for those three years are something like $280billion; but the cumulative current account deficits for 1986, 1987,and 1988 are something like $410 billion. So we are looking at asituation where in the three years that we are in now, we have tofinance 50 percent more than we financed in the three earlier years--but in a context in which interest rate differentials and exchangerate relationships are very, very different than they were in thethree-year period when we were only financing $280 billion as opposedto the $410 billion or whatever it's going to be. It could get a lottougher. The conclusion one draws is that it could very well betougher--especially in the kind of interest rate/exchange rateenvironment we have right now--to finance what lies ahead than tofinance what came before us.MR. HELLER. In my mind there are always two possibleoutcomes. The one is like the scenario that you are outlining--thatthe dollar will really plunge; the other possible outcome is that yousay okay, the balance is not turning and, therefore, there will bemore exports and that will give confidence.-14-2/10-11/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's already built into thosenumbers.MR. HELLER. So then you are stuck with the first one.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You are not stuck with it. I thinkit just says that the potential risks of that adverse scenario areprobably greater prospectively than they were retrospectively.MR. PARRY. I think something of an offset to that, Jerry, isthat because of the depreciation of the dollar the foreign investoris, in effect, buying at a cheaper price.MR. TRUMAN. That's the other point that came up in myconversation with Governor Johnson. In some sense, the closer you areto the bottom the more attractive it is to buy. In fact, theexpectation of appreciation makes it look cheap now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Still, in those markets people will buy.Do we have any more questions or comments? If not, I think we can goon to people discussing anything they want to lay out about thegeneral view of the outlook and the potential risks therein. [In theforecasts you submitted prior to this meeting] everybody is positivein a certain range, but there is considerable difference for somepeople. Mr. Parry isn't one of them; he agrees with the staff so hiscomments can be brief.MR. BLACK. I hope the converse of that doesn't necessarilyapply!MR. PARRY. I didn't hear you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comment briefly on the outlook.MR. PARRY. I would start out by saying that our forecast isnot very different from that of the Board staff. But I do want tocomment a bit on the risks that I see to the forecast because I thinkthey could have implications for policy. It would appear to me thatthe risks as far as inflation is concerned are on the up side. Wehave assumed that the recent decline in the value of the dollar islargely permanent and that the dollar will end 1987 at a lower levelthan we had in our previous forecast. The pass-through of priceincreases resulting from the dollar's decline has been slow to date,but I believe profit margins of many foreign suppliers of goods to theUnited States are really quite narrow at the present time and,therefore, future pass-throughs could be considerably greater.Secondly, it seems that the momentum of oil prices at the present timeis in the direction of rising oil prices, or at least not declining.Thus, our assumptions about oil prices could turn out to be too lowand inflationary pressures more intense. The dollar and also the oilprice issue are largely factors that one would presume would betemporary as far as inflation is concerned. But a third risk forinflation would be more prolonged, I think, in its impact. The staffprojection of the unemployment rate at year end is around 6-1/2percent. By some estimates that rate gets close to full employmentand thus any positive shock to demand could produce more serious pricepressures than are included in the forecast.-15-2/10-11/87On the real side, I am basically comfortable with the staff'sestimate of just under 3 percent, although there is a risk to theprojection, probably, on both sides of the forecast. I would like tonote two risks on the downside. The first one I really was hinting atwhen I asked the question about the saving rate. It seems to me thatit is conceivable for the saving rate not to deteriorate from theselevels. If that were the case, it's possible that consumption wouldgrow at a somewhat slower pace than is incorporated in the forecast.Obviously, another major uncertainty on the real side is net exports.We have talked about that considerably, but to me a conservativestance would be to assume that the failure of the dollar to declinerelative to currencies of numerous important trading partners willlead to an improvement in net exports that is somewhat less than theBoard staff's number.On the regional front, we continue to see growth a bit fasterthan the rest of the nation. Last year we saw employment up 3.5percent compared to 2.3 percent nationwide. We also saw a huge jump--67 percent--in California building permits in December, but that was aresponse to a large builders fee that went into effect January 1.It's interesting to note that the increase significantly added to thenational totals; it probably caused about 17 percent of the increasein the December leading indicators. So it was not an insignificantdevelopment. A couple of other points in the District: We had arather interesting experiment regarding the effects on consumerbehavior of the removal of the sales tax deduction. Oregon does nothave a sales tax, and consequently, one of the things that we observedwas that there was no surge in car sales in Oregon in contrast to theyear-end surge in other states with sales taxes. We also heard from amember of our small business and agricultural advisory council thatapparently one major Japanese car maker is beginning to ship strippeddown models to the U.S. I think that is interesting because it maymean that the volume of Japanese car imports may not decline as muchas had been expected and that, conceivably, price competition in theindustry may turn out to be more intense. Finally,pointed out to us thathe was having much greater success in selling to the Canadians becausethey were now substituting our exports for French exports. We havebeen focusing on the failure of the Canadian dollar and the currenciesof [unintelligible] countries to appreciate and thus to enable us tocut down on our imports. One thing that is sort of interesting isthat the failure of their currencies to appreciate relative to ours isprobably raising some export opportunities that perhaps we have notbeen focusing on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It also has diminished some imports whenyou [unintelligible] to France. The problem is your preciseindication of the risks. Let that be a model to others when theyapproach this thing.Just in terms of inflation, I meant to ask a question of you,[Mr. Kichline]. We have all of these GNP deflator projections; howmuch do you have to add to that, roughly, to get a consumer priceindex projection?MR. KICHLINE. For 1987, fourth quarter to fourth quarter, wehave forecast a CPI increase of 3.8 percent; it was 1.3 percent on a-16-2/10-11/87fourth-quarter basis in 1986. So that's 0.9 percentage points abovethe deflator in 1987.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I will be very brief. One of the noticeabledifferences in the forecast of people around the table has to do withinflation. There seems to be a trend: the more you are in Washingtonthe lower you think inflation will be; and the more you are out in thecountry the higher you think it will be. I have been surprised intravels around my District by questions about inflation. I would haveexpected questions to be more on the dollar or whether the economy isgoing to go into a recession or what have you. I have found in recentweeks that the greatest concern is that inflation is going to get outof the box. And if you push, and ask if [the basis for the question]is wages, or imports, or that you are raising your own prices, youfind that it doesn't seem to be analytically based. It seems to bemore of a gut feeling that somehow we are just going to let inflationout of the box again. I think it's just a general worry at the gutlevel that causes that. But it is there. And I think that has someimplications for how monetary policy is stated in addition to what itactually is. In general, I agree with the staff forecast; I'm perhapsa touch higher on inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, before I talk about theforecast in general, I thought I would tell you about some interestingnumbers I came up with. Ninety percent of the New England high techmanufacturer exports are flown out of Boston Airport because of thelow weight to value ratio, so I thought I would ask the port authorityto give me some figures on air freight exports and imports. I thoughtit might be an indicator of how this high tech industry is doingbecause I have been getting a lot of optimistic feedback and I wantedto see if it was confirmed by the numbers. The numbers are in poundsso you don't have any exchange rate problem. What they show is thatour air freight exports bottomed out in the first quarter last yearand have been rising pretty substantially. In the three months endedin November of 1986 they were running 29 percent higher than the samemonths of 1985. Air freight imports, which are still larger thanexports, were running 7 percent higher than a year ago. Now that'spounds and that can be misleading because I know that we shipped a lotof tuna. Lobster don't weigh much, but we ship a lot of tuna toJapan. We don't eat fresh tuna and we ship the whole fish in aspecially prepared box because they like fresh tuna. It could well bethat a good part of this increase reflects a 40 percent decline in thecost of fresh tuna to the Japanese. But I think it does tend toconfirm the idea that the high tech industry is doing a lot morebusiness overseas than it has been. So, I will keep watching thosenumbers and see what intelligence I can get from them.I am inclined to think that if the forecast is wrong on realgrowth it's going to be wrong on the low side. I had a long argumentwith my staff about what number to give you. They wanted me to giveyou 2 percent real growth. I thought that was a bit on the low side.I hated to offend them because their forecast has been better thanmine in recent years, so we compromised at 2-1/2 percent after theysaw the January employment numbers. I am impressed with the very-17-2/10-11/87widespread strength in the leading indicators in November, December,and January. Three months back-to-back strength of this sort leads meto think that at least the first half may be considerably strongerthan we are projecting. So I come out on the optimistic side of therisks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. On the real side, our forecast is just a touchhigher than the Board staff's. I would be inclined to agree withFrank Morris; I feel good about the current statistics that we areseeing, although I am not inclined to read too much into that. Icertainly don't pick up anecdotally the idea that people areconsciously recognizing a significantly strengthening picture rightnow. The only thing I would say on the price side--just to pick up onwhat Ed Boehne said--is that in general in our discussions,particularly of late, we tend not to place too much weight on theeffects of M1 growth and so forth. But just to pick up on this year-end phenomenon, one way that you could conceptualize that is that whatwe have done is monetize or liquify a lot of unrealized capital gains.And that has been done largely through an expansion of bank creditthat hasn't run down significantly. That money is sitting there andsome of it certainly will go back into other investments; but some ofit could well be spent. I just think that at some point, when moneyhas run at such rapid rates, we are going to see some impact in pricesthat may not really be built into the forecast we are looking at. So,we're higher on the price side; we are at the high end of that range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the relationship is the same as thestaff's, your kind of price [forecast] would have to produce about a 5percent CPI. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. If we have a difference with the staff, it'son the inflation side as well. We see pressure on prices probablyoccurring more towards the end of the year than at the beginning, andwe are attributing that basically to a greater impact from importprices than we had thought earlier. We have done some studies thatsuggest that the decline of the dollar is going to affect these importprices somewhat. Those studies are certainly not definitive by anymeans, but my hunch is that they are probably right. So we arelooking at the deflator to be at about 3-1/2 percent; we think it isreally somewhat unrealistic to see the deflator stuck at 3 percent,which is what the staff is forecasting for three quarters. On the GNPside, we are closer to the staff but a little lower; therefore, ourforecast is a little less sanguine than the Board staff's. Some ofthat activity that we saw in December could very well have been taxrelated. I hope it's more than that and that there is some momentumin the economy; but we will just have to wait and see on that. But wethink that GNP is probably going to grow around 2-1/2 percent.Consistent with that slower rate of growth, we have a slightly higherunemployment rate at year-end, although it's not significantlydifferent. So the real difference that we have is on the inflationside.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. As far as the real economy is concerned, myforecast is the same as the staff's but I tried to build into that-18-2/10-11/87some allowance for this fourth-quarter borrowing phenomenon--that is,I assumed the fourth quarter was going to take some strength out ofthe first half of 1987 for tax reasons and so forth. I must say thatI am not sure that was a wise adjustment. It seems to me, at least,that the risk--risk is probably not the right term--that the range [oferror] around the forecast is probably symmetric at this point. I amquite impressed with the momentum with which the economy ended theyear. I am not just referring to the December statistics. Looking atthe payroll data or the household employment data going back toSeptember or October, we see a string of consecutive sizable increasesin the statistics on a monthly basis that, as far as I am concerned,are about as reliable as any we have to look at. And there are someother developments one can add to that as well, relating to the year-end improvement in housing starts and the tone of the purchasingmanagers' survey and so forth. As far as inflation is concerned, I amat the high end of the range, based on the reasoning that we havebenefitted from some special factors in 1986 that are not going to bewith us in 1987 and that, in fact, will be reversed through higherimport prices of oil and other things. So, I suspect we are going tosee a somewhat more rapid rate of inflation.A couple of interesting things have happened in the Districtlately that I might just comment on. We run a quarterly agriculturalcredit conditions survey, and for the fourth quarter that survey hadthe most positive tone reported in a long, long time, both with regardto farm earnings and to the pace of farm debt repayments. One quarterobviously doesn't establish a new trend, but there seemed to be someinkling there that, at least in our District, we are seeing some realturnaround. I would also comment that the labor market in the Twincities, which has been quite tight for some time, has apparentlytightened further. We got reports from one of our directors that forjobs that would have to be characterized as requiring modest skills,but where the compensation is really pretty decent--total compensationof $20,000 to $25,000 a year--they just cannot find people to fillthem. There are no takers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I am right that an inflation rate of 4percent in the GNP deflator means something close to 5 percent on theCPI--and that is the middle of the range--your number means the CPIcould be over 5 percent.MR. STERN. It could be, but that's only 0.4 percent a monthannually. It doesn't strike me--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A turning point--MR. STERN. The CPI last year, excluding food and energy, wasaveraging about 0.3. It's that kind of deterioration.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't saying it couldn't happen. Ijust wanted to talk about it. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Our numbers are very consistent with the staffforecast. We are a touch higher on real GNP, but perhaps from a lowerfourth-quarter base, and our deflator number is a little higher. Withregard to risk--and I think we have covered it in some detail--itseems to me that so much is dependent on the trade side that the risksreally have to be in that area. I must say, nonetheless, that I think-19-2/10-11/87we are probably going to come out about right on that. From talkingto people in the District, I do sense that probably one of the moresignificant changes that we have had in the last month or so is on thetrade side, more as it relates to imports than to exports. Certainly,the environment for exports is better and there are some industries--chemicals and paper products, for example--that are doing better. Buton the import side, I think an awful lot of the domestic people whohave been supplying the domestic markets that have been so very, veryhard hit are sensing better opportunities now--particularly for peoplesuch as the integrated manufacturers who had typically gone to foreignmarkets for their out-sourcing. I think they are beginning to lookmore at domestic markets for their sources and, therefore, that's animprovement also. It's nothing dramatic, but I do think we areperhaps at a turning point on this. Because of the importance of thetrade sector to our outlook for the year, in my mind that has to bethe big risk.On inflation, I think the risks are a little on the up side.People I talked to say that wage costs are continuing under very goodcontrol. Their contract settlements are excellent in terms of cost aswell as work rule changes, etc. And the market pricing is very tough;conditions continue to be very, very competitive so they are able tomaintain pressure on that. There is this bet that imported productswill begin to go up in price. I think we are going to see that showthrough and the CPI number is going to be a little higher than wemight have expected. And because of the sheer publicity--thevisibility that the CPI gets--it seems to me that it is going to beginto get one's eyes focused on this problem, perhaps more than has beenthe case in the last couple of years. So, I think inflation is theother risk area.I have just a couple of quick comments on the District. Iecho what Gary Stern was saying about the agricultural sector. I havebeen out a couple of times over the last two weeks, and I sensed thatwe might, I hope, be at the bottom of that particular problem, or inthe zone of stability, as I call it. That's a bit of a positive. Onthe negative side, we are continuing to see plant closings, somethingthat I keep a count on. Caterpillar has announced the closing ofthree additional plants in the Midwest in the last month or so. GMhas announced one more plant closing over and above that big stringthat they had a couple of months ago. They are now beginning to shutdown some of their [plants producing] parts used in assembly and,again, they are going to out-sourcing. So that's one on the negativeside. Generally, conditions in the District seem to be pretty muchunchanged from what has been the case over the last few months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we are more on the optimistic side,like some of our brethren are, I am comforted to see. We may havebeen overly influenced by the signs of a turnaround in manufacturingin recent months than by the flurry of good statistics that has justhit in the face of a great deal of liquidity in the economy. We putin 3-1/2 percent as the rate of growth in real GNP, and we have theunemployment rate coming down to 6.4 percent. So far as our analysisis concerned, we are pretty much in agreement with the staff on theforces that are at work in that we think there is going to be a markedimprovement in the net export picture and that it's going to be a-20-2/10-11/87major contributor to growth. We also agree with the conclusion thatgross domestic purchases are going to grow more slowly, but we differmainly in that we think that there are going to be more real personalconsumption expenditures. The staff has projected just 1-1/2 percentgrowth fourth quarter to fourth quarter. It is certainly true that wehave a lot of debt there, but we also have some factors that offsetthat negative in the growth of wealth. So our guess is that PCE isgoing to be somewhat higher than their forecast. Coincidentally, Isuppose, we had about the same kind of growth in real disposableincome last year as they are projecting for 1987 and we had a 4percent rise in real consumer expenditures. Against this moreoptimistic forecast, we have inflation near the high side, at 3.8percent. I am a little comforted to see that someone else is thereand even more comforted by one of the Board member's forecast of realGNP of 4 percent. For once I am not the high one on that. We thinkthat inflation is going to stem from this stronger projection of realgrowth; that ought to tend to reduce this remaining slack in labor andproduct markets, particularly in the second half of the year. Insofaras the risks are concerned, I would say that the risks are that thenumbers are going to come in somewhere between our forecast and theBoard staff's.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not much of a risk. Mr. Corrigan.MR. BLACK. It's an averaging of two misses, probably.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My forecast is again almostidentical with the staff's forecast. It probably means that we areboth wrong. As a number of people said, the trade sector is obviouslycrucial. And frankly, I blow hot and cold on that. Sometimes I thinkwe have a good shot at doing better than the forecast and other timesI say "no way". I guess right now I am, to some extent, in the coldcamp as opposed to the hot camp. And that came about in part fromlistening to President Poehl and Governor Sumita over the weekend inBasle, both of whom were really distinctly more cautious abouteconomic prospects in Germany and Japan. Clearly, in terms of thefavorable world economic situation--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How are the Japanese talking now?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, they start with the governmentforecast which is 3 percent plus--say, 3-1/2 to 4 percent. Then theytalk a little about the Bank of Japan forecast and shave a half pointoff that. Then they start wriggling in terms of their own forecasts,so with the body english, I ended up with 2 percent or less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is where the Germans are. It's notvery exciting.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And some worry, especially in theJapanese case, that they are really taking a terrible beating in theirmanufacturing sector now. So, as I said, I guess today I am a littleinfluenced by that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A terrible beating by Japanese standards.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. By their standards. On the importside, the question I keep asking myself is: If we have a shortfall2/10-11/87from this kind of consensus forecast on the export side, is there anygood possibility that we can make up the difference on the importside? That to me is a tough one. Indeed, it's a "Catch-22" becausewhen I look at the nature of the import situation here in the UnitedStates now, with the infrastructure that goes with it in so manyproduct lines, it just seems to me that to break out of that mold thatTed has in his forecast, we are probably going to have to have prettysharp price increases for imports. That's something we haven't seenyet; and if we start to see it, it's just going to add that much morepressure on the domestic inflation side. So, I am not sure we canmake up any shortfall on the export side. But if we do, I am afraidthat we are going to make it up at the cost of higher inflation. So,as I said, right now I am a bit on the cold side of the tradesituation, but that will change next week, I suspect.On the purely domestic side, like Mr. Stern and a couple ofothers, I've got to say I am impressed with not just the Januaryemployment numbers, but the collection of numbers over the past threeor four months which, net, have been stronger than I would haveexpected, especially in the circumstances of the tax change. Thosedevelopments will probably lead me to be marking up my forecast alittle. Putting it all together, I would say that the risks are aboutsymmetric at this point. I have a little of that nagging sense ofunease that Ed Boehne spoke about in terms of the inflation situation,although I can't pin it down either. If you go through unit laborcosts and productivity exercises, you still get numbers that lookrespectable, at least in terms of deflators. But there is at leastthat nagging feeling that this tremendous amount of liquidity that weput into the economy ought to do something at some point. And rightnow all it seems to be doing, in some sense, is feeding the financialsector. That in itself constitutes a risk because I continue to see arather sharp--and in some ways an ever sharper--dichotomy between thefinancial sector of the economy and the real sector of the economy.And I just don't see how that is sustainable. I think there are risksright there in terms of something going astray which, in turn, couldimpair confidence in the world in a detrimental way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, optimism or pessimism is arelative thing. Having been through a series of meetings over thelast several weeks--with our own board of directors, our advisorycouncils for small business and agricultural, our financialinstitutions' advisory council, and a few others--I thought I wasbeing rather optimistic in sending in [a forecast of] 2-1/2 percentreal GNP because that isn't what I was hearing anecdotally from ourpeople. However, based on what I have seen, it's probably under theothers; it's certainly a little under the staff forecast. My ownstaff, I think, would encourage me to shave that up slightly, based ontheir analysis and, certainly, the current information. One thingthat is tending to influence us in the Eleventh District is the factthat in the survey that we just did on the effects of the decline inthe value of the dollar, we probably have not received the benefit--orcertainly not the same benefit--that other Districts have beenreporting. There is optimism, although it's cautious optimism; it's asense that we just don't think we are going to slide down any furtherand we can see a few glimmers of hope. If anything, I have been a bitpessimistic in terms of the 1987 performance on the real economy and-22-2/10-11/87inflation, although we are not seeing a great amount of indicationthat inflation is getting to be a problem. To me, at least, it's timeto observe that very, very closely, because the possibilities are suchthat we could see a little pickup there. I don't know whether it willmaterialize or not; we will just have to wait and see. But it'ssomething that I would hope we'd be observing very closely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Angell, is going to tell us howgood the inflation outlook is.MR. ANGELL. No, I think it's pretty bad. I think myforecast for the CPI is 100 basis points higher than it was last yearafter I had been here 7 days. So I got worse on that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Relatively worse.MR. ANGELL. Yes, relatively worse, right. In a sense, Isuppose my forecast, at 1.9 percent real GNP, is optimistic in thatthe non-U.S. world output would seem to be hardly higher than 2percent and it would seem appropriate that we would be a little lessthan the rest of the world. So I guess I feel very comfortable thatif we can do it that wouldn't be bad at all. As I looked at theexport side, I noted from St. Louis' recent publication that U.S.export prices over the last six years have risen a total of 11percent, which would be less than 2 percent a year. Our staffforecast has an 11 percent increase in export prices over the next twoyears. In the world that I see, it is somewhat unlikely that thatkind of increase in export prices would occur. On the import side, Ialso noted in that same study that U.S. imports as a percentage of GNPhave been so constant; they just don't change very much. So I justdon't hold much hope for any reduction of imports by relative pricing.That is, the price elasticities seem to be such that we are not goingto make much gain there. Frankly, I don't see that we are going tomake quite as good a move on the trade side as even the staffforecast, and that's not very good.When I look at dangers, I suppose there are two kinds ofdangers. I tend to set aside the stagflation scenario; I don't seethat as very likely. On inflation, my estimate is only 1/2 of apercentage point different from the staff, and I don't see that to bevery large. But if we both missed, if there was higher growth andmore inflation, I guess that would provide us a very decided monetarypolicy option which would be, I presume, higher U.S. interest rates;and that would be good for the dollar. If we had higher growth, itwould be good for a lot of sectors of the domestic economy. So Iassume that if we missed in that direction we would have a responsethat would be appropriate both domestically and internationally. Theproblem I see would be if we get too slow and the world gets too slow.And if the U.S. gets too slow, then I wonder what the policy responsemight be because that might put downward pressure on U.S. interestrates. I'd hate to see that happen with equity prices maybe goingeven higher than they are today, which might be an unsustainable path.So that's the kind of worry that I have: that we might get too slow[economic growth] and get declining interest rates. This would putthe dollar in a precarious position, and we might not have good policyoptions. So, I guess I do worry some.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are paid for worrying. Mr. Heller.-23-2/10-11/87MR. HELLER. The pay shows that Governor Angell is notworrying very much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Spoken like the private sector fellows.MR. HELLER. Overall, I very much agree with the staff. Mynumbers are almost indistinguishable from the staff forecast, but onthe trade picture I agree more with Jerry Corrigan. Having beenthrough Europe only a day or two before him, I think the hand-delivered Wall Street Journal article, courtesy of Manley Johnsontoday, says it all: "Fed Official Finds Little Sympathy in Germany onTrade Deficit." It will be difficult to get the very optimisticprogress on the export growth front. On the other hand, on the importsubstitution side I think there probably is a lot more room forprogress. So the net outcome may well be very much the same asforecast by the staff but the composition would be very different.On the inflation front, I think the key is not the directeffect of the depreciation of the dollar but the response of U.S.manufacturers to the increase in prices by their competitors. And ifthe U.S. automobile industry and their pricing behavior is anyindication, I think we are in for a hard time. I hope that noteverybody will follow that example but will instead hold prices and gofor the market share. If the auto example were followed it wouldclearly be very detrimental on the trade front, because we would notget the relative price effect and the trade picture would be very bad.One last brief comment: a lot was made out of the differencebetween the CPI and the GNP deflator. I think there is good reason toassume that next year that discrepancy will be bigger than it has beenin the past because the prices from imports will show up in the CPIwhile they are going to be subtracted out of the GNP numbers. Sothere is going to be a bigger discrepancy there. I think that isbasically a statistical quirk that we have to be aware of butshouldn't overemphasize.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. Wayne Angell and I have been having a horse racein the last year to see who could be the most pessimistic. And,believe it or not, looking at actual numbers for 1986, neither of uswas low enough. Wayne, do you realize that?MR. ANGELL. Yes, and my inflation [forecast] was also toohigh last year.MS. SEGER. Well, having said that, I am in his camp againwith a low number for real GNP growth--something on the order of 2percent, which is below the staff's. I have two main reasons fordeparting from the staff forecast. One is that I continue to beconcerned about the auto industry. On the one hand, I watch thepricing behavior, as Governor Heller indicated; but also, I reallythink that the fundamentals of the auto sales picture are weaker thanthe dealer delivery figures may suggest. There was a surge at the endof 1986, and I think much of that surge should be attributed to thetax changes that were going into effect January 1. We know that therewas a substantial decline in January. But, as someone pointed out tome, even that overstated the strength of true retail demand because-24-2/10-11/87many fleet sales were processed in January. And, of course, that'snot a function of showroom traffic, and so forth; that is a deal thatis struck between large purchasers and the corporations. So, thefundamental demand for automobiles is probably even weaker than itlooks. Auto manufacturers are watching February numbers very, verycarefully. One person told me that they were inthe process of revising down their production schedules as we spoke,which was this morning. Anyway, I don't think that they are going tocontinue to wait for a miracle to occur that will somehow or othereliminate these high inventories, particularly in certain lines andcertain makes, is the company with the worst inventorysituation. They have excessive--that's my word, not theirs--andextensive incentives out right now. If they don't get the resultsthey expect--and there is a great deal of concern that they won't--then they will have to make really substantial production cuts. Ihope that isn't the case, but I am concerned that we may not have[forecast] enough weakness coming from that particular sector.The other area of my concern involves the trade turnaround.I asked at the [Board staff] briefing on Monday where the additionalexports in this country were going to go and what the products wouldbe. I also asked what imports were going to be curbed or curtailed,and I haven't gotten very good answers to those questions. I justthink it's going to be much more difficult to accomplish this. Thedeterioration, I would remind people, went on for a number of years--five or something like that. And I think that there have beenadjustments made in the economy to these changes and that they are notgoing to be easily reversed. Although I would like to see a quick andsubstantial turn, my suspicious nature suggests that it won't takeplace. So, I put those two differences together, and that's why Ithink that we are going to have a slower rate of growth.On the inflation side, I am just a touch more optimistic,perhaps, that we will be able to keep inflation under control. Here Iguess my main difference comes from what I view as a real change inbusiness behavior--not in all business behavior but in the behavior ofa number of significant businesses--in that they are finallyaddressing the efficiency question. They are really trying to skinnydown. I just heard of one request by an organization that is workingwith its suppliers over a five-year time horizon and telling them thatin order to be assured of business in this period ahead, they willhave to agree to cut their prices, not increase them, by one percentper year over the next five years. That's pretty hard bargaining.And I think a lot of things like that are going on that have mainlyresulted from the intense import competition. I think it has been a[unintelligible] factor. I certainly can't put an exact number on it;I don't pretend to know. But I think that that kind of behavior isgoing to help us keep these inflation numbers looking better than theyotherwise would.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I didn't hold up my hand, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I got your name on a piece of paperand I will delete it if you don't want to say anything.-25-2/10-11/87MR. GUFFEY. Well, I think that since I am about the last[speaker], I will say something. Our forecast is very much like theBoard staff's on the growth side; we are a touch higher on theinflation side. If one were to make a forecast from the TenthDistrict perspective, none of those figures would be verysatisfactory; they would be much more pessimistic. On the forecastitself, the growth is largely dependent, as everybody has alreadynoted, upon the turnaround in the net export sector. If that occurs,then growth much as we experienced in 1986 seems to me to be quitereasonable. On the other hand, on the price side it seems to me thatour foreign competitors' import prices will have to rise since theirprofit margins have been squeezed over the last year and a half as thedollar has declined vis-a-vis their currencies. And that should startto show through together with an increase in imported oil prices. Ifthat were to occur, and as that is passed through, it would seem to methat inflation would be a bit higher than we experienced last year.Having said that, I think it is noteworthy, as Governor Hellermentioned, that the CPI--which will incorporate those higher importprices--quite likely will be in the 4 to 5 percent range. And it'sgoing to take some explanation, I guess by the Chairman, of thecontrast between the slow CPI numbers posted in 1986 with what likelywill happen in 1987 and why this may not be all that significant--whyit looks very high and should [not] give us all cause for concern.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with you. I am willing to explainsomething about the forecast--up to 3.9 percent. When it gets above 4percent, it may get a little difficult to explain.MR. GUFFEY. That's the reason they pay you that big money,Mr. Chairman! In summary, our forecast is very close to the Boardstaff's forecast with the exception that we think prices may be atouch higher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson, a benediction here.MR. JOHNSON. I will try to be brief; just about all of theissues have been covered. Like Jerry, I just got back from Basle and,after talking to the other G-10 governors, I am a little lessoptimistic, I think, than I was when I left.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just remember what you did to themthe last time you were there!MR. JOHNSON. I'll admit to being the guilty party among theBoard members who estimated the higher real GNP growth rate. I havebeen looking at the numbers, and I have been fairly impressed withseveral months of fairly good data. There are some end-of-the-yearproblems there, but I think there is enough evidence to say thatthings are starting to pick up. The staff's forecast on the tradedeficit is looking pretty good. As I said, I was even more optimisticbefore I left to talk to the Germans and Japanese about it, so maybe Iwould cut that back a little now. But I do think things are lookingbetter. On the tax side, I will make one point: one reason why demandmay hold up a little better than some expect is that some people, Ithink, are overestimating what tax reform is going to do. There was abig surge to avoid the elimination of the sales tax deduction at theend of the year. I went back and checked the law and found that youreally don't lose the sales tax deduction unless it's a special sales-26-2/10-11/87tax item. Any generalized sales tax is still deductible--at leastthat is what it says in the books. If you calculate your sales taxfrom the state tax tables, you can still deduct it.MR. BOEHNE. I don't think that's right.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I went back and from what I could seeit's still there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will have somebody look into this overnight.MR. BLACK. I sure hope you are right.MR. JOHNSON. It will be interesting to know because that'swhat the accounting firms say in the books they put out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we have to resolvethis right now.MR. JOHNSON. No. I am just saying that it's interesting. Afew people may find that their deductions--MR. MORRIS. I have looked in two [publications] that saidexactly the opposite.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they can ever fill out their W-4 forms.MR. MELZER. A good point along those lines, Manley, is thatthe withholding went down for a lot of people and a number ofretailers, particularly the ones that compete on price. I view thatas a real positive.MR. JOHNSON. A lot of the interest deductions are beingphased out, so it's not really a big hit all at once. That issueaside, I am reasonably optimistic about a turn in trade but it may notbe as strong as I originally had thought because I am a littlegloomier about the growth prospects abroad. It's going to beinteresting to see.On the inflation side, I am a little more pessimistic. Ihave marked up my estimate about a percentage point, I think, fromlast July but that's basically a function of the oil picture as muchas anything. The nominal inflation picture doesn't look that bad tome. There will be some pressure from import prices. But looking atthe wage situation and the shift toward manufacturing--so at leastthere is some productivity away from the service area--I think it'sgoing to be a little better. So, I am fairly consistent with thestaff on the inflation forecast but I do think we have to be extremelycautious in that area. I agree with everyone else here that thepsychology seems to be tilting the other way a bit. What's beenhappening in the financial markets with the dollar and some of thenervousness in the bond market should be watched very carefully.That's about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That ends today's session.[Meeting recessed]-27-2/10-11/87February 11, 1987--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can proceed with Mr. Kohn this morningand discuss the long-run ranges.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we probably ought to turn to M2and M3 first and see whether we can resolve those. But I have onequestion, just to isolate it, on M1. If I understand correctly,you're saying it's a matter of judgment but, for what it's worth,you're reluctant to say that growth would be less than 10 percent forM1; however, the model shows half of that.MR. KOHN. The model shows rates on the order of 5 to7-1/2 percent for M1 for 1987.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You just don't believe your models.MR. KOHN. That's correct. Some of these models showed ratesonly a little above that for 1986. Others were closer to the mark butimplied such a marked slowdown, especially in the OCD component, thatI have trouble believing them.MR. JOHNSON. You have to put in a set of interest rateassumptions to make it--MR. KOHN. No, these model results are based on the interestrate assumptions behind the Greenbook forecast--that is, essentiallyvery little changed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but growth greatly exceeded what theysaid for last year. Is that before or after the actual declines ininterest rates that took place last year?MR. KOHN. Even after the actual declines in interest rates,several of the models underpredicted money growth last year. Ourquarterly model didn't do too badly; it was under by about 2 to 2-3/4percentage points--that is at about 12-3/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that model shows what for next year?MR. KOHN. That model shows about 5 to 6 percent, dependingon the assumptions about offering rates and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will return to M1, but it's moreproductive to look at M2 and M3 first as we did last time. Doesanybody want to say something about M2 and M3?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Alternative II is for me for M2 andM3.MR. JOHNSON. Alternative II is all right with me, too. ButI think it's important to give some signal that we're moving toward alittle more restraint on the broader aggregates; at least, that isconsistent with continuing to try to keep inflation suppressed. And I-28-2/10-11/87think there is enough room in that target to allow for that in afairly significant way. Given what M2 did last year, with anexplosion in M1 and the decline in interest rates, it doesn't seemthat it's that sensitive. So, I think alternative II would be able tohandle just about any event.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I prefer alternative II also. It would seem tome that the accommodation of 1986 is not as apt to occur; so 8-1/2percent, even under a declining velocity scenario, does give us anequal opportunity to snug up a bit. But I do think, as we proceedwith alternative II, that this year we should be aware of the factthat market forces are even more important. That is, if long-termbond rates and intermediate bond rates were to rise, it seems to methat, given the problem with the dollar, we ought to be particularlysensitive to those interest rates--on the down side also. I wantalternative II with a proviso that interest rates ought not to bemanaged by the Fed much differently than the market forces wouldindicate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I like alternative II, but I get there by askingmyself the question: What kind of a message ought we be sending?Monetary policy has largely been on a one-way street toward ease overthe last two or three years, particularly last year. I think it'stime to send the message that monetary policy operates on a two-waystreet: There are circumstances in which we might loosen some more butthere are also circumstances in which we might tighten some more. AndI think alternative II does send that two-way street message.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I don't really see a great dealof difference among these various alternatives but, for psychologicalreasons, I would prefer alternative II. I think it is important thatwe send a signal to the public and to the markets that we arecontinuing to observe inflation. That will be particularly importantthis year and next year if the estimates of increasing inflation areaccurate, which I think they are. So, I would prefer alternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative II aswell. And I would make a suggestion as far as sending a message aboutthe commitment to price stability. Some work that we've doneindicates that it's quite likely that M2 will grow at the lower end ofthis range and, from reading the Bluebook, I got the feeling that someof the quantitative work the Board staff has done would suggest thatas well. It seems to me that one thing we could do is have 5-1/2 to8-1/2 percent for M3 and 5 to 8 percent for M2. That change, as faras M2 is concerned, would represent a full percentage point declinefrom what we had in 1986. And I think that would send a message.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you? Which way did you have this?The 5-1/2 percent would be for what?-29-2/10-11/87MR. PARRY. Have M2 at 5 to 8 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 at 5 to 8.MR. PARRY. And M3 at 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. Some of thework that we've done would support that and--maybe Don can comment onthis--I think some of the quantitative work the Board staff has donesuggests that M2 would grow in the low end of the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just pin that down. I read theopposite someplace--maybe you had it--that M3 would grow less than M2.MR. PARRY. No, no.MR. KOHN. Actually, that was our judgment given what weexpect for bank and thrift credit growth, which tends to drive M3because of the managed liability component; we expect that todecelerate substantially. We had M3 at 7 percent or a tick below,between 6-1/2 and 7 percent. M2 at 7 percent was judgmental. Mr.Parry is absolutely right in the sense that our quarterly model, as Itried to indicate in the briefing, was showing something on the orderof 6 to 6-1/2 percent for M2 growth, which is in the lower end of therange. I think his model is showing more like 5 to 5-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is between models and judgment.Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Well, I'm in favor of alternative II but nowyou've got me a bit confused. First of all, let me remark on theshort-run alternatives. I realize we may want to discuss it later,but the target for the first three months is rather high. It's at thehigh end of the range for M2 and the lower end of the range for M3. Ithink that's what Chairman Volcker was just talking about. But SanFrancisco also got me confused. You are in favor of discount ratecuts yet you want to have a tighter monetary target?MR. PARRY. I don't vote on the discount rate.MR. HELLER. I'll stick to alternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I would definitely not favor alternative I. Thechoice, in my view, is between "II" and "III". We have established apattern over the last few years of reducing the range on a yearlybasis and alternative I would certainly break that. Betweenalternatives II and III, I see no particular reason not to choosealternative II, which we adopted [on a tentative basis] last summer.Certainly, there seems to be an expectation that we can hit that andalternative III might suggest a change in policy that we don't reallyintend at this particular point. So, I'd end up with alternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'd be reluctant to reduce theranges a full percentage point as alternative III suggests, and Ithink we'd risk confusing the market if we went with alternative I.Besides, I think the staff has made a good case for alternative II as-30-2/10-11/87encompassing, probably, all the reasonably likely behaviors that wemight see in velocity of M2 and M3. So I can go with "II" likeeveryone else.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'll try to keep this short: alternative II.MR. BLACK. Well said.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I vote for alternative II as well. One thing weought to keep in mind is that the elimination of IRA accounts islikely to drive up M2 relative to income. That's why I'd be concernedabout moving the M2 target down to 8 percent. We may need a littlemore room for that. The Bluebook says you don't expect much effect in1987; I'm not sure why you feel that way.MR. KOHN. Well, I agree with you on the direction. Thequestion is the magnitude. Our feeling was that we might havestronger inflows early in the year both from people who might havepostponed putting money in last year, partly because of all theuncertainty with the tax law, and from people who wanted to make surethey took full advantage of their ability to use IRAs under the 1986law since it was going to be the last chance. Flows later in the yearwould indeed be lower, but this might be offset by the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can still put money in an IRA for lastyear, can't you?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. KOHN. That's correct--through the 15th of April.MR. BLACK. Up until April 15th.MR. MORRIS. The last one.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see why it should affect this yearmuch; it may affect 1988.MR. MORRIS. But in 1988 it clearly would be a factor.MR. KOHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Alternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. I don't see a big difference, frankly, betweenalternatives I, II, and III. We're talking about 1/2 of a percentagepoint between each one. When we discussed this last summer in July,one of the points I made when I opposed changing from the ranges wehad for 1986 was that I didn't think we had the predictive tools tocome up with these fine gradations of economic impact. Six months-31-2/10-11/87have gone by and I guess I'm still not convinced that we can readilysay with great confidence that there's going to be a major differencein impact on the economy with "I" versus "II". So that leaves me withthe psychological side. I guess if you think that this is the kind ofthing that will send a big message to the world out there that we'retough rather than weak on inflation--I happen to think they look at alot of things and not just our ranges--I could reluctantly go with"II". But I still think a more honest presentation would be justdealing with round numbers, say, 6 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. I favor alternative II as well. For what it'sworth, our model suggested that M2 growth would probably turn out tobe near 8 percent in the year ahead. But our model also has asomewhat stronger picture of the economy than the Greenbook forecast;if you were to plug in something akin to the Greenbook forecast Ithink you'd get something comfortably within that alternative II rangefor M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I would also favor alternative II. I don't havea great deal of faith in M2 or M3 as a guide to policy. If you lookback over the history of M2, for example, over the last 5 or 6 yearsit has varied between 8 and 9 percent except, I believe, for 1983.Many things have happened--policies have changed, interest rates havedropped--and still growth comes out to be 8 to 9 percent. As aresult, it doesn't seem to me that it's a very reliable guide.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Like M1.MR. GUFFEY. We expect to see--MR. BLACK. All guides are unreliable; some are just moreunreliable than others.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Hendricks, do you have something toadd from Cleveland?MR. HENDRICKS. We also believe it would be appropriate toadopt the same ranges for 1987 that were set in July, so we wouldfavor alternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we seem to have great unanimity. I,personally, could make a case for alternative III. I thought theBluebook set that out rather convincingly but I won't make the case.Alternative II is obviously the easy thing to do; it's a nicecompromise. I interpret this to mean, without being very rigid aboutit, that we expect growth to be someplace in the middle of the range;this time it's a target set reasonably symmetrically around wheregrowth should be.Let us turn to M1 with this caveat--that if we wantedsomething like variant I [in the Bluebook], which I think has someinformational content, I'm not crazy about the particular languageproposed. I think it needs a little work, and I'm a little reluctantto rewrite it in detail right now rather than during the break. I-32-2/10-11/87haven't got another proposal to put in front of you, if we end up withthat one. I'm making an assumption that we're going to end up there,which may be wrong. I think we ought to discuss it. But if we thinksomething like variant I is correct I would just defer finalconsideration until we get some possible modification to the languagein front of us. It would be along these lines, but not precisely thislanguage. I may be wrong about whether that's where we'll want to endup, but let's see. We're open for discussion on M1.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll try. And this is going tomuddy the waters right off the bat, so I apologize.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, after all--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just looking at it in terms ofvariant I and variant II, predictably, I come out somewhere betweenthe two. I don't think I have to restate the reasons why that's whereI am. But I would like to suggest that at least we start out withsomething like the first sentence in variant I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be the part in the firstbracket or something?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, the first sentence. And thenput in something like this: "Looking to 1987, in the context ofmoderate economic growth, continued moderation in inflationary forces,and absent major changes in interest rates and exchange rates, thebehavior of M1 relative to income and prices might return to morenormal relationships. In those circumstances, growth of M1 in a rangeof 4 to 8 percent--or 3 to 8 percent or 3 to 9 percent-- would beappropriate." Then I would say: "Because of the continuinguncertainties, the Committee decided not to establish such a target atthis time, but would be prepared in appropriate circumstances toreestablish such a target range." Now it stops short; clearly, it'snot a target. I don't even really think of it quite as a monitoringrange. Nevertheless, we have a couple of numbers there in a contextof an economic scenario. And we're saying that, in that context,those numbers mean something. So I think of it as a combination of"I" and "II".CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's all you would say?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, we'd have all that otherstuff.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All what other stuff?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Some flavor of the language at thebottom of Don's current variant I. In other words, put in some ofthis language here that would deal with what we would do--meaningprobably nothing--if one of those assumptions were widely off themark. Clearly, if the exchange rate fell out of bed, signals would beoff. If the economy were very sluggish, signals would be off. I saidit would muddy the waters.MR. MORRIS. This assumes that we know what the normalrelationship of M1 to income is.-33-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I have great doubts about that. Mr.Morris, we'll let you talk.MR. MORRIS. I think we still persist under the delusion thatthere is a normal relationship between M1 and nominal GNP that isgoing to reassert itself at some point. The mistake in this kind ofthinking is that this is a brand new aggregate. It's not like M1 was;interest is being paid on these deposits. And I think it's going tobe a number of years before we know what the normal relationship ofthis new aggregate is to nominal GNP. So I still think it just doesnot make sense to set a range, given this level of ignorance aboutthis new aggregate. I don't think we know any more about it now thanwe did last year and we had a miss of more than 7 percentage points.I think that's a testimony to the fact that this new aggregate, whichwe call M1, has behavioral characteristics that it's going to take usa long time to understand. To set any kind of a range for it for 1987would be a mistake.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In general, you like the kind of languagethat's in variant I?MR. MORRIS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make the case for thisbecause, as I obviously indicated earlier, this is the way I'mleaning. I think we ought to take M1 seriously in a sense--in acertain economic context that isn't fully predictable--and we ought totell people that. We can't be very precise about the numbers. But Ithink it is saying something. We could say: If inflation is buildingup or the dollar is very weak we would expect M1 to be quite low andthat would be appropriate. In other circumstances, we would expect itto be quite high without getting worried about it. That is sayingsomething. We ought to try to say something about it and if muddiesthe waters--. It seems to me that to suggest some normality over avery wide range doesn't mean much.MR. JOHNSON. What you're basically saying is that ifvelocity starts to rise we need to pay attention to it. If it goesdown we don't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one way of putting it is that wewould expect velocity to rise under certain circumstances or we mighteven force it to rise, in a sense, and that would be entirelyappropriate. What we really want to say is: You shouldn't besurprised by a low M1 number; on the other hand, we wouldn't getconcerned in certain circumstances about it remaining high. I'm notsure what sticking a number in there that we don't know much aboutadds to that. We end up with a range so wide that it's meaningless.What we really want to say is that we think a low number would beappropriate under certain circumstances and we think a high numberwould be appropriate under other circumstances. But we've got todescribe the circumstances in which that would be true. It getscomplicated, and that's what makes writing the precise wordsdifficult. But I think that's the sense of what we ought to say.MR. KEEHN. Would you go on in those circumstances to suggestthat if certain events transpired that, at a later date, we wouldthink about a range?-34-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we could say that moregenerally. It's hard to put it in the directive. I think we couldput in a sentence later on. I don't know what we would say because Ihave some sympathy for Mr. Morris' point that if it's going to be veryinterest-rate sensitive we're always going to be saying that it'sgoing to be high or low depending upon the trend in interest rates.And I'm not sure what that's saying. I guess the point we ought tomake is--we can't put this all in the directive but we could put it inthe other discussion--that we have a much more highly interest-sensitive aggregate here. And the message we ought to be emphasizingis that, depending upon circumstances, M1 might vary widely into theextended future based upon what we know now.MR. ANGELL. I think that's an excellent way of doing it. Itseems to me that in a reemergence of an inflationary environment inwhich interest rates were trending up the range should be as low asmaybe 2 to 6 percent. On the other hand, if deflationary forces wereto pick up speed again and we had this demand for financial assets itmight very well be that 8 to 13 percent would be right. Whatever thecase, I think it ought to be less than last year. But I like thesuggestion. I think it would be appropriate for us to suggest thatsince we've had a period in which M1's growth has been very, verystrong, we realize that there must be another period in which M1'sgrowth path is indeed going to be below what we would ordinarilyexpect it to be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is part of my concern. We may wellrun into such a period whether it is this year or not. But we're[not] going to want people jumping off wildly if M1 is very low for awhile because it might be entirely the reflex of what we've had in thepast and be entirely appropriate. On the other hand, I don't want togive Mr. Proxmire too many hostages--just to name one, that we thinkit's a disaster that it has been as high as it has been under theparticular circumstances that have prevailed to date.MR. ANGELL. If M1 growth were to be low and deflationaryforces were to pick up again and the dollar was not weak, that'sanother matter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the way I see it. I just don't seethat you add much by putting in a figure which could be exceeded ineither direction from an already large range.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I hear this, I think thedifference between what you're saying and what I said is a fairlynarrow difference, because all I was trying to say is use a number toindicate where we thought M1 might be if everything were, in a sense,working right. In other words, if the economy were growing at areasonable rate and nothing was happening on inflation, exchangerates, or interest rates, this is a kind of central tendency where wethink M1 will come out. But if any one of those conditions is notpresent, M1 could come out way above or way below it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not arguing that the difference ishuge. This is an extreme example, but suppose we really thought thesituation was such that inflationary forces were picking up, theeconomy was at the high end of all the ranges of projected growth, andthe dollar was weak--we put in all these assumptions--and M1 really-35-2/10-11/87came out very low for a few months, anyway. I'm not sure I wantpeople hollering at me that we have a range that is 4 to 9 percent orsomething and the middle of that is 6-1/2 percent and M1 is onlycoming in at 4 percent and saying oh my heavens [policy is] way tootight! Because I'm not sure it would be way too tight.MR. ANGELL. But under some circumstances it might be way toohigh because if we come down the demand curve for money with interestrates falling, if interest rates were to rise it has to hold that ourgrowth path would have to be much, much less than we normally wouldhave thought.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think that's the problem--it wouldchange that interest rate differential even if we hadn't acted tochange short-term interest rates because of inflationary expectationsaffecting the long end; we could get a decline in the aggregates or aslowdown even if we hadn't tightened at all. And we might want totighten, and everybody would think that we had.MR. ANGELL. Yes. Or, if we had not accommodated last yearand the discount rate were still at 7-1/2 percent, it seems to me thatwe would have had a macroeconomic result of a lower real GNP growthpath than we had and we still would have had dramatic declines invelocity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does somebody else want to add tothis? Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. Basically, I like this language or the conceptof it. I might just suggest an extension to what you've suggested.What you have suggested makes a lot of sense. In general, I have someproblem with the signaling effect of abandoning a narrow aggregatealtogether. As I said at the last meeting, I'm not sure that we havethe right one in M1 as it is now. Also, I'm not sure that we canreally pick another right one right now. I think we have to let thisunwinding of inflationary expectations that's been in process sort ofrun its course. I don't think any of us is confident that it has donethat, so I don't think it's a good time to pick another narrowaggregate. Roger Guffey commented before, and I agree with him, thatwhat we do with respect to M2 and M3 doesn't have much of a signalingeffect at all. I'm afraid that not setting any target at all for M1could potentially have a negative signaling effect. And as you'veobserved, Mr. Chairman, it could have a negative effect on Mr.Proxmire. I would suggest that we consider setting a target along thelines of what Don suggested based on what we know now. We could set atarget range for M1 of, say, 7 to 13 percent, but with languagesurrounding it indicating that we might miss that on the up side orthe down side. Now, when I thought about this, I was concerned aboutwhat the implications of that might be. But if we add to that thekind of language that's in variant I with respect to missing thatsubstantially on the down side--and also recognize that we've got toapproach this target flexibly and we ought to be prepared to changeit--I think that there's some advantage to having the target outthere. As I said, not having a narrower aggregate--which is what wecan really exert some control over based on our behavior and what wedo with reserves--could send a negative signal. What you'resuggesting could potentially be misread in the other direction aswell. The 7 to 13 percent range certainly puts out a clear message in-36-2/10-11/87the market that we expect the very rapid growth rates in money thathave occurred in the last two years to come down. We expect, andintend in a way, to commit ourselves under certain circumstances tobring those down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Boy, 7 to 13 percent sounds to me--andthis is part of the problem--wildly high in terms of sending out amessage right now. It may not turn out to be.MR. MORRIS. And the 7 percent could turn out to be much toohigh.MR. MELZER. Oh, I understand that.MR. ANGELL. But I thought Tom Melzer was saying that 2 to 6percent under certain circumstances might be the right range, but 7 to13 percent under other circumstances might show restraint compared towhat happened in 1986.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think putting a number--MR. MORRIS. It doesn't sound very restrained to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is precisely the trouble. If we talkabout a range that high I don't know what we can say. We have aproblem with what we say if we use something like variant I. It couldbe misinterpreted; I have no doubt about that. A lot depends uponwhat we say. My own gut feeling is that, ideally, by putting it in amore realistic context we're putting more weight on M1 than by puttingout a target like 7 to 13 percent and saying it may go below it orabove it.MR. MELZER. In a way, with inflationary expectations on therise right now, somehow I would like to see the message out there thatwe've noticed that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But 7 to 13 percent doesn't give thatmessage to me.MR. JOHNSON. I think something like variant I in combinationwith ratcheting down M2 and M3 at least gives that signal.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with that.MR. JOHNSON. It conveys that message.MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I agree with that. I think putting anumber in gets in the way of what you're trying to explain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's my point.MR. BOEHNE. People are going to have to think a bit aboutthe implications of what is in variant I. If we put a number in therepeople are going to look at the number and forget about what we'rereally trying to say. That's why I like variant I without a number.-37-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have expressed my gut feeling. Ithink that we send a better substantive message without a number--andwe don't know what the number means anyway.MR. MELZER. Okay, if you accept that part, how do you getaway from the fact that we're walking away from a narrow aggregatetarget at all? It's not that M1 is the right one, but how do we getback into that ball game down the road?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't interpret it that way.Given all the difficulties of explaining this, that is not my feeling.Unfortunately, the fact of the matter is that we are in a situationwhere we can't interpret M1 in terms of anything like an appropriategrowth rate. So we're going to be very vague anyway.MR. JOHNSON. If it's as interest sensitive as it appears tobe--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't evaluate M1 without takingaccount of what's going on elsewhere, and that's what we ought to betelling people. We want to take it into account but only in thecontext of specific economic circumstances. And that's what we oughtto be trying to tell them.MR. ANGELL. Tom, doesn't that say more precisely that if wereturn to a period of inflation actually being there--and with thebehavior in regard to preferences for financial assets waning--that wewould then expect to come in with some rather conservative numbers?MR. MELZER. Yes. As long as abandoning the concept ofsetting a target does not take away the fact that we think it'simportant to pay attention to what M1 does and that it has to beevaluated under certain circumstances, that's fine. As a matter offact, on that point I asked our people to look at what would happen ifvelocity went back to what it was--roughly a level of 7 at thebeginning of 1982--over a two-year period. If that were to happen,based on the liquidity that's in there, we could have roughly 5percent nominal GNP growth each year without adding any more money.MR. ANGELL. That's right. Zero would be appropriate.MR. MELZER. I'm very sensitive to the problem on the downside. I just also am very concerned about the signaling effect--making sure that the message out there is that we can't set a rangebut we're paying close attention to this narrow aggregate in thecontext of what's going on more broadly.MR. JOHNSON. If M1 is really symmetric, interest-sensitivewise, we could be sitting around trying to ignore 2 percent M1growth--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Exactly.MR. JOHNSON. --when the economy was growing, just like we'retrying to ignore 15 percent now when the economy is sluggish. I thinkthat lends some weight to what Bob Black has been talking about--moreof a price rule. I'm not sure how you do that either, but in a period-38-2/10-11/87like this it seems to me that we have to be more sensitive to somesort of price signal.MR. ANGELL. It also supports what President Morris has beensaying, and I think he's right: that we haven't seen all of thereshuffling that will take place under the deregulated environmentthat we're in. But at some point in time, those savings accounts aregoing to get reshuffled with the transactions account to the extentthat they're going to be. And I think that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's quite specific. What I thinkwe ought to be able to say when we are attacked [and accused of] beingwildly expansionary now and building up inflationary pressures and allthe rest, is: Look, [we will act] if we see evidence that that's true,which we haven't seen heretofore with the weights, trends, and a lotof other things. But we recognize all those dangers. We agree withyou that we couldn't keep feeding out M1 like this and we ought to beprepared, and you ought to be prepared, to see M1 level off ratherabruptly under those circumstances. We contemplate that under thatparticular set of circumstances. On the other hand, if there are noinflationary pressures, and the economy is weak, and we haven't gotany particular dollar problem, and we have not seen the dangers ofthis kind, and M2 and M3 are behaving all right, then we don't thinkyour criticism that we're unduly easy is valid.MR. ANGELL. Would you want that check list to be in there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I think we have to be quite carefulabout how we put it in there--that's why I have some quibbles aboutthis language here--but that's what I want to convey.MR. ANGELL. Yes, it seems to me that we do need to draftthat [unintelligible] because we need to indicate what might occur inthat check list that would bring back these M1 targets in a meaningfulway. The market has to expect that, if those things occur, we willact. Of course, if the market believes this and those things start tooccur, then we're going to have a market forced interest-rate responsebased upon that expectation, and we will have achieved our objective.MR. MORRIS. I think a 7 to 13 percent range would be tellingthe market that we don't intend to push interest rates up this year nomatter what happens, because as soon as there is a little rise ininterest rates the growth of M1 has got to swing pretty rapidly.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think this variant I as you'vesuggested is really the one that we ought to use for the reasons thatyou indicated. I was inclined to be sympathetic to Jerry Corrigan,but you made some pretty tough points on that. At the same time, Ithink Tom Melzer has a point, too. In a period when the risk ofinflation seems to be increasing and the risks of [rising]inflationary expectations also are increasing, there could be concernabout the dropping of M1 [as a target]. That's the reason, really,that we put forth that idea of putting an inflation target in there toreassure the public that we had not lost our determination to dealwith inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a lot depends upon the language thatwe use in the testimony and so forth. I would see at least as much-39-2/10-11/87danger there. It will be delicate to write it. I could easily writethis in a way that locked us in more than we might want to be lockedin to a lowering of M1 if we saw any sign of increasing inflationarypressures. I don't want us to be locked in too much either.MR. ANGELL. Well, I think we should create that expectation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think people have to be warned. Myprincipal concern is that we should warn them that under thosecircumstances, which may or may not eventually occur, we expect apretty low Ml.MR. ANGELL. And I think a continued depreciation of thedollar should be included among those.MR. MELZER. The question is the difference betweenexpectations and actions, too. It may go beyond just expecting it; wemight be prepared to take steps to achieve it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure.MR. MELZER. That is the desirable aspect of a narrowaggregate [target] because we can affect its behavior.MR. PARRY. If it's written with that warning, the fact thatwe dropped a specific range won't be interpreted as meaning that we'redropping M1 as something of significance or potential significance inthe future.MR. ANGELL. And it avoids this problem of where we wouldstart off the year if we used any M1 range. Where we would start offthe year when we're so far behind in the cone? We'd have that problemto look at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I visualize, in just describing policy asthe year progresses, that if we put in some range, we'd be stumblingall over ourselves to say there's a range but it doesn't mean anythingunder certain circumstances. I don't think that does us any good.MR. ANGELL. What we'd be saying, I presume, is that at afuture FOMC meeting we might announce a short-term target range forM1. It might be the case that that would even be announced prior tothe next FOMC meeting, in some circumstances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I don't think that would exclude thatat all. I haven't thought about that, but I think that's right--thatin particular circumstances as the year progresses we might want tostick in an M1 target. And I think we can even say that.MR. MELZER. Well, that goes a long way in addressing myconcern.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying that I can't anticipate thesituation in which we would do that, but--MR. MELZER. Right.-40-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I think we can certainly say that incertain circumstances we might, in the short run, name a target forM1.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To put this in a slightly differentcontext: If you took the sentence in variant I that people arefocusing on and the Committee decided not to establish a range--not atarget, not a monitoring range, nothing--it's as though we're puttingM1 lower on the ladder than debt. That's the danger.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Operationally, I don't think it has to beinterpreted that way.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agree with that, but that's thedanger.MR. ANGELL. But the language should be changed. Thelanguage should be changed to say that and [to indicate] thecircumstances under which M1 will be established rather than thatwe're not establishing it.MR. STERN. Well, if we have a full paragraph devoted to M1,I doubt that people will view that as downplaying the significancefrom where it is.MR. FORRESTAL. I think we need to be clear in thisdiscussion that we're not really abandoning M1. I don't interpretthis language as doing that. In fact, quite the contrary. This doesindicate that there will be continuing observation and surveillance ofM1. And I would think that, as the Chairman has indicated, the marketwould respond favorably to this because I think basically now they'rejust ignoring M1 completely. In this variant I, no matter how wechange the language, the thrust of the language is important to getout to the market. I think that this really is just going to be aconfirmation of past events and that they'll respond favorably. Idon't interpret this at all as being an abandonment completely of M1nor do I think, if the language is done correctly, that it puts M1lower than the debt aggregate.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I like variant I with maybe a provisothat we might bring M1 back on an intermediate-term basis if we needit and if conditions arose.MR. GUFFEY. I have a little problem with the thought that wewould, at a particular meeting, resurrect M1 for some limited periodof time or forevermore. I don't think we know enough about it to dothat unless we got into a real bind in which we needed to call upon M1in order to move interest rates to 20 percent. I wouldn't want touse--MR. JOHNSON. I don't think it's very likely that we would.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we're going to move to 20percent, but I can visualize a circumstance--suppose M1 were risingrapidly and some of these were moderating at a time when we wereincreasingly worried about inflation and saw some signs of the economydoing pretty well and, say, we wanted to tighten up. In that contextI could well see a change in the particular arrangement we're doing.-41-2/10-11/87In the Committee's operating directive presumably we'd say we'reputting more pressure on reserve positions and the Committee islooking toward a slowdown in the rate of growth of M1. I can quitesee that.MR. GUFFEY. That's a bit different than establishing atarget for an intermediate period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we might want to say the Committeeis looking toward a slowdown to no more than [unintelligible], if wefelt strongly enough in a particular circumstance. There's somevariance between putting in 7 percent or 5 percent or something andsaying we're looking for a clear slowdown. And all those [options]are open to us.MR. JOHNSON. What would you say if the long end of the bondmarket had been deteriorating because of building inflationaryexpectations from a decline in the dollar or something like that andM1 was already decelerating quite rapidly because of the change in theinterest rate spread. I don't know what you should say.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We welcome the slowdown in M1 under thecircumstances.MR. JOHNSON. But we may want to tighten under thosecircumstances and yet M1 is decelerating sharply.MR. ANGELL. But under those circumstances M1 is going toslow down later. Bond buyers are not going to be very pleased by thatcircumstance and rush into long bonds until they think the recessionis tightly--MR. JOHNSON. We might see a rush out of liquid balances--ifthere's an interest sensitivity there--into CDs fairly quickly; Idon't know. When that change in interest rate spreads develops andall of a sudden M1 starts falling quite sharply, that would have anexpectational effect on the long end.MR. ANGELL. I always wished that the bond buyers wouldbehave that way, Manley, but I never found that they did. Onceinterest rates start up on the short end bond buyers get scared thatit's going to continue. So it takes a while before that response--MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's their response to a tighteningmove. I think that you can see bond buyers move on inflationarysignals without moving the short rates at all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does somebody else want to add to thisdiscussion?MR. HELLER. I think the bottom line still is that we have noidea what the demand for money function looks like. And to put in aquantitative target--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're overstating it a bit. Inprecise terms, I agree with you. But I think we do have a sense thatit's very interest sensitive.-42-2/10-11/87MR. HELLER. Yes, but there are a lot more factors in it too.There's the whole deregulation angle still in it. And, as Mr. Morrissaid earlier, that makes it very difficult to do. The one trouble Ihave with the different economic scenarios in defining the alternativegrowth path is that if you mention the dollar--if the dollar should godown or if the dollar should do this--you're hooking yourself.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is there are too many "ifs".I agree, but I think all we can do is give some sense--MR. HELLER. But what are you going to do if some senatorthen says: Well, what do you expect the dollar to do? And what willyou do if the dollar goes down by 10 percent? And then what if itshould do this? That's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to have at least threevariables and, fortunately, they're not all likely to be moving in thesame direction. We have growth, inflation and inflation expectations,and the dollar. And it leaves us open to all kinds of questions. Ifgrowth is weak but inflation is strong and the dollar is mixed, whatdo you do? Those questions are just unanswerable.MR. HELLER. I trust you can dress it up well in thetestimony. But I think one of the things we really should do isredouble our efforts to study M1 and the proper definition of M1 sothat we will be able to sort out some of those behavior patterns.Maybe we'll be able to do that in a better way than we're able to doit right now. In any case, I would avoid setting a figure for M1growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say if we don't set a figure,presumably we will say, in some words, that we're not going toestablish a range for the year as a whole at this time--which is whatthis says. Probably some general language that we expect it to belower this year than last year is appropriate. And then we give someclear flavor about the conditions in which we would expect it to beeither high or low without being definitive about it. Those are theessentials we want to get in this paragraph.MR. MELZER. And the idea that it might be or could betargeted [later].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And at a particular time during the year,the implication is that we may specify a target. Those four thoughtssomehow we should get in the paragraph. I know that's pretty vague.We'll come back with [specific] language; I think it needs a littlemassaging. Is that acceptable, generally?MR. GUFFEY. I assume also that this M1 performance would beevaluated in view of the other aggregates that we have set targetsfor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that point would be made. Thecontext in which rapid or slow growth would be appropriate woulddepend upon the other aggregates.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me see. I think I've got fivepoints. You have four, you're saying?-43-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can get but so many in the paragraph.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, no I think I've got it. You'resaying: first, there's no target as such; second, there is some broadexpectation that M1 will be slower this year than last year; third,you loosely specify some conditions under which it could be very highand loosely specify conditions under which it could be very low; andthen--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say "should be." That's one ofmy language changes here: not just passively "could" but "should."VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Then you have some language thatwould suggest there are also conditions in which we would react to it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes, I think that's clearly the case.MR. JOHNSON. That's if the "should" doesn't come about.MR. PARRY. Just a point of clarification. The way it hasbeen discussed it's almost as though we're not talking about anoperational target but we're talking rather about predicting M1 on thebasis of the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has that flavor. But, as I seeit, it's more operational than setting out a target that we don't knowwhether we should exceed or undershoot. In my view, I am trying tomake it operational.MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. If the "should" provisos are violated, it wouldmake it operational.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. As I see it, we face justthe mere fact of complexity here. Now we look upon M1 differentlydepending upon what's happening. That's what we have to try todescribe. And it is operational; it's not operational in a 2 percentrange or something because we don't know that much about it. Butwe're pretty clear that we want it low under certain conditions orhigh under certain other conditions. If there are no violentobjections to that, why don't we move on. We have to try and writethis in a way that's precisely acceptable. But if we assume that thatis the framework in which we will modify or fool around with thislanguage a bit, we'll try to fool around with it. That's better thansitting around the table doing it, in my opinion. Somebody's got tobe a draftsman, namely me. I'll try to get something typed up and youcan look at it after the break. But why don't we pass on. I willassume that the M2 and M3 targets are going to be those in alternativeII with the surrounding language saying that we think these arereasonable targets and the midpoints are appropriate. I think thattemporarily closes the long-term ranges to which we will return.Let's turn to the short-term ranges. Mr. Kohn, do you have somethingto say about the short term?MR. KOHN. A little, sir. [Statement--see Appendix.]-44-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will only comment that when I look atthis, we are now in the middle of February and so little of whathappens between November and March depends upon what we do now. Thatraises a little question in my mind about whether it's appropriate andwhether it's conveying much information to stress these objectives interms of a November-to-March period that included all this veryexceptional stuff at year-end. Maybe we want to say something aboutM1, at least in terms of its direction, given that enormous bulge overthe year-end. With the completely neutral statement that we have inthe directive now, in line with the conversation we just had, I don'tthink we can be very precise. I don't know; it would be totallyunconventional, but maybe this is the time we want to have a forward-looking range for M2 and M3 rather than one that encompasses almost 2-1/2 or 3 months of history and only a month and a half that is forwardlooking.MR. ANGELL. It might be better to say January to March thanit would to say November to March.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or else even make it--MR. MORRIS. Go to April.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. Go into the second quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could almost put it as the second-quarter objective or February to June or something. I don't know.MR. BLACK. That has a lot of appeal.MR. HELLER. We could just set one for the first half of theyear, January to June. Set the whole thing--MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to be that there's a lot that wedon't know. I hate to look that far ahead. It seems to me that we'regoing to know more about what we would want it to be in June when weget to March than we do now.MR. JOHNSON. I think we'll be looking at the second half.MR. HELLER. [March is] only two or three more weeks.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with Wayne on that. We just set ourlong-run targets. And the purpose of these meetings twice a quarteris to set policy for the next six weeks, really. I think that's whatwe ought to do: set policy for the next six weeks rather than try toset it for the first half of the year.MR. ANGELL. We can call it January to April, which would beunder the control of this--MR. JOHNSON. But with April--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know; the thought just occurred tome. But, is it so bad saying the first half of the year? Obviously,-45-2/10-11/87we can review that again, but right now that's what we're saying isconsistent with our stated objectives for the year as a whole.MR. ANGELL. I hate to get us in the position of having toback off or of having to change that. What we were saying previouslywould indicate that conditions might be such that what we say nowwould need some adjustments. So, I'd rather not stretch the timeperiod out and then have to alter it. In the past we've found thatonce we set it and then needed to alter it that that createdexpectations--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I've been sitting on the side ofbeing against altering it in the past from a quarterly period,although we do that now infrequently. We would do it this time ifwe--MR. BLACK. If we did it for the first half of the year wouldwe use December to June?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, no. We could do it from January toApril but that's unorthodox, too, in getting in the middle of aquarter.MR. ANGELL. I know.MR. BLACK. I think it would be best to use January for thebase because that's really the latest date.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's kind of unorthodox, but in some waysit makes more sense than using November as a base in this particularcase.MR. HELLER. If you take the end of December as a base thenyou have a good chance that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me approach it differently. Let'sdiscuss what we actually want to do in terms of reserve pressures.MR. JOHNSON. I don't know, given what's been happening withthe dollar and the stronger data we've had--although I think there's alot of year-end influence on those data, and we don't have a clearpicture yet. But I think, as Ed Boehne and some other peoplementioned yesterday, there are some expectational effects out therethat are starting to develop from a lot of this move in the dollar andsome of the things that have been going on in the internationalsector. So, I don't know. I'm not for any major changes but I am forgoing back to tilting our nuances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other way?MR. JOHNSON. Keeping a $300 million borrowing target butshifting the nuance back to asymmetrical language toward the tighterside.MR. BLACK. That's exactly the way I'd come out, I think.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with that, too. I think that's justright.-46-2/10-11/87SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe we don't have to go around thetable. Is that the [consensus]?MR. ANGELL. That's good.MR. HELLER. That sounds good.MR. MELZER. I'd like to make some comments. I came insomewhat predisposed to leaning toward a greater degree of reserverestraint. But I really wanted to hear the discussion; it has been along time since we've gotten together. And I was really struck by thediscussion yesterday [unintelligible] really the whole time I've beensitting in. I would characterize people's general feeling on the realside as one in which the risks, if anything, are that the staff'sprojections might be a little low. But I wouldn't put too much weighton that or necessarily too much weight on the December economicnumbers. What struck me more was the broad expression of concern,made in a number of different ways, about inflation and inflationaryexpectations. There are some things that trouble me right now andthere are some things down the road that I think could put us in adifficult position, possibly. The things that trouble me now are theextraordinary growth of money, reserves, bank credit, etc. over athree-month period--November, December, and January. Some of it haswashed out but, still, over a three-month period it's quiteextraordinary. We all know about the year-end factors, but I justhave this feeling that there may be something more afoot than that.As I said yesterday, even some of those special year-end factors havethe effect of liquefying unrealized profits. And that money is inthere; that's grandfathered.The other thing that has been troubling me right along, as Ihave been saying, is that I'd be concerned about continued rapidgrowth in M1 against a backdrop of stable to rising rates. We stillcould have some lagged effects from earlier declines in rates, butbasically we have been pouring in reserves at an extraordinary rate totry to hold funds somewhere around 6 percent, although some marketobservers have interpreted it differently. Now, that really begins tobother me in the context of these other things. There are somepressures building up, and as Jerry Corrigan pointed out, we're reallypumping in reserves at an extraordinary rate to try to hold the line.Again, that's a straw in the wind that troubles me. I don't think Ineed to comment about the dollar, and we've talked about the buildupin liquidity before. As I look down the road, what bothers me is thebox we could be in--really, as early as later in the first quarter.The staff's projection on the CPI is 4.6 percent; it wouldn't takemuch of a miss on the upside for us to be looking at a 5 percent CPIin the first quarter. Secondly, I really think that this yearCongress will not be able to come up with anything close to crediblein terms of that $108 to $118 billion Gramm-Rudmann-Hollings deficittarget. Now, maybe this would come a little later than these CPInumbers, but I think we very likely could see--even though theprogress on deficits might be in the right direction--a need to walkaway explicitly from the Gramm-Rudmann-Hollings legislation and thegeneral concepts and guidelines there. And that, too, I think couldhave a negative psychological effect. So, basically as I look atthese straws in the wind now and then look at the position we could be-47-2/10-11/87in down the road--and I don't think we're ever absolutely sure attimes when we have to move--what I say to myself is that if we don'tstart to lean against this now we very likely could be in a positionwhere we're going to have to do a lot more down the road if we losecontrol of these inflationary expectations.One final comment I would have is that if we were to havetightened policy last summer and last fall there would have been adramatic impact, in my judgment, on short-term rates--markets werediscounting the possibility of further ease. I think all of that hasbeen washed out now. The three-month bill is trading essentially evenwith the funds rate on a yield basis, whereas I suspect that at pointsin time it might have been 50-60 basis points below the funds rate.Would that be about right, Don?MR. KOHN. I think it's still a bit below where funds havebeen most recently.MR. MELZER. Okay. But it's around 6 percent now?MR. KOHN. That's right.MR. MELZER. It might have been trading substantially belowthe funds rate in the summer and fall--maybe 50 basis points. So, alittle snugging on our part now, in my judgment, is not going to havea major adverse impact on short-term rates. It could have a salutaryeffect on long-term rates, although we haven't really seen the samekind of negative signals in the long-market to the extent that we didearlier in the year, at least in terms of the yield curve.MR. JOHNSON. I think, Tom, that because of this supposedshift in the borrowing function--which may be permanent from what weknow--we've added to reserve pressures and done some snugging withoutchanging our borrowing target. We've seen Treasury bills edge uptoward the higher funds rate. We've actually achieved that, I think,without having to change our borrowing target.MR. MELZER. Well, I don't think we have achieved that,really. I think what has happened is that we are pouring in atremendous amount of reserves to try to avoid it, and the market issending us a signal. To the extent that we keep trying to do that, Ithink we are really going to create some problems in the longer-termmarket.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to be clear. You started outby saying that you came into the meeting thinking maybe we ought totighten up a little; it sounds to me like you are ending up there,too.MR. ANGELL. Sounds like alternative C.MR. MELZER. I am for alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The difference, I suspect, between whatyou say, which is very eloquent, and what others have said, byimplication, is that right at this moment in time the short-runbusiness situation is not all that clear. It could turn south on usand [some feel that] we better wait a little while before-48-2/10-11/87[tightening]. You are quite persuasive; but it's a question of movingnow or waiting for some more confirmation of the business situationover the next few weeks.MR. ANGELL. There is a scenario that could develop in thenext month that I would feel exactly like you do, Tom, but I wouldhate to think about releasing the minutes six weeks from now with thatscenario in there after it didn't develop. I would rather havealternative B, as Manley specified, but with an understanding that oursymmetric language would cause us--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Our asymmetric language.MR. JOHNSON. Asymmetric language.MR. ANGELL. --asymmetric language, which would give us alittle flexibility over the six weeks if that were to turn out to bethe real scenario.MR. BOEHNE. Yes. I was one of the ones who brought upinflation yesterday, but I am not yet ready to stand up and say let'stighten. I like the idea of preparing ourselves to tighten and havingasymmetrical language, but I think we ought to be cautious about the[unintelligible] at this point.MS. SEGER. Remember a few months ago, though, we voted notto change policy but then when the minutes were released withasymmetrical language everybody jumped to the conclusion that we had.So I think we have to be sensitive about what we say.MR. BOEHNE. But in this context, I think that asymmetricallanguage would send a very healthy signal, because I think we have toconvey to the markets that, yes, we are prepared to tighten in theright circumstances. And we ought to be clear about that message.MR. HELLER. One thing we might want to keep in mind also isthat our last directive was asymmetric in the other direction andthat's what will be released.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure that is going to make a lotof difference because in this particular instance I will betestifying.MR. BLACK. That's another factor.MR. HELLER. In the testimony, do you release the language?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. But de facto I do, yes.MR. HELLER. Okay. And the minutes from the last meeting aregoing to be released when?SPEAKER(?). This Friday.MR. HELLER. Friday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, there may be a little confusionbecause they are being released on Friday and I don't testify until-49-2/10-11/87next Thursday. I don't think that's bad if, in fact, we decide not tochange anything between now and the time I testify. But thetestimony--MR. HELLER. You are going to get that whammy--the market isgoing to see the earlier language and a week later the tighter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would guess, given where the funds rateis and so forth, that they will simply assume that we didn't doanything, which is correct. And I would confirm that, but I would addsome warning language about the future.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. I don't think that's a problem givenwhere the funds rate is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have one point of view expressed.And we have other points of view expressed. Does anybody have anyother point of view?MR. STERN. I think Mr. Melzer makes a persuasive case. Iwouldn't go as far as alternative C, but one thing that would havesome appeal to me that we might want to look at is a borrowing targetof $300 to $350 million, on the argument that we don't want the fundsrate to slip back down below 6 percent for any successive number ofdays. That should help, if in fact it's true, that what really hasbeen going on here is some change in the preference [for excessreserves] and the way banks are managing their reserve positions. Ihappen to think that there is probably more to it than that, but ifthat were the case, we could build ourselves a little protection thatway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A more modest way of stating that is justthat we don't lean over backwards simply to get the federal funds ratebelow 6 percent again, I'd say.MR. ANGELL. That's right. The $300 million is what we aimfor and I would not expect the funds rate to go below 6 percent withthat, given the preference for excess reserves and given--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think where the funds rate goes will bedominated by the expectations in these very short-run circumstances.If we got some weak business news and the expectations turned towardmore easing, the federal funds rate could easily go below 6 percent.If the markets don't have that expectation, then it probably wouldn't.If they have the expectation that, if anything, we would tighten up,the federal funds rate probably would stay higher.MR. ANGELL. Gary Stern is saying that he would like us totake action to stop it from occurring in the face of weak businessnews.MR. JOHNSON. But if the weaker business news develops, I amnot sure that we would want to stop it.MR. STERN. We always write the directive, though, with allof those caveats, in any event. So I don't think that what I amsuggesting would preclude us from changing our views if we did get alot of weak business news. It would seem to me that it is going to-50-2/10-11/87take a minimum of a month before we have enough evidence to changeviews on that; but even if we did, we still have those caveats in thedirective.MR. BLACK. Well, we are not going to have much between nowand next Thursday.MR. STERN. We certainly aren't going to have much betweennow and next Thursday.MR. BLACK. That's what we are going to be listening for.MS. SEGER. How many weeks has it been, though, since thefederal funds rate averaged below 6 percent?MR. STERN. You have to go back into October, actually.MR. STERNLIGHT. To October for 5-7/8 percent.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, it looks to me like maybe we needa vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we are pretty close. Ithink we ought to look at this. If nobody else has anything to add tothis discussion, why don't we turn to the language and how we want tophrase it. I assume that the prevailing view is not to change the[stance] anyway, which will be reflected immediately in this firstsentence, but to be asymmetric. I am not saying there's unanimousagreement for that, but I sense that's where the central tendency is.In that case, I presume that we would simply say maintain in the firstsentence. I am eliminating nuances now, which we can return to whenwe return to this question of how we express it. What projection doyou have for M2 and M3 if we began in January and went through April?MR. KOHN. Well, I don't have a specific projection in frontof me for April, but I would be tempted to maintain M2 and M3 at abouttheir March growth rates. I don't see why they would deviatesubstantially, so that means 7 percent for M2 and 6 percent for M3.So January to April--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be 7 percent for both?MR. KOHN. No, I was thinking 7 percent for M2 and 6 percentfor M3. It could be 7 percent for both, too. So January to Aprilmight be 6-1/2 percent, or a range of 6 to 7 percent for M2 and around6 percent for M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that gives us one alternative--I amnot sure that this is the way we want to say it--but if we wanted tosay January to April, we would say we expected the growth of M2 and M3over the period from January to April to be at annual rates of 6 to 7percent.MR. ANGELL. That's narrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we ever make it wider thanthat.-51-2/10-11/87MR. ANGELL. 6 to 7 percent?MR. BLACK. I sure do like that idea of using the Januarybase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's unusual and I would resist itordinarily on the basis that we normally use quarters, but that greatdistortion at year-end--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The way you could present--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks like the only way we could reallyget rid of that distortion is to use February as the base, but I--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Couldn't you preserve your positionby just saying 6 to 7 percent over the balance of the quarter? That'sright where all the numbers are anyway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you use one month.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Use two months.MR. BOEHNE. Two months: February and March. Vote for two.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We are only talking about M2 and M3,so theoretically, the weekly numbers don't matter.MR. KOHN. Last April, we did have a big jump in the M2 andM3 numbers; it is the tax period and there has to be--. Of course, wehad reduced interest rates in March and April, so--MR. PRELL. We always run into a lot of uncertainties at thattime in terms of how fast tax payments are made. And this time wewill have capital gains taxes that will have to be paid, so it's avery uncertain period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the argument for saying January toJune or something.MR. ANGELL. Or January to March.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. January to March gives you what kind of anumber?MR. KOHN. That would be around 6 percent. Under alternativeB January to March would be 6-1/2 percent for M2 and 6 percent for M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those numbers were 6 percent and 6-1/2percent?MR. KOHN. 6-1/2 percent for M2 and 6 percent for M3.MR. ANGELL. I think that makes the best choice.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What about February and March?MR. KOHN. Well, that would be 7 percent for M2 and 6 percentfor M3.-52-2/10-11/87MR. BLACK. That pretty well covers the intermeeting period,too.MR. ANGELL. Don, are you expecting February to come in ashigh as you have here now?MR. KOHN. We got some information yesterday that suggestedthat M1 might be a little lower, but we didn't get any new informationon M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am sorry: what are you projecting forFebruary and March?MR. KOHN. On page 14 [of the Bluebook], Mr. Chairman, for M2I have about 6-1/2 percent for February right now and 7 percent forMarch. For M3 I have 6 percent for both months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sounds like we say 6 to 7 percent,whatever months we pick.MR. GUFFEY. It doesn't make any difference.MR. BLACK. Aim at 6 to 7 percent for whatever month youpick.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it makes a lot ofdifference. I guess somebody might argue that nothing we are going todo now is going to affect February or March anyway. That's theargument for going through June, but I--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the problem with M2 and M3 ingeneral.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it makes a great deal ofdifference. Do you want to say from January through March? The realchoice, as I see it, is to say January through March or Januarythrough June. We could say April, but there's a seasonal problem inApril.MR. ANGELL. Yes, but that seasonal problem doesn't affectthe three-month growth rate that much, does it, Mike?MR. PRELL. It could, depending. Last year, if I remember,we also had a delay in tax refunds due to IRS processing speed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The seasonal adjustment factors aresupposed to take care of the seasonality, but I guess what you aresaying is that it's very uncertain. It could be high or low.MR. ANGELL. There's a high standard deviation, you mean.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. April is just an uncertain month. But thenumbers are going to be the same anyway. Do we want to say January toMarch, January to April, or January to June?MR. KEEHN. January through March.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Through March.-53-2/10-11/87MR. GUFFEY. Isn't that the same as January to April?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that what we want to say?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. January to March, 6 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The preference is to say January to March,6 to 7 percent? We don't need the "respectively;" the range coversboth of them. Now what do we say about M1? I think with respect toM1 we ought to say something. It's very easy to say that in thecurrent circumstances we expect it to slow from the extraordinaryrates of recent months. Maybe that's it: simply say that growth in M1should slow from the extraordinary rates of recent months--period.MR. ANGELL. "Should" is stronger than "expected." I think"expected" is a little better.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We expect it to slow appreciably from thehigh rate of recent months, or of earlier months. Is there anythingelse anybody wants to say about M1? "Appreciably" or "substantially"?Decrease substantially from the rate of growth of 30 percent.MR. ANGELL. I thought "substantially" went with "chiefly"but--MR. HELLER. Also say "primarily."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Growth in M1 is [unintelligible]. Weprobably should say "substantially," it's so high. Does anybody haveanything to add about M1? Then we fiddle around with--MR. ANGELL. The nuances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat greater reserve restraint wouldor slightly lesser reserve restraint might"? Does that do it?MR. MORRIS. I thought we agreed to make this [asymmetric].MR. ANGELL. That's what we just did.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat greater reserve restraint wouldor slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable."MR. MORRIS. I would like to make it even more asymmetric andnot mention the possibility of lesser reserve restraint because Ican't see that as a possibility for the next six weeks unless thebusiness numbers come through very much differently than we expect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's perfectly reasonable to discuss that.I don't think we have ever done that. Or have we?MR. ANGELL. Ever done what?MR. BOEHNE. Yes we have on one or two occasions; but it ishighly unusual.MR. KOHN. Not recently.-54-2/10-11/87MR. JOHNSON. It gives the right connotation.MR. ANGELL. Well, let's suppose oil prices broke down; let'ssuppose Germany announced that they were going to grow at zero. Youcould--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Which way would that work?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way I wrote this, the language has twoasymmetrical words: one is "somewhat" as opposed to "slightly;" andthe other is "would" as opposed to "might."MR. BOEHNE. It's the double whammy nuance.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Somewhat greater than an[unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. I think the markets are tuned in to thislanguage.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.MR. BLACK. They can use this double asymmetry. I can seethe caption on that now. That may be symmetric double negatives.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have any further comments? Itake your silence as saying double nuance asymmetry is about right.MR. ANGELL. That's plenty.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me assume 4 to 8 percent down inthe federal funds range clause. Is there anything else in thislanguage? It would then read: In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. This action is expected to beconsistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from Januarythrough March at annual rates of about 6 to 7 percent. Growth in M1is expected to slow substantially from the high rate of earliermonths. Somewhat greater reserve restraint would or slightly lesserreserve restraint might be acceptable depending on the behavior of theaggregates, taking into account, etc. Then 4 to 8 percent [on therange for the federal funds rate]. Any other comment? If not, we canvote on this one and adjourn while we work on the language of theother one. When we turn to the long term, this is highly consistentwith what we would be saying in the long run. Ready to vote? If so,we will vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesPresident Melzer NoPresident Morris YesGovernor Seger Yes-55-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Let's [break and come] back on the[long-run].[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just describe the market today. Wewon't discuss this but the federal funds rate is 6-5/16 percent and weanticipate 6-5/8 percent. Oh! Now it is at 6-5/8 percent, not 6-5/16percent, despite the fact that, according to the estimate, we arerunning $500 million or $600 million over target in providingreserves. So we decided to do nothing. Unless there is a wildreserves miss, we will end up way over target with a high federalfunds rate, at least until the 7th.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, many years ago--20 to 25 years ago--the market at one time had a sentence that said, "The federal fundsrate is hanging at this level apparently out of respect for what themarket thinks the Open Market Committee has done."MS. SEGER. That's when rates never moved anyway.MR. BOEHNE. They had better respect then.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if the federal funds rate doesn'tcome way down this afternoon there really is something screwy.MR. MORRIS. While we have a little time here, Paul couldtell us about this story about Mr. Baker pushing target zones forcurrencies.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's putting it in a morepermanent or long-range context than he, or really his staff, wouldadmit. There is, obviously, discussion about some agreement. You seesomething in the paper every day about his being more forthcomingabout saying he is relatively content with the broad range [ofexchange rates] currently prevailing and there ought to be awillingness to--I will say "defend" but that may be too strong a word--to engage in joint and reciprocal actions in the markets. Thatobviously, as I mentioned yesterday, has implications beyond just whathas been mentioned, if one really believed it. [It would] demonstratethat we are altogether content with the broad present range ofexchange rates depending upon reasonable satisfaction that the othercountries will do something to grow.MR. MORRIS. We are not thinking in terms of a formal system.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no. But having taken that step,obviously it is consistent with and will be read by many, anyway, as astep toward something more permanent. Whether they are called targetsor some levels of resistance, the word would be "resistance." Therewon't be any formal expression of that kind but, obviously, therewon't be a lot of speculation. This is a step, at the very least, inthat direction. Indeed, I think it is a tentative step in thatdirection without any sense of commitment.MR. JOHNSON. You can bet the currency markets will try andsearch for those levels.-56-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then there will be [unintelligible]! Oneof the problems, I think we ought to remind ourselves, is that thereis a rather broad range--a much broader range than the currencymarkets will be probing for in the short run. So there is lots ofroom for misunderstanding. One of the problems is that without makinga commitment--even to discourage a loose arrangement--it becomes moredifficult in the short run because people want to make payments. Youget caught unless you're willing to make a full-blooded commitment.The French might be willing to but I don't think anybody else iswilling to [unintelligible].MR. ANGELL. Did the markets ever pick up broadly ourintervention before?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think they did right at firstbecause they thought it was the Japanese. But they do have theimpression that we intervened [unintelligible]. They assume thatthere was some.MR. CROSS. Well, it got reported. The last time there werereports in Japan and also elsewhere.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, the Japanese said so! I forgot that.MR. ANGELL. But another low-key move like that, if it workedas well, together with heavy Japanese and German [intervention]wouldn't be too bad an environment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is the kind of thing they wouldlook for, but the problem that I foresee is that that interventiontook place well above where I would conceive the lower part of anybroad range would be. I am not saying there is anything the matterwith it; I think it is fine. But we don't want the market to think weare defending 152 yen per dollar, or something, with our life's bloodif we are not, and then have market participants greatly disappointedwhen they see the exchange rate go above that. In my mind it's a verytricky, psychological, thing. I have no problems with what they aretrying to do but it is a very tricky problem, operationally--that themarket doesn't read much more into ranges or zones, whatever you callthem, than anybody has in mind.MR. ANGELL. But isn't there a case that could be made that,for the foreseeable future, that is about as high as the yen ought togo?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is that we are in a rangewhere that is debatable. It is just a question of whether you say 150is the limit, which implies that on the other side--assuming youretain the concept of a broad range--you probably wouldn't mind if itwas at 170.MR. ANGELL. Whether you would want it that high--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whether you wanted it that high[unintelligible]. Personally, I think 150 is fine, but I don't wantto make that the absolute low point, probably because I wouldn't wantto see it go all the way to 170. But I don't want to get caught with150 to 155 or something like that.-57-2/10-11/87MR. ANGELL. How about 150 to 160.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That still seems to me to be prettynarrow. I suppose substantively it may be all right. But it isnarrow and when people talk about these, even on [unintelligible]. Idon't want to get trapped into thinking something narrow.MR. CROSS. I don't think we would find it easy to get theothers to start intervening on the other side at very low levels ifthis was to be cooperative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even if there is a judgmental agreement tothis kind of thing, it is still a good idea to argue about where therange should be set.MR. GUFFEY. Isn't a precedent condition of this arrangementthat they agree to stimulate their economies? And is that to be apublic announcement of some sort.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is very much a condition in Mr.Baker's mind for both substantive and symbolic reasons. But I thinkthere is a real question as to what they would do, in fact, that wouldmake much difference. Our talking in terms of concerted actionagainst the background that their economic outlook seems to bedeteriorating--MR. ANGELL. But is a Japanese discount rate cut likely?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It certainly would be in the context ofthis.MR. ANGELL. Well, that certainly would make a differenceregarding the spread between capital flows, I think.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It can't make much difference interms of growth in the Japanese economy.MR. ANGELL. I know, but it will make a difference in regardto capital flows.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I should hope.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the Japanese did. Ithink one of their problems before was [unintelligible] as much asthey did, but their savings deposit rates are close to zero now. Iknow they were close to zero before they reduced the discount ratelast time. I don't know what happened after they reduced it. That'sthe big savings vehicle for Japanese citizens as opposed to peoplewith access to the money markets. They may be [unintelligible] butthere are some very close to zero and some deposits may have--MR. JOHNSON. What is their postal rate?MR. TRUMAN. The discount rate is above the postal rate, Ithink.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they have a variety of rates.-58-2/10-11/87MR. TRUMAN. There has been some responsiveness.MR. JOHNSON. If they are going to deflate, a zero rate[unintelligible].[Secretary's Note: A draft of proposed directive language,labeled "Variant I for M1" was circulated to the meeting participantsat this point. See Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just as a technical matter, where is thisparagraph we are talking about inserting to be placed--before or afterthe discussion of the broader aggregates?MR. KOHN. I guess after the discussion of the broaderaggregates in the longer-run part of the directive: between the broadaggregates and the short-run part.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you have this paragraph above statingthat the FOMC seeks all these things.MR. KOHN. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then: "In furtherance of these objectivesthe Committee established growth ranges of--" What are we talkingabout, 6-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent?MR. KOHN. 5-1/2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for both M2 and M3.Total nonfinancial debt was set at what?MR. KOHN. 8 to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8 to 11 percent, the same as for 1987.With respect to M1, why don't we take a minute to peruse this? Idon't argue that it is a literary masterpiece.MR. ANGELL. On page 2 is the word excessive--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we just give everybody a chance[to read this]. Have you all had a chance to get some flavor of it?MR. ANGELL. I think it very well reflects what we suggested.On page 2, I wonder if the word "excessive" in front of weakness ofthe dollar is a little strong. Would it be better to leave the wordout or maybe use the word "continuing." I wouldn't want to indicateto the markets that it really has to be pretty bad before anythinghappens.MR. PARRY. How about "significant"?MR. ANGELL. Yes, that would be better, I think.MR. MELZER. In citing those conditions it is possible to usean "and/or" structure. In other words, I could imagine circumstanceswhere you wouldn't necessarily have all four of those.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously. Oh, I---59-2/10-11/87MR. JOHNSON. That's why velocity is such a useful word. Itcaptures all those things.MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me, since that is an "and"list, that you could take "excessive" out and just say "weakness inthe dollar." If all those other three--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, that is the problem. I wasabout to say that it is easier to list when all those things are goingin the same direction than when you have some going in one directionand some going in another direction. I was just going to summarizeour discussion in terms of the broad message we are trying to give.The message I would try to give is: It is not that M1 is meaningless,but that it can only be evaluated in the context of the surroundingcircumstances. I can't read my own writing. It is not meaningless;it can only be evaluated in the context of the surroundingcircumstances. That can't be a mechanical judgment but rather aqualitative judgment. [Unintelligible] enter into the qualitativejudgment. We can [not] get a formula that can take all four of thesefactors and weigh one 20 percent and the other 32 percent.MR. MELZER. You could use "in the context of signs of" or"in the context of surrounding circumstances" and you could use an"including" structure and an "or" at the end.MR. KEEHN. At the end of the sentence rather than using theword "and" I wonder if you used the word "or" if that would deal withthe possible alternative situations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think you can quite say "or"because we are not saying that any one of these factors is going to--MR. KEEHN. It gives you a little more flexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, what was this other suggestion ratherthan "or"?MR. MELZER. I was suggesting that we could say: "It would beappropriate in the context of surrounding circumstances, which couldinclude, for example," and then just list the four and put an "or"there. If they are given as examples it doesn't necessarily implythat there will be just one or all four.MR. BLACK. You could say: "In the context of signs suchas..."MR. JOHNSON. You could say: "In the context of many of thesigns" or something like that. Or use a word that is allencompassing: "necessarily" before the "appropriate."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Accumulating signs.MR. JOHNSON. Accumulating signs, or many of the signs, orintensifying, or growing, signs.MR. BLACK. I think that "such as--"-60-2/10-11/87MR. HELLER. With the "such as" language the only thing I amnot too happy with is the last statement: "In the context of signssuch as continuing economic expansion." That does not cause us toreduce growth. It would have to be something like unsustainableeconomic expansion.MR. JOHNSON. Well, you could say all these other things "inthe context of continuing economic--"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without repeating the words "in thecontext."MR. JOHNSON. Oh yes, I'm sorry; that is already there.MR. MELZER. You could say: "which might include acombination of..."MR. JOHNSON. Or "along with continued economic expansion."MR. HELLER. Or "in the framework."MR. ANGELL. I think it is better as it is with the "and."MR. JOHNSON. But I have a big problem, too, with implyingtightening just because the economy is expanding and none of the otherthings are occurring.MR. ANGELL. But "and" answers that question.MR. JOHNSON. No, it is overly reactive.MR. MORRIS. With price pressures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was meant to encompass it, but thisget's [complicated]. Suppose we said: "Much slower monetary growthwill be appropriate in the context of continuing economic expansionaccompanied by..."MR. JOHNSON. Okay. That would do.MR. KEEHN. Rather than using "continuing"--not to stir thesoup here--how about "strong economic expansion." We could getcontinued economic expansion in a modest proportion.MR. PARRY. How about "rapid"?MR. JOHNSON. Don't stretch it too far. If all these otherthings were happening, even if the economy weren't growing I wouldn'tmind doing something about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is something the matter here as Isee this; something is garbled. "In that connection the Committeebelieves, particularly in light of the extraordinary expansion ofetc., much slower monetary growth would be appropriate in the contextof continuing economic expansion accompanied by signs of intensifying,strong growth in this aggregate in recent years." That doesn't belongthere. The whole thing is crazy.-61-2/10-11/87MR. BLACK. We're talking about slower M1 growth in the firstline and the broader aggregates in the second line, aren't we?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe I have two different pages, becausemine doesn't read right.MR. ANGELL. No, I think it is okay. I think you just havethat clause there in front of the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I've got the wrong first page. That'swhat's wrong. "In that connection, the Committee believes etc. Muchslower monetary growth would be appropriate in the context ofcontinuing economic expansion."MR. ANGELL. Do you want "accompanied by increased pricepressures" or "signs of"?MR. MELZER. You could say "accompanied by some combinationof" and then use the "and" structure, which could mean all or it couldmean one or two.MR. ANGELL. Yes, it seems to me that there could be somecircumstance in which the dollar, given strong economic growth--.Frankly, I just don't quite see how the inflation is going to comeabout unless we get a further [decline in the dollar]. It seems to methat the whole inflation scenario is dependent upon the dollar'sposition.MR. JOHNSON. Then what you are saying is that there may betimes when we want to deal with the psychology, if nothing else.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't cover every contingency here, butI can imagine that if the price pressures or some of the other thingswere bad enough we might have to tighten up even if the economicgrowth didn't look very satisfactory. But it is just impossible tocover every combination of circumstances here.MR. ANGELL. The fact of the matter is that if economicexpansion slows to a negative rate, it does limit you somewhat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it limits you!MR. STERN. It could be a very slow expansion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Say "continuing economic expansion."We've got a choice here. If we just leave it "and" it seems to me weare giving a pretty clear unambiguous signal that we would tightenunder all these circumstances. If we begin saying "such as" or "or,"which is better in some respects, it is also vaguer.MR. ANGELL. But with the "and" there, can't we take the"excessive" out before the "weakness of the dollar"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I put a "significant" in.MR. HELLER. But you are putting "continuing economicexpansion" ahead, right?-62-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that it is perfect now. Itreads: "Much slower monetary growth would be appropriate in thecontext of continuing economic expansion accompanied by signs ofintensifying price pressures, relatively strong growth in the broadmonetary aggregates, and significant weakness of the dollar inexchange markets."MR. MELZER. Did you say "or"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I said "and."MR. ANGELL. [Unintelligible] sounds like a bit of weaknessdoesn't bother us. If it doesn't, it's okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Another way of doing it is to say "signsof intensifying price pressures, perhaps related to significantweakness of the dollar in exchange markets and relatively stronggrowth in the broad monetary aggregates."SPEAKER(?). That's how I would like it.SEVERAL. Yes.MR. STERN. That probably [improves it] a little; becauseotherwise it sounded like you'd need all three.MR. ANGELL. I like that.MR. HELLER. "Related to"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Perhaps related to." I didn't want tosay that is the only source of--MR. MORRIS. All of this suggests that the relationship ofnominal GNP to M1 is indeterminate. The stronger the economy thelower the growth rate of M1.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think it's fair to say that if youcould stabilize this interest differential that has created such asensitivity and swings you would expect to see it run consistently. Imay be wrong, but under a stable differential I would guess that wouldbe the thing more than anything else probably would be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody want to focus on any othersentences?MR. PARRY. Yes, just a minor point in the last sentence ofthe first paragraph. Isn't "appropriate changes" a little misleading?Wouldn't it be better just to say "changes"?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We could say "the appropriatenessof..."MR. PARRY. That would be better. Or just leave it out. Andif that is the case, it's the same thing in the last sentence of thesecond paragraph where it refers to appropriate growth. It is alittle misleading--we are going to evaluate growth in M1 from time totime as to whether or not it is appropriate.-63-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is a minor point, but why would youwant "appropriate" in there? Let's have some sense of: we are goingto evaluate whether we are going to have a short-run target for M1,which implies some appropriateness.MR. PARRY. No, it says here "appropriate changes in M1during the course of the year will be evaluated in light of" etc. Weare going to be evaluating changes as to whether or not they areappropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, so I changed that to "theappropriateness of changes." I made just a couple of errors readingit; it reads a little more smoothly. This is only changing clauses."With respect to M1 the Committee recognized that, based onexperience, the behavior of that aggregate and appropriate growth mustbe judged in the light of other evidence with respect to economicactivity and prices; fluctuations in M1 have become much moresensitive in recent years to changes in interest rates among otherfactors." Put "among other factors" at the end of the sentence. Thenstart the next sentence by saying: "During 1987 the Committeeanticipates that growth in M1 should slow." [Unintelligible] in thenext sentence. We're just trying to avoid repetition.MR. MELZER. On the last sentence of the second page: "[TheCommittee] will evaluate appropriate growth in M1 from time to time inthe light of circumstances then prevailing, including the rate ofgrowth of the broader aggregates." That says evaluate; it doesn'tnecessarily imply very explicitly that we might set a target. I amjust wondering if we could add a phase "and under certaincircumstances might establish short-run target ranges." That is veryexplicit about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That makes it much more explicit. I don'tknow if that is desirable or not since we always miss these short-termtarget ranges. I mean to hint at that, but I don't know what theadvantage is of being absolutely explicit. I don't know if there isanything inconsistent with it--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This doesn't tie [together]. Howabout if we said "The Committee during the course of the year willevaluate the appropriate role and growth."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Rule out M1. It has no role any more.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No. I was thinking of the option.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is not the appropriate role of M1; itwould be the appropriate role of M1 in our decision-making.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It already says that: "The Committeehasn't reached any operational decisions."MR. STERN. Maybe we can find a somewhat stronger word thanevaluate. But I must say I am at a bit of a loss.MR. MELZER. This sounds like stuff we say all the time.-64-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It does sound like what we been saying; Iguess I put that on the other side of the ledger. There is nodifference in some respect from what we've said before. Well, I amsure this isn't perfect but I am struck with the fact that it iscumbersome enough. That last sentence is certainly repetitious but Idon't know if it hurts anything, with the last sentence in the firstparagraph. We could use another word than evaluate, but I don't knowwhat.MR. ANGELL. Would it be appropriate to have continuingsizable increases in M1 with the continuing weakness in the dollar?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. ANGELL. I know. I would just like to have it be--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You don't know which way it willwork. What are you trying to guard against?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What he is saying, I guess, is that hedoesn't want all that sizable an increase in M1, if we have somegrowth and the dollar is very weak.MR. ANGELL. That is right.MR. MELZER. What if you replace "will evaluate" with "maytarget"? I think you want to stay away from that, but I am just--MR. ANGELL. Now we are on page 2?MR. MELZER. The last sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can say "continuing sizable increasesin M1 could be accommodated in circumstances characterized by sluggishbusiness activity, maintenance of progress toward underlying pricestability, and international stability," or something vague like that.MR. ANGELL. I like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And "progress toward internationalequilibrium." How about that?MR. TRUMAN. Fine, if you can define it.MR. ANGELL. That's pretty wide. But that is all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That brings in the trade balance as wellas the dollar.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I like that better than not having it inthere at all.MR. JOHNSON. Equilibrium could be a much lower rate ofgrowth.MR. ANGELL. I am afraid that is what it is.2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am a little worried about therepetitiousness of these two sentences. Maybe it doesn't hurtanything. I suppose this implies that the Committee in reachingoperational decisions during the year might target appropriate growthin--MR. MELZER. I think that is the statement that addssomething to what has already been said. Otherwise, you're right thatit doesn't--MR. GUFFEY. That presumes that we'll know what theappropriate growth is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll only know it in the light of thecircumstances then prevailing. Does that sound better to people?SPEAKER(?). Yes.SPEAKER(?). It does to me.MR. JOHNSON. They'll pay attention to the things that causeus to pull it off the shelf.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe I better read the whole thing whilewe are having our last thoughts here. This would follow the ratherconventional paragraph, to say the least, regarding the 5-1/2 to 8-1/2percent for growth in M2 and M3 and 8 to 11 percent for the debt.Then it goes on to say "With respect to M1 the Committee recognizedthat, based upon experience, the behavior of that aggregate and itsappropriate growth must be judged in the light of other"-- I'm juststumbling here, and I wonder whether we need the behavior of thataggregate and its appropriate growth. Why don't we just say: "Withrespect to M1, the Committee recognized that, based on experience, thebehavior of that aggregate must be judged in the light of otherevidence with respect to economic activity and prices; fluctuations inM1 have become much more sensitive in recent years to changes ininterest rates, among other factors. During 1987 the Committeeanticipates that growth in M1 should slow. However, in the light ofits sensitivity to a variety of influences, the Committee decided notto establish a precise target for its growth over the year as a wholeat this time. Instead, the appropriateness of changes in M1 duringthe course of the year will be evaluated in the light of the behaviorof its velocity, developments in the economy and financial markets,and the nature of emerging price pressures." If I can make aneditorial comment, I wrote this "the nature of emerging pricepressures" rather than "emerging price pressures" because we allconcede that there are likely to be some emerging price pressures thatwe have already taken into account. "In that connection, theCommittee believes that, particularly in the light of theextraordinary expansion of this aggregate in recent years, much slowermonetary growth would be appropriate in the context of continuingeconomic expansion accompanied by signs of intensifying pricepressures, perhaps related to significant weakness of the dollar inexchange markets, and relatively strong growth in the broad monetaryaggregates. Conversely, continuing sizable increases in M1 could beaccommodated in circumstances surrounded by sluggish businessactivity, maintenance of progress toward underlying price stability,and progress toward international equilibrium. As this implies, the-66-2/10-11/87Committee in reaching operational decisions during the year, mighttarget appropriate growth in M1 from time to time in the light ofcircumstances then prevailing, including the rate of growth of thebroader aggregates."MR. MELZER. That's fine.MR. ANGELL. Good.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope you people are satisfied on theother side there. There is no other--we have a consensus on the otherparagraph.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Could I just raise a quick non-M1point about the long-run part? In terms of what we are saying aboutmonetary policy, I am getting more and more concerned about that debtvariable, even though nobody pays any attention to it. We are sittinghere again this year saying we are going to monitor it, which impliesa kind of quasi-sanction. We monitor a growth in debt up to 11percent with GNP growing [2 or 3] percent. I know we can't do a darnthing about the variable, but for four or five years now running wehave been monitoring it while it's behaving in a way that just doesnot make sense for the long term.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am just thinking out loud--wemight say, as you just noted, that we have had a fairly liberalmonitoring range for this variable. It has exceeded the range; thisyear we really expect it to be within this range that we are talkingabout and we would be increasingly disturbed--MR. ANGELL. But what would we do if were disturbed?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess what we would do is tighten up.MR. ANGELL. Is anyone suggesting that that is what we shouldhave done during 1986?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I wouldn't suggest that. But I dothink that when you look at the way growth in debt has departed fromthe growth in GNP over a period now of five years or so, there issimply a point where those chickens are going to come home to roost.MR. ANGELL. But any time a preference for financial assetsexplodes like it has during this deflation, as well as every deflationin our history, you can't have financial assets expanding without debtexpanding.MR. MORRIS. And the problem with the corporate debt sector,anyway, is that we have had, in large part, no corresponding growth incorporate assets. The offset to the debt has been a decline inequity; so we haven't had an increase in assets.MR. JOHNSON. We have had a run up in the price ofassets--equity.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Whether it is sustainable or not isthe question.-67-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at it on the basis of marketvalues it doesn't look bad; if you look at it on the basis of balancesheets it looks pretty awful.MR. JOHNSON. It depends upon how much weight you put onmarket value.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose nobody is saying that this isgoing to be our single judge, but I think it does lend some weight toour tightening. I would be very happy if we said something like that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The only other choice is to drop itall together as something we in some sense monitor.MR. ANGELL. I understand the monetary aggregates and Iunderstand the validity of monitoring. But once those explode, theother side is going to explode too. The other side's problem is basedupon the quality or the ability to pay. It is a microeconomicjudgment, company by company.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we have exploding monetary aggregates.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's precisely the reason why Ihave this concern--because there is [impairment in] the ability to payat some point. That is why in balance-sheet terms this is dangerousto the economy and I think there is a point where the chickens couldcome home to roost. Then the question for the Federal Reserve isgoing to be: What were you doing here?MR. ANGELL. But, Jerry, it almost seems to me as if we aresaying we've got a danger out here, so what should we do? Well, weshould tighten. We are afraid people can't pay, and if we tightenthen we guarantee they can't pay.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I did not say we should tighten. Isaid that, at the very least, we ought to express some sensitivity tothis. I think there is a danger in just letting that sit out there ina way that at least subtly carries the implication that we areprepared to sanction or underwrite that kind of behavior indefinitely.MR. HELLER. In my mind at least, debt should be more amongthe categories of things we are monitoring: prices, growth, interestrates, exchange rates. Debt should be in that category rather than asa target variable.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am not trying to make it a targetvariable. I am just concerned that we have had it in there, ineffect, as a target variable. And it has been behaving in ways that Ithink over the long run raise some very difficult questions.MR. ANGELL. I don't know what handle we have. There isn'tany margin requirement handle that would work. I don't know where wewould begin.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am suggesting simply that we beprepared in some appropriate words to acknowledge that there is apotential problem here.-68-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is what we are doing anyway, in somesense. It doesn't have any operational significance.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Look at the nonfinancial corporatesector: since the end of 1984, $230 billion in equity and $480 billionin debt has been retired. Now, some of that is the retiring of short-term debt with long-term debt. I know all the circumstances. But youjust can't have that kind of thing indefinitely, in my judgment.MR. ANGELL. Well, our tax law changes help because in thepast it paid to not pay dividends, and to pay it out in the form ofleveraging out and--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That should mean that debt growthshould be--MR. ANGELL. It should be less. I think the tax law willreduce debt growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But not by that much; the basic incentiveis still there. It is now less than it was.MR. ANGELL. And people who have learned to benefit from theother one will continue to behave that way as long as an economicincentive is there.MR. JOHNSON. I'd be happy for us to carry on a campaign toallow [tax] credits for the dividends.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but you can't use that. I have beencarrying on that campaign in a not very effective way for some time.But I suppose your concern about it is more the corporate debt; thatis one area. You have made your point. I don't know how operationalit is.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It is not. I feel better havingmade it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other points to be raised,I guess we can vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesPresident Melzer YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Seger YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can always send in revisions of yourprojections. You are strongly encouraged, if you are so minded, toget them in and get them here in a hurry so they can be [incorporatedin the group] projections.END OF MEETING-69-