Federal Open Market CommitteeConference CallApril 29, 1987PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. BoykinMr. HellerMr. JohnsonMr. KeehnMs. SegerMessrs. Black, and Forrestal, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, President ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,St. Louis, and Boston, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMs. Loney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Mr. Prell, Associate EconomistMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Hendricks, Powell, and Stone, First VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofCleveland, San Francisco, and Philadelphia,respectivelyTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Callof April 29, 1987MR. BERNARD. [Roll call of Reserve Banks expected toparticipate in the conference call.] Thank you. All of the ReserveBanks are on, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, gentlemen and lady here--we onlyhave one lady on the Committee, now.MS. SEGER. [Our number is] reduced by 50 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, there has been quite a lot ofturmoil going on in markets recently, whatever market one looks at.We have had problems with open market operations. We have a number ofpolicy issues, and I thought it was appropriate just to review wherewe are. I think it's fair to say that pretty much since the last OpenMarket Committee meeting, pressures have developed on the dollar.That occurred not long after that meeting. And in accordance with thediscussion at that meeting, we were playing things rather cautiouslybut not really changing the borrowing target in any overt or non-overtway. We had our usual problems in sometimes meeting and sometimesmissing targets; there was no change in the target but there waserring on the side of restraint--if that's the right word--in makingany day-to-day judgments that may have been appropriate.In accordance with the discussion and given what was going onin the market, [our approach] changed a bit this week. We assumedthat under these circumstances we would aim overtly at a somewhathigher target, something around $400 million. I think the market hasthat sense now--not about a number but a feeling that we probably havedeliberately snugged, if that's the right word, this week. Now, infact, we have many fewer reserves out there than we intended becauseof technical problems, which I'll let Mr. Sternlight and Mr. Kohndiscuss with you. But what has happened, essentially, is that we werewilling to aim slightly higher, and then all the reserve factors camein strongly adverse both yesterday and today. We don't know whetherthat will continue to be the result. We put in a lot of money bothyesterday and today--as much money as the market would take--but westill have a little hole for ourselves just in terms of stricttargeting. Given the direction in which we're going, I'm not surethat that's any disaster from the standpoint of the market. You willhave observed that both the exchange market and the bond market--and Ithink those two phenomena are not unrelated--have considerablystrengthened over the past couple of days, although they have had someintermeeting ups and downs. Just as a matter of general background,the Board is going to have to keep the question of the appropriatenessof a discount rate move under consideration. All of this is somewhatdependent, at least ideally, on what goes on abroad. There is atleast some verbal indication that the Japanese would like to see ratesease a little in Tokyo markets. They have a sharply declining bondmarket rate; that's just the opposite of what's been going on here.It's a reflection both of expectational factors and actual shifts ofpurchases out of U.S. bonds into Japanese bonds by Japanese investors,without necessarily at all connoting a change in monetary policy. Butthey have told us that they would aim toward lower money market rates.In fact, I was told this morning that they said that publicly in some4/29/87kind of press contact that the Governor has. It didn't receive muchattention here; I haven't seen it anyway.MR. JOHNSON. They didn't say it very loudly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it was said. It's verystrange; the Japanese press generally picks it up and reverberates it.They told me they said something publicly and I'm trying to get moredetails on that. The only other thing I would add is that I have totestify tomorrow morning, not on monetary policy but on risk-basedcapital. I'm sure this question [of current policy] will arise. AndI would think that I should confirm that we have had a small snuggingor tightening, or whatever word seems appropriate at the time, in thelight of the circumstances in the market. I certainly would not tryto get that out of perspective; I'd try to avoid further trouble.That's about where we are at the moment. Oh! I might just indicate,and the staff can describe it more fully, that while all this has beengoing on--and it's one of the reasons the reserve factors are movingso strongly against us--the money supply, or M1 at least, hasballooned very sharply over the middle of the month, presumablyrelated to larger-than-expected tax payments. But it hasn't washedout yet. Peter, why don't you describe it?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think both things that have happened onthe reserve supply could be well be related to the tax situation,particularly the individual taxes that have been coming in veryheavily right about April 15th. And since it takes a while to processthose, particularly the individual payments, we've been getting much,much higher Treasury balances than had been expected. At the sametime, I think individuals must have built up their transactionaccounts to be able to make those payments. So, we've got a verylarge indicated increase in the April 20th week. And we're justfinding out in the last day or two that where a sharp rundown had beenassumed in the following week, we're not getting much indication ofthat rundown. So, it's giving us much higher required reserves. Injust the last three days we've had to move up the path based onrequired reserves by something like $1-1/4 billion. At that sametime, our estimates day-to-day of the Treasury's balances at theFederal Reserve rose because those balances pretty much filled up thecapacity at the tax and loan accounts at the commercial banks. Theestimated balances at the Federal Reserve have risen by severalbillion dollars. We are trying very hard to fill that reserve needwhile at the same time keeping in mind the desirability of not losinga little of the advantage we got a few days ago in the market bydeliberately hanging back in what we thought then were fairly moderatereserve needs. With all of that, borrowing thus far in this period isnot badly out of line; it's averaging just a little over $400 millionright now for this current reserve period. The funds rate isaveraging something like 6.44 percent, although over the last coupleof days it has been more in the 6-5/8 to 6-3/4 percent area. But, asthe Chairman said, in the last couple of days the market has gotten asense--it's not 100 percent sure--that there has been some snugging ordeliberate lessening on the Desk's part of its generosity in providingreserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kohn, do you want to say anythingabout anything?4/29/87MR. KOHN. Well, I can fill in a little on the money supply,Mr. Chairman. As Mr. Sternlight suggested, we expect to publish avery large increase tomorrow afternoon--on the order of $15 billion--an increase widely expected by the market, which has seen thesedeposit inflows. And we're not getting the kind of runoff in thefollowing week that we expected. As a result, with an expectation ofa decline in the week after that--that is, the first week in May--westill are projecting M1 growth in April in the high teens.Apparently, a good portion of the funds shifted to demand deposits andOCDs seems to have come from M2 components so that the non-M1 part ofM2 has been weaker than we expected. So, M2 and M3 may be coming outin the 5-1/2 to 6 percent area, which isn't far from what theCommittee's expectations were at the time of the FOMC meeting. Now,how much of that has been artificially inflated by the tax effect, wewon't know for a couple of weeks, until that comes out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Cross may want to bring us up-to-dateor give us a little flavor of what has been going on in the exchangemarkets in recent days.MR. CROSS. There has been more or less continuous--. Hello.Do you hear me?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. CROSS. Okay. If you hear me, I'll proceed. There hasbeen more or less continuous pressure in the exchange markets sinceyour last meeting at the end of March. At times the pressure has beenquite heavy. The reasons seem to be more of the same things thatwe've all heard and talked about, including: discussions of whatalmost seems like a trade war between us and the Japanese--which getsa lot of attention in the markets and the newspapers; continuing badfigures on the trade deficit; and a lack of any very impressive policymove by the main players. The [unintelligible] did break through somevery important psychological numbers. Whereas earlier the pressurehad been very heavily between the yen and the dollar, toward the endof last week it began to be more generalized and there were alsopressures against the mark. There have been substantial amounts ofintervention during this period totaling over during themonth of April, of which the very heavy portion has been by theJapanese. There is a recognition by the market that there have beensuch heavy amounts of intervention. And there is some feeling by themarket that this has not been enough to deal with the situation in anylasting way. In addition to the heavy amounts of intervention, therehave been substantial other purchases of dollars by the central banks.For the ones that we're on the concertation arrangement with, and thatwe keep figures for, the total of the intervention and the otherpurchases has been more than $20 billion of purchases officiallyduring the month of April. That is quite a substantial amount, wellabove the rate that we were running in the first quarter. The markethas been calmer in the past few days, partly I think in recognitionof--or a feeling that there has been--some modest change in themonetary policy approach. Another factor is that Mr. Nakasone ishere, and although the market is quite cynical about what may come outof that, they're reluctant to be 100 percent cynical and to be certainthat nothing will happen. So there's a kind of wait-and-see attitude.Also, the fact that we have a number of holidays both in Europe and inJapan over the next several days up until the middle of next week I4/29/87 -4-think has made the traders a little cautious. They say they will comeback and look at the situation after the Nakasone visit and in lightof what appears to be monetary policy [unintelligible]. That's all Ihave to say, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as I suggested earlier, it's quite aturbulent period. I think what's been going on in terms of openmarket operations is pretty much what the directive would havesuggested during this period. I don't think we have to do anythingformal as a Committee, but I certainly would want to hear any commentsor deal with any questions or any observations that any of you have.MS. SEGER. Maybe I missed it, but what is the borrowingtarget we're now using? I know we talked about $300 million at thelast meeting but it has been above that.MR. STERNLIGHT. We had been using $300 million up to thispoint, but I'd say in the last day or two we've really been behavingmore as though it was a shade higher. And my understanding is thatwe're prepared to use something a little higher now--I assume $400million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think $400 million, notionally, would bethe target at the moment.MR. KEEHN. Peter, this is Si Keehn. At that borrowing levelwould the federal funds rate tend to ride at about a [unintelligible]level or higher for some reason?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there is such a mixture ofexpectations out there that it's very hard to sort all of this out.Just taken by itself--if there weren't that expectational element ofsomething possibly lurking on the discount rate--we might be having afunds rate of 6-1/4 to 6-1/2 percent or something like that, maybejust 6-1/4 percent. As it is, it has been more like 6-1/2 to 6-3/4percent in recent days. And that's kind of what I would have expectedto see ahead, even without a discount rate increase. If that were tohappen as well, then I think we'd see the rate somewhat higher--nothigher by the full amount of any discount rate increase, because Ithink something already has been allowed for in the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the federal funds rate will bemore influenced by psychological factors within that band that you'retalking about than anything you could measure by a $100 million changein the borrowing, given this turbulent atmosphere. If thatdissipates, the range will be down; if it doesn't, it won't.MR. JOHNSON. Peter, what's happening in Treasury bills?Bill yields have been fairly stable to down. Well, they did pick up alittle, but they really stayed around the fairly low level. And inmany cases, bill yields were declining at the same time that bondyields were going up sharply. I assume this has something to do withthe Treasury paying down bills.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it has a lot to do with that,Governor Johnson. As you say, the Treasury has been paying down billssince early this year. There really just has been a technicalshortage of bills at the same time that there has been some extra4/29/87demand in the market because of some of those proceeds of foreignexchange intervention, either by those countries who intervened bythemselves in the market or, in some cases, executed transactions overour Desk. We have been a bit of a counterbalance to that because somethat we normally would have done for System account reserve provisionpurposes might well have gone in the bill market. We did more thanusual in the coupon market; we've been there three times in the lastfour weeks for a total of something like a little over $6 billion.SPEAKER(?). In coupons?MR. STERNLIGHT. In coupons, yes sir.MR. JOHNSON. Have they announced the refunding packagetoday?MR. STERNLIGHT. They'll be announcing their refunding today.MR. JOHNSON. Have they cut back the long bond or not?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they'll announce it later.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the market doesn't really expectmuch of a change on that score.MS. SEGER. What did the PSA recommend to them?MR. STERNLIGHT. Pretty much a carbon copy of what was donein February, notwithstanding the question about whether foreignparticipation would be there in the same degree as before.MS. SEGER. What is the increase in the federal funds ratesince last October? It's approaching a full percentage point, isn'tit?MR. STERNLIGHT. It must be around 3/4ths to 7/8ths; I don'tknow. Since last October, you say?MS. SEGER. Yes. Isn't that when it started picking up?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. KOHN. It averaged 5.85 last October and it moved up 3/4of a point or a little more--7/8ths.MR. GUFFEY. Just a perspective question, Mr. Chairman: Ifindeed, for whatever reason, the dollar begins to firm or to settle atits current level, would that suggest that we move to or near the $300million level?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it might at some point, dependingon what other things happen. I would suspect if that happened thatrates, in the first instance, would kind of move down by themselvesfor a while. But we would have to look at the other things--themonetary aggregates, the business situation, inflation. One questionthat I suppose enters into the approach now, as it always does, is the4/29/87question of whether we think the inflationary outlook has worsened inthese past few months. That seems to be the view in the market, andit's not unrelated to the exchange rate situation because theinflationary expectations are given in part by the exchange ratemoves. But I do think there has been some greater pessimism in themarket about inflation, which has helped account for the long-termbond market performance, anyway.MR. HELLER. This is Bob Heller. We have discussed financialmarkets a lot, and I certainly agree with the summary that we probablyneedn't do much or shouldn't do much. But I think we also have tokeep in mind the real side of the economy. If you look at the lastquarterly numbers: business fixed investment is still going down by12.8 percent; residential structures are down 7 percent; and consumerspending is down 0.4 percent. If you look at the inflationindicators, there isn't much change on the wage front; everythingseems to continue to be rather well behaved compared to a year ago--somewhere between 3 and 4 percent increases and the union side is muchbetter behaved. If you look at commodity prices, they're essentiallygoing sideways with the exception of oil and the precious metals;certainly, the experimental index is moving sideways. And theaggregates, I guess, are continuing to come in at the bottom of theirranges--there not being a range for M1, which might show a big boost.My view is actually very strongly that Germany and Japan[unintelligible] should be expanding faster and not doing something tocontract. So, doing nothing is certainly agreeable to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will have a lot to discuss inthree weeks, I guess. Are there any other comments? If not, I willbid you adieu. No, adieu is too much. Au revoir.MR. HELLER. Sayonara.END OF SESSION