Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 15-16, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., starting on Tuesday, December 15, 1987, at 3:15 p.m.,and continuing on Wednesday, December 16, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHellerJohnsonKeehn 1KelleySegerSternMessrs. Black, Hoskins, and Parry, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer and Morris, 2 Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Boston, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld,1Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account1/ Present for Wednesday session; participated in Tuesday session via telephoneconference from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.2/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of meeting held onNovember 3, 1987.12/15-16/87Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan,1 Assistant Director, Division of MonetaryAffairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Small, 1 Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Guynn, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof AtlantaMessrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis,and Ms. Tschinkel, 2 Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco,Richmond, Cleveland, Kansas City, and Atlanta,respectivelyMessrs. Fryd1 and McNees, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of New York and Boston, respectivelyMr. Guentner, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMs. Rosenbaum,3 Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofAtlanta1/ Attended portion of meeting on Tuesday.2/ Attended Wednesday session only.3/ Attended Tuesday session only.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofDecember 15-16, 1987December 15, 1987--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we are all present, with theexception of Frank Morris who, hopefully, is on his way from theairport and Si Keehn, who never was able to make it. I trust you'reon the other end of the wire, Si.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'm here with Karl Scheld and Ihope you can hear us.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We can hear you quite well. I'd like toalter the order of the agenda and ask our Managers to report tomorrowmorning rather than today and use this afternoon for the more genericdiscussions. I hope and I trust that Messrs. Kohn, Sternlight, andLindsey are prepared. Is that okay? Without objection, I willrequest a motion to approve the minutes of the November 3rd meeting.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No objection. The first topic ofdiscussion, item number 4 on the agenda, is a discussion of borrowingsand the federal funds rate as guides to open market operations. Mr.Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Sternlight, would you like to addanything to that?MR. STERNLIGHT. I have very little to add to either what wasin the memorandum or what Don has just outlined. Maybe the one pointis that, as Don just mentioned in his comments, the market is fairlywell aware of this current emphasis on the funds rate in theimplementation of policy, with greater weight placed on day-to-dayfunds rates. From comments that I hear, the market seems to be fairlyunderstanding of it. Some of the people I regard as more thoughtfulobservers in the market would be troubled, I think, if they thoughtthere was a long-term reversion to something that could be called"pegging of the funds rate." That's exaggerated, but I think that'swhat it would tend to become to be known as. That carries with it thebaggage of a past association with periods of what many regarded asinadequate policy responses in times of excessive money growth. Idon't think that argues that one has to go back immediately to whatwas being done--particularly since in the very near term, we will haveall the uncertainties associated with the year-end period--but it issomething to keep in mind as we look a little further at it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for either Mr.Kohn or Mr. Sternlight?12/15-16/87MR. HOSKINS. In your opinion, if we were to make a change,is the tenor in the market a lot different now than it was, say, rightafter October 19th?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think the market has calmed downconsiderably from the extremely turbulent and nervous state of lateOctober. I would hesitate to say it's totally back to normal. Ithink there is still some background nervousness and we are gettinginto a period when there's a lot of uncertainty anyway, just becauseof the possibility of pressures associated with the year-end.MR. PARRY. Well, that has been true in certain markets butin terms of demand for borrowing, things are still very different fromthe pre-October 19th period. In fact, it looks as though thatdifference now may be as great as it ever has been. Isn't thatcorrect?MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I agree with Bob on that. Borrowingsactually have declined under the same spread, or even a wider spreadfor a while.MR. STERNLIGHT. Borrowing has been very light, and we havescratched our heads about what the reasons for that might be. We dohear some comments to the effect that some banks are saving theirrecourse to the discount window, perhaps anticipating pressures aroundyear-end. There may be some who just want to take extra pains toavoid the window because they are concerned that their own creditratings could be coming under some review, and they just don't want tosubject themselves to any additional attention that might come fromusing the window. Seasonal borrowing is just about at its low point.I know it doesn't stand up all that well in the correlations, but Istill think that some--MR. JOHNSON. Just a technical question: Based on theresearch, which has a larger variance in normal times--borrowedreserves or the funds rate?MR. KOHN. Do you mean under which circumstance would thefunds rate vary more?MR. JOHNSON. Well, assuming that we're targeting borrowedreserves, is there more noise around borrowed reserves or the fundsrate?MR. KOHN. It's hard to compare them; one is dollars and oneis basis points.MR. JOHNSON. I know that, but I mean in terms of thepercentage variation or standard error.MR. STERNLIGHT. You can get a good deal of variation evenwhen you're following a borrowings target more closely, just becauseone incident can bring banks in for some special reason and you haveto make allowance for that. Even on a borrowings target, I have oftenhad to report to the Committee that borrowing was considerably higherfor this or that particular reason. But--12/15-16/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not even sure that you could get ananswer without adjusting for the fact that there is not a unitaryelasticity between the change in the funds rate on the one hand andthe change in borrowings on the other. I think it is mainly the casethat a percentage change in borrowings would be a lot larger unlessyou normalize it to the--MR. JOHNSON. I'm trying to think of some way to normalize itand I can't; I'm thinking apples and oranges but I'm just simply--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the answer is self-evident, ifyou think about it. It is feasible to peg the funds rate, but thereis no possibility of pegging borrowing.MR. JOHNSON. If we are trying to hit a borrowings target,I'm just asking whether we get as much variation around that target aswe get around the funds rate that results out of that borrowingstarget. I don't know whether there is any information there, but Istill think it might be interesting to know.MR. KOHN. Okay. The standard deviation of borrowings aroundthe path assumption from early 1984 through mid-1987 has been about$170 million; excluding the year-end periods, it has been about $160million. The root mean square error of the funds rate around what theDesk thought it ought to be was about 20 basis points over that sameperiod.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless you have [unintelligible] toanswer that question.MR. JOHNSON. I don't know how you compare the two, but itsounds like similar magnitudes of variations.MR. ANGELL. [You could] use coefficients of variation, butit would seem to be smaller for the funds rate.MR. JOHNSON. The funds rate? I guess what I'm saying isthat if you could hit your borrowings exactly, it's really a loose wayof targeting the funds rate. There's only a certain band in which thefunds rate is going to vary under a borrowings target. And I guessthe question is: Can you pursue the same goals by a lot of adjustmentsin the funds rate versus a few adjustments in the borrowings target?MR. BOEHNE. You can, although pegging--or whatever word oneuses--the funds rate is much more addictive than the borrowing becausethere is much less--MR. JOHNSON. Well, the political risks are fairly--MR. BOEHNE. But even in the decision-making process of theCommittee, there is much less emotional attachment to a givenborrowing level than there is to the funds rate, so it gives you alittle more flexibility in the process. You're right, theoretically,that you can do it either way. But the way the decisions are made andcarried out and perceived, you end up with more flexibility to changepolicy through this borrowing procedure than through the funds rate--not in theory but in practice.12/15-16/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Don, there was one thing that surprised me. Itseemed to me that after the first few weeks following October 19thbanks would have had some excess reserves which they could carry overto the next period. But with $150 million to $250 million, I wouldpresume that quite a few banks were running very heavy excess reservesand that the carry-over period for those excess reserves is lapsing,so that it's a financial cost. Is that true?MR. KOHN. I think that was true in only one reserve period--right after the reserve period in late October and early November--when there were more excess reserves than could be carried into thenew period. Since then, we have not observed that. Excess reserveshave varied over a wide range, but on average--mostly because of thecarry-ins and carry-outs--they have not really differed substantiallyfrom what we might have expected over time. But we can't see a realeffect on excess reserves, and I don't think we see banks losing.MR. ANGELL. So behavior will not necessarily be modified fromthese very low levels of adjustment plus seasonal borrowings then.MR. KOHN. Of course, we have tried to estimate the excessreserves that banks want to hold and have built that into the path ormade allowance for it in putting out nonborrowed reserves. So, insome sense, we are trying to compensate for this phenomenon that youare trying to identify. But the excess reserve behavior has not beenunusual even though the borrowing behavior has.MR. ANGELL. Okay.MR. HELLER. Well, I found it a very interesting paper andhelpful to have the options in front of us, some of which we haven'tdiscussed for the last year, at least. The current period clearly isa very important period as we are coming off pegging the funds rate.It is the same sort of thing as taking off wage-price controls. Youhave to ask: Where do we go from here? I was wondering why you didn'tgive consideration to a broader array of options such as targetingtotal reserves, or targeting nonborrowed reserves, or other techniquesthat have been used in the past. Maybe you did and you rejected them.In particular, I'm wondering about this because during the last threequarters of the year--I think at virtually every FOMC meeting--we havehad projections for increased reserve growth and we have hadprojections for increased M1 growth and in virtually all of thosecases the projections haven't come true. So, maybe there is somethingin our operating technique that doesn't get us where we want to go. Iwas wondering whether the other techniques might be more suitable toget us to the targets that we actually want to reach. Obviously, alot of people here have been through the periods when targeting totalreserves or nonborrowed reserves was the technique and, being new tothe game, I was wondering why you rejected them.MR. KOHN. A decision to go to nonborrowed or total reservetargeting presupposes the decision to target the aggregates veryclosely and to accept very wide swings in interest rates, as we hadfrom 1979 to 1982, as a result of allowing overshoots or undershootsin required reserves to be absorbed in the borrowing to keep on anonborrowed reserve objective. We didn't have a sense that that's12/15-16/87what the Committee wanted to do; that was our presumption in writingthe paper. Perhaps that can be discussed in item number 6 on theagenda. In discussing that item, if the Committee decided it wantedto target monetary aggregates very closely, we could come up with thatkind of alternative. But an alternative of nonborrowed or totalreserve targeting presupposes that you really want to hit theaggregates and you're willing to accept very wide swings in interestrates.MR. JOHNSON. It assumes you know a lot about money demand.MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. HELLER. Not necessarily. You can also argue that yourgeneral path for nonborrowed reserves might be 5 percent, say, but youwould be willing to tolerate quite a bit of variation to mitigateinterest rates swings that would be implied in following it week byweek right down to the "T." One probably can make compromises alongthat line, too, but it brings in the broader issue of the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony and setting targets. Why do we go through themotions if it isn't something that we take seriously?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. On the question that GovernorJohnson raised before, it does follow that if you use borrowings asthe operational target, you will see more variability in the fundsrate than you would see, obviously, if you target the funds rate. Butfrom my perspective, that's a desirable result for two reasons. Onereason is that the short-run variability in the funds rate often hasvery valuable informational content. It may be telling you somethingthat you don't know or can't find out if you literally have the fundsrate pegged. The second reason I think it's desirable is something ofan extension of Ed Boehne's point: not only does pegging the federalfunds rate tend to result in people being more inhibited about movingit than they perhaps otherwise would be, but neither borrowings northe funds rate is what we are ultimately concerned with. What we areultimately concerned with is the economy. The experience of the1970s--a period that was much more tranquil in many respects than the1980s--leaves me at least with a very bitter taste in my mouth,because the implication of an approach to policy that seeks to peginterest rates is that, in fact, we can do that with great precision.But we end up with an economic result that is far, far removed fromwhat we are after.MR. JOHNSON. No, my view would be that you'd only want todo that if you had the flexibility to adjust it very often in a waythat met your larger goals. I think the problem before was that theinterest rate got so politicized that the Federal Reserve didn'treally feel it had a political--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I think it's more than beingpoliticized. First of all, as I said, I think there is an inhibitionto changing the federal funds rate, quite apart from the politicalside of it, but there shouldn't be. And Peter touched on this: oncethe market knows that that's what you are doing that's what thefederal funds rate is going to be. It simply loses--12/15-16/87MR. JOHNSON. But I think that's true of the funds rate underthe borrowing target. Once the market knows the borrowing target, thefunds rate is going to move in a narrow range. It's only when youmiss that borrowing target that you get a lot of variation in thefunds rate.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well--MR. JOHNSON. If you set a borrowing target, your ability tohit it depends on how good your estimates of other reserves are; ifyour other reserve estimates are off, then you're going to get a lotof variation in the funds rate, which is going to affect yourborrowing and throw your borrowing off.MR. ANGELL. But that reserve estimate being off can haveinformation in it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It can be off for a lot of reasons.MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's right, it can be off. One of thevulnerabilities to targeting borrowed reserves is that you have toestimate so many things in order to decide what your open marketoperation should be for the day. So you use the funds rate asinformation that your reserve estimates may be a little off.MR. HELLER. But, the other way around would work, too. I'mnot arguing for it, but if you fix the fed funds rate and then you seethe borrowing fluctuating, that also gives you information.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, you can do it either way.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think so.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman Corrigan expressedit just exactly the way I would. If there is, as I sense, a desire toreturn to a borrowing target, then it seems to me that the questionis: How do we best get away from this situation in which the market isin danger of interpreting our actions as pegging the fed funds rate?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not "in danger of". They aremaking that judgment. Now the real danger is--MR. ANGELL. Of course they are.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --how do you get off of it withoutcreating--MR. ANGELL. Having them think that means that getting off ofit is somewhat problematic because, in the period following thismeeting, if we begin to read things differently they may assume thatwe have made a policy change when we don't think we have made a policychange.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's always the case.MR. JOHNSON. Well, to even consider getting back totargeting borrowing, which I think is just as good an approach astargeting the funds rate, you have to have a predictable relationship12/15-16/87between borrowings and the funds rate. You don't have that now. Youcan't take any given spread right now and predict the level ofborrowing that is going to result.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me it has been very predictable;borrowings have been very close to a $200 -$250 million range and inthese weeks we have had a federal funds rate very close to 6-3/4percent. So, it seems to me, it is somewhat predictable.MR. JOHNSON. Well, let's ask the experts.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not from the context of the past.MR. JOHNSON. Not from what I've seen.MR. STERNLIGHT. These last few weeks borrowing has divergedfrom what we would have predicted based on experience, looking back afew quarters.MR. PARRY. Borrowing would have been $400 million.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom Melzer.MR. MELZER. Don or Peter, the question I want to ask isthis: Other than the experience in the marketplace, do we have anyevidence of a shift in the borrowings function? I think we have tolook at that. The reason I'm asking is that in the most recentreserve period we missed by roughly $80 million, I believe. Isn't$220 million where borrowings came in?MR. KOHN. Right, relative to the $300 million [in the path].MR. MELZER. Okay. If we had forced the target at $300million, that would have meant only $1 billion to $1-1/2 billion inborrowings on the last Wednesday; I don't know that that would haveproduced disastrous results, being the end of a two-week statementperiod. Even if we had forced that level of borrowings on a Wednesdayand had had that measure of volatility, generally over that period theequilibrium funds rate might still have been perceived to be 6-3/4 to6-7/8 percent. My question about evidence stems from this: I askedour discount officer whether he had seen anything unexpected in ourDistrict, and he hadn't in terms of unwillingness to borrow. But theissue came up, I guess, at a recent meeting of the discount officersthat you might have attended. They have seen a shift in theborrowings function, but it's not really associated with October 19thin particular; it has been going on for a much longer period of time.So, we are talking about an operating procedure here that was based onthe response to October 19th, and I don't think the shift we arelooking at was necessarily associated with that. I should give Don achance to respond, but I have one final comment. If we were to goback [to a borrowing target], I think year-end would be an ideal timeto go back because there will be seasonal pressures, as there oftenare at the end of a quarter. In fact, if we didn't, and we stabilizedthe funds rate through the year-end, we might encounter some serioustechnical problems in getting those reserves back out.MR. KOHN. Let me address this question of the shift in theborrowing function. As I heard the reports from that discount12/15-16/87officers' meeting, they were discussing a kind of trend since passageof the Monetary Control Act in the way they have been administeringthe window over a period of time, rather than anything that hadhappened very recently. When our staff came back from that meeting weran some equations trying to detect that trend and it was difficult tofind. We also responded to their concerns and what we heard by tryingto reinforce in their minds that there has been no change inRegulation A and that any tightening up on the supply side wasinappropriate. This is a theme that we play constantly from this end.I think the most recent shift has been very large, as Governor Johnsonsaid, relative to the $400 million to $450 million we might haveexpected. That really seems to have occurred very recently. I don'tknow if I can pinpoint October 19th, but I don't think it is relatedto anything that the discount officers were discussing at theirmeeting.In terms of what we hear or see in the data, Peter has heardanecdotally from at least one large institution and they in turnthought they knew of other large institutions that were staying out ofthe market and saving up their chips for year-end. Secondly, in thedata, we do see that the lack of borrowing is very much at the largeinstitutions with deposits over $3 billion. At small- and medium-sized institutions, regional institutions, the borrowing may havedropped a little but not nearly so much as you might expect, givenwhat seems to have happened with the large institutions. That led meto think that it's not just the stock market decline, but the wholeatmosphere around banks--uncertainties about their credit, quality ofassets, and other such things--that has been making them be very, verycareful. It's not related necessarily to the stock market; that justcame in on top of a situation that was already bad.MR. BOYKIN. That's also what we hear.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I was just thinking that it certainly would bevery desirable to get back to where we were, with the emphasis onborrowing, but it seems to me that as long as we have the demand forborrowings along its current track that will be extremely difficult todo. With the relationship between the discount rate and market ratesat its present level, we are so close to frictional levels, youralternative (4) probably ought to be deferred until we see somethingthat would be more of a traditional relationship in terms of demandfor borrowing.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Higher interest rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think there are two key questionshere that we need to consider. One is whether or not the funds rategives us the right signals if we target borrowed reserves, which hasbeen addressed by the staff. The other is whether or not it's reallyeasier--from a political standpoint, or to follow up on JerryCorrigan's point, because of inertia--to [make a policy] move underthe borrowed reserve procedure. Generally, the federal funds rateprobably does move in the right direction to give the correct signalwhen we are using a borrowed reserve target. But there are times when12/15-16/87it doesn't. For example, in 1984, around the time of the ContinentalIllinois Bank crisis, Chuck Partee had to reassure the markets throughan article in The New York Times that we were targeting borrowedreserves and that the rise in the federal funds rate did stem frombanks' unwillingness to borrow--that it really didn't have anything todo with a tightening of policy at that particular time. Also, rightbefore the market crash on the 19th, I think there was a perception inthe market that we probably would tighten at a time when we reallydidn't want that to happen. In general, a borrowing target probablyworks [to give the right signal] but it doesn't always work that way.There's a lot to Jerry's argument that there is inertia whenoperating under a federal funds target; the Committee, just because itdoesn't know where the funds rate ought to go, is less apt to move.There is also some substance, I think, to the political argument thatit gives us a certain degree of protection if we can say we reallydon't control the federal funds rate, we control borrowed reserves.At least at one time I think that did alleviate some of the concernsof Congress and gave us some protection. I'm not sure that's the casemuch anymore, except maybe in the case of some Congressmen. Themarket seems to look through this and be reasonably certain that wehave in mind a certain level or range for the federal funds rate.Moreover, if the borrowing really doesn't change and the federal fundsrate does change, they tend to think that's really what we want. So,I would be inclined to do something like alternative (3), which is togo back to borrowed reserve targeting but pay a little more attentionto the federal funds rate when it is not behaving in the way we thinkit ought to, and deal with it on an ad hoc basis. But my real hope isthat we can do what Bob Heller suggested--if we can ever get theaggregates behaving more normally--and that is, make someinstitutional changes and move toward a nonborrowed reserve target,which would have certain desirable automatic features that wouldenable us to ease or tighten without having to take discretionaryactions. I would hope that at some point we can move in thatdirection because now what the market gets is largely demand-determined and I think there ought to be a larger element of supply-determined in there than we have now because of the misbehavior of theaggregates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'd like to think of this in two stages. One iswhat I think is useful in normal or typical times, if there are suchthings. In those times, I'm perfectly willing to support an approachthat emphasizes a borrowings target, even though I have learned thatbecause we don't have nice stable relationships, we cannot predictexactly what a certain level of borrowings will produce in the way offed funds rates. But there are times when conditions are more unusualand abnormal, and I personally believe we are still in one of thosemodes at the moment. And in times like these, I think that we oughtto pay a lot more attention to fed funds because the markets are very,very nervous and skittish--not as much as they were October 20ththrough October 26th or 28th or whatever, but I don't think it's backto normal. I would hate to see us give the message inadvertently thatwe were tightening or engineering a major policy change because fedfunds rates shot up at the end of the year when we really didn't wantto give that message. I don't think that everybody out there in thereal economy and in the markets is that comfortable with what's going12/15-16/87on. Therefore, I would just urge us in the next few weeks to betriply sensitive, even though in two months or so we may go back towhat we were doing prior to October 19th, emphasizing the borrowingtargets. But I personally wouldn't feel comfortable with going backto business as usual starting tomorrow.MR. ANGELL. If banks are saving up to have free access tothe window, would they be most likely to choose the two-week periodending the 30th or would they choose that [next] four-day period?MR. STERNLIGHT. The particular comment that I heard relatedto just that four-day period beginning the 31st.MR. ANGELL. So, if that's the case, then you might expect avery large jump in borrowing--MR. STERNLIGHT. That could be.MR. ANGELL. That might also mean that borrowing could be atlower numbers during the period that begins the day after tomorrow.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. PARRY. I think it's important to know that banks havebeen very poor at making estimates of what their demands would be atthe end of the year. Typically, it has been almost a perfect,opposite indicator of what the demands were going to be. Last yearthere was a large demand that some people said was associated with thenew tax legislation. To assume that that's going to carry on into1987, I think requires some--MR. ANGELL. But, Bob, people in the marketplace are makingthat assumption and have been positioning themselves for over a month.MR. PARRY. Well, the mere fact that they are positioningthemselves, for example, in the CD market to go out beyond year-endprobably--MR. ANGELL. That's right.MR. PARRY. It probably indicates that you won't get theborrowing at the end of the year. That's what I'm saying.MR. JOHNSON. That's right.MR. STERN. But if you do, it should not come as any bigsurprise. This is certainly one of the most well advertised potentialevents in a long time.MR. ANGELL. Then, the fed funds rate would tend to droprather dramatically in that period.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that. That's why I'm saying that,with all these instabilities, we probably need to continue to focus onthe funds rate for a while until we feel more satisfied that we areback to normal. I favor going back to a borrowed reserve target whenwe feel more confident about the relationship between the funds rateand the discount rate spread and borrowings. But I just don't see any-10-12/15-16/87evidence that we are there, and it certainly seems to me that we arenot going to get any closer to it between now and the end of the year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think a useful way to look at this question ofwhether you want to go back is, as Martha pointed out, to look atwhere you want to get to. There probably is general agreement, and Ishare that view, that we ought to get back to a borrowing objective.It's a question of when and how. My sense is that the longer we wait,the more difficult it's going to be. It may be a long time before weget back to normal times. While there clearly are still unusualpressures, I think the longer we wait the more difficult it will be toget back. And we have more at stake here than just the technical sideof how we operate. Clearly, there are technical difficulties becauseit's hard to measure the demand and the relationships. But beyondthat, there is this credibility issue in the marketplace; and my senseis that the longer we stay with this procedure, the more thecredibility issue is going to come to the fore. Also, I think it'sjust good to have some specific kinds of goals, internally. So, Ithink we ought to begin the shift back and do something along thelines of alternative (3), which still gives a fair amount of emphasisto the funds rate but sets us on a path back toward where we want tobe. That is where I come out on this for now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's right. In fact, I thinkwe're already beginning to see the problem emerge. I have been ratherstruck that in the last two or three days the funds rate all of asudden has been locked.MR. ANGELL. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It hasn't budged at all.MR. ANGELL. It's the 1970s all over again.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's an extraordinary thing to watch thescreen and see high: 6-3/4 percent; low: 6-3/4 percent; last: 6-3/4percent. I know that the markets are not functioning. I think themore interesting question is the one that Ed Boehne has raised--namely, that the longer you wait to effect the transition back tosomething else, invariably, the greater the jolt. What we have tothink about is not only the question of do we, as I suspect everyonedoes, want to get off this procedure at some point, but also we haveto figure out how we do it. If we have this very large "add factor"in our equations between the funds rate on the one hand and borrowingrequirements on the other, the implication of shifting back beforethings have returned to normal is that we know what the phase-down ofthat add factor is going to be--unless Tom Melzer is right that thisis really just a long-term trend and it's never going to go back.But, right at the moment, if we were to shift and not have the coverof the year-end period, the actual transition mechanism would have tobe very subtle. And the longer we wait, the greater the length of thetransition. I guess I come down pretty much where Governor Johnsondoes. I get the impression that we are not there yet; in other words,I think abnormal yield spreads are still there and skittishness isstill there. But, frankly, I think we are now getting to the pointwhere whatever benefits we are getting out of this funds rate-11-12/15-16/87procedure are rapidly falling relative to the benefits of thestability it's creating. I think it has been very effective; it hascreated a great deal of stability in the market. But, very shortly,it's going to start to become counterproductive. The only question iswhen.MR. JOHNSON. What would you try to do as a first step?Would you try to take current borrowings and the result from thecurrent funds rate-discount rate spread and try to target that unlesssomething really changes dramatically? Or what?MR. KOHN. Well, I think that's where I'd start. It dependson the Committee's decision tomorrow. Suppose, for the sake ofargument, that the Committee wanted to maintain something like currentreserve conditions. I don't know what the outcome of this currenttwo-week period will be, but I'd be tempted to write down something onthe order of $250 million of borrowings, or maybe a little lower--perhaps $225 or $200 million--and then be alert to see how things werecoming in. That's very low, and I would expect it to be higher afterthe new year. I think you're right, Governor Johnson, that there's alot of uncertainty; but I also think that we can interpret incominginformation and adjust the borrowing objective if it looks like we arewrong. Now, there's a very fine line between that and [focusing onthe] federal funds rate.MR. JOHNSON. I guess I'd worry that what Bob Parry is sayingis right--that everybody has gone to the CD market to lock up theirfunds and that all of a sudden, if there is no willingness whatsoeverto borrow toward the year-end, we could get extreme funds ratepressures out of that scenario.MR. PARRY. One of the interesting things, of course, is that30-day CD rates are about 25 basis points higher than the 90-dayrates.MR. KOHN. Definitely.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, that's right.MR. BLACK. Unless the uncertainty is completely behind us, Ithink if we were to try to go in that direction, we'd have to make apublic announcement that we thought enough of the uncertainty wasbehind us that we were going back to a borrowed reserve target. Weshould do that so the swings in the federal funds rate that wouldprobably result would not be misinterpreted.MR. PARRY. Don't you think the market will figure that outpretty quickly?MR. BLACK. Yes, pretty quickly; but the first two or threedays they would read all sorts of changes in policy into that, I wouldthink.MR. ANGELL. Well, this market is going to get just asfragile as we cause it to be: and the longer we cause it to believethat the fed funds rate is 6-3/4 percent, the more fragile it's goingto be about getting away from there. It seems to me that we[unintelligible] variance in the fed funds rate and yet have a 50-12-12/15-16/87basis point limit on it if we want. If we would like to have a 50basis point limit on it this week, and we want it to be in a range of6-1/2 to 7 percent, then we could do that. But at least we would getthe market used to some variation. Then when we get to the first ofthe year the transition is not going to be nearly so abrupt.MR. MELZER. I think you can use the cover of year-end, as Ialluded to before. I think it would be a mistake to start right afterthe FOMC meeting; that's how you would get the misinterpretation thatBob's afraid of.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I agree that the longer we wait, the moredifficult it is. I agree with going to alternative (3), which I wouldinterpret as a gradual move back, but certainly one with enoughlatitude to back off if we're not getting the right reaction. Withrespect to how to do it, I don't know that we can be this precise--andmaybe this is an oversimplification--but I would say go foralternative (3) but postpone it until after year-end. I would staywhere we are for the next couple of weeks, or certainly through theyear-end, and then start the gradual move. At that point, there wouldbe enough flexibility that we could back off if we're not getting thereactions in the market that we're anticipating.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As to the fundamentalquestion of whether to stay with the federal funds rate or go to anonborrowed or a borrowed reserve target, I think I would be one ofonly three or four here who sat around this table when we targetedfederal funds back in the 1970s. And I can tell you that ourexperience was not very good, as everybody knows. There was a lot oftugging and pulling to go an eighth of a point on the federal fundsrate. As a matter of fact, we even got to the point of setting a zoneof indifference where the federal funds could move a quarter of apoint between two established points. And the fact is that theinformation that came from that procedure was well behind the factsand got us into trouble, in my view. I think we have to move back toa procedure of targeting nonborrowed reserves. Also, I would join TomMelzer in his proposal to do it, first of all, as quickly as possible,and secondly, under the umbrella of uncertainty that surrounds theyear-end. I would opt for alternative (3) in the sense that weshouldn't totally ignore the federal funds rate over this next three-to four-week period. But I think the focus should be on the borrowinglevel and--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you said nonborrowed reserves. Didyou mean that?MR. GUFFEY. No, no, I beg your pardon, I didn't. I shouldnot have said that; I meant a borrowing target. And I'd do it underthe umbrella, or the smokescreen, of the year-end uncertainty.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It seems to me that nobody in themarketplace would expect the Federal Reserve literally to seek to-13-12/15-16/87target the federal funds rate on an hour-by-hour basis over this year-end period. I think that would be a terrible mistake. I felt that wedid too much even last year, in terms of the situation. So I wouldassociate myself very strongly with Tom Melzer's suggestion that,given that people expect some movement in this period, we should takeadvantage of it. As I've mentioned to you before, it seems to me thatone way or another we are probably going to have to remind people, nomatter what we do with policy, that we are coming into a period inwhich we could see rather extraordinary amounts of churning andvolatility in the money market. I don't think we should ever getourselves to the point where we literally are going to run policy soas to avoid that kind of working of the marketplace, which I considerhealthy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't sense any desire around thistable for that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, if you say you're going tocontinue literally day-in and day-out to target the federal funds rateover the next three weeks that's what you're saying.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I don't know if we physically dothat.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, my point is--MR. STERN. Pumping a lot of reserves in there.MR. JOHNSON. We don't really know. We could see the fundsrate collapse at year-end just as easily as we could see it soar.MR. ANGELL. That's right.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It doesn't seem to me that we wouldwant to overreact in those circumstances either. There is at least a50/50 chance that at some point over this interval, one way or theother, a very large aberration will set in. I don't know which sideit will be on, but regardless, I don't think that the operating policyof the Federal Reserve should be to try to offset it literally dollar-for-dollar. But if we say that the funds rate is going to be at6-3/4 percent, period, that's what we are saying, in effect.MR. ANGELL. Today is the next to the last day of a two-weekreserve maintenance period, and the fed funds rate is locked on 6-3/4percent. If it locks on 6-3/4 percent through tomorrow, I think wewould have told everyone that's where we are.MS. SEGER. What if it comes in at 9-1/8 percent?MR. ANGELL. It comes in at 9-1/8 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Everyone will say it's the last day.MR. ANGELL. People then say, well, it's the last day.MS. SEGER. Yes, but having something like that in thecontext of having had flat reserves since April, a declining M1 in-14-12/15-16/87December, and missing our M2 targets--. I think you have to look atit as the whole ball and not just--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but suppose it comes in at 2percent; substitute 2 percent for 9 percent--MS. SEGER. Yes.MR. ANGELL. If you don't want to go to 9 percent, then put aceiling of 7-1/2 percent on it: or put a floor if you want to. I justwant to have more variance than we have been getting.MR. GUFFEY. That would be the zone of indifference.MR. ANGELL. That's alternative number (3) as a transitionback to where we want to be.MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that we are arguing about prettytrivial issues. If you take a borrowing target and the possiblevariations of the funds rate around that--I don't know, maybe Don canhelp me--except in very extreme circumstances, where we grossly missreserve estimates or something, there can't be much variation of thefunds rate around that borrowing target.MR. KOHN. 20 basis points is what we--MR. JOHNSON. Yes. Don has quoted you the standard error: 20basis points.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There are some possibilities in it.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but I'm just saying we're talking aboutangels on the head of a pin here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, as Governor Angell was talkingabout the federal funds rate being what the market thought we wantedit to be, I remembered a day back in the early 1960s, which was beforePeter Sternlight was Manager, when the open market wire said, ineffect, that the federal funds rate was hanging at around 2-7/8percent, or whatever it was at the time, out of respect for what themarket thinks the Federal Reserve System's intentions are. That hasalways stuck in my mind and I think there is some of that right now.MR. ANGELL. Well, of course. It is because people out thereare saying, "My goodness, 6-3/4 percent is the rate. I guess maybeI'll sell funds. I'm not going to sell for less than that if that'swhat the rate is."MR. BLACK. And I'm not going to get more.MR. ANGELL. I'm not going to get more.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Si Keehn, do you have any thoughts onthis issue?-15-12/15-16/87MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I think I hear a consensus formoving away from what we are currently doing and in the direction ofalternative (3), and I certainly would favor that; but in my mind,it's really a question of timing. I'm a little uncertain as to howthe rest of the year is going to play out and what kind of pressureswill be emerging. Rather than using the year-end as a blind, if youwill, to accomplish a change, I'd favor going through that period, andthen as soon thereafter as possible, begin to implement the change.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that was one of therecommendations--is that right? Yes, that after the first of theyear, coming off the instability of year-end, is an ideal time tophase in, if we're going to do that.MR. KEEHN. I'd be in favor of that--in other words,alternative (1). Or more precisely, I guess, I favor alternative (1)for now, but moving to (3) as rapidly as we can after the turn of theyear.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. It seems to me that we are struggling with theissue of trying to tell the markets where we are. Perhaps one way todo it--and I think Jerry has already referred to it--is simply toindicate that we are returning to an operating procedure that is morenormal. There are a couple of reasons for doing that. We are tryingnot to give a miscue with respect to two things, it seems to me:first, whether or not we have tightened or eased policy; and secondly,whether or not we have moved to a different kind of interest ratepolicy. Because we don't want misconceptions out there about thosetwo issues, it seems to me we're better off providing more informationrather than less. Now, Peter did that before by protesting--by comingin early--and the market caught on very quickly. I'm not sure he cando that in reverse. So, I guess to some extent I would support Jerry.I'm not sure I caught the gist of his comments correctly, but[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions or issues that anyone wants to discuss on this question? If not, why don't we move onto item 5 on the agenda, the definition of the borrowing objective andthe appropriate discussion. Mr. Lindsey.MS. SEGER. What was the decision on the first?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. None.MS. SEGER. I just wanted to make sure I understood what wedecided.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the point is that there is no needto make a decision on this. Essentially, that will be part of ourdecision tomorrow.MS. SEGER. Okay.MR. LINDSEY. [No transcript record exists of Mr. Lindsey'sremarks, in which he summarized a memorandum (circulated to the FOMC-16-12/15-16/87on October 29, 1987) that he co-authored with Mr. Gillum. Seeappendix for the memorandum and a covering note from Mr. Kohn.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Sternlight, would you like to addanything?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think so.MR. JOHNSON. I understand what you said, but the onlyquestion I have is: If there is a seasonal component to seasonalborrowing of any sort, why have it in there? If it has no effectwhatsoever on the variation, what is the point of having it in thereunless it's just more confusing or more complicated at this stage topull it out?MR. LINDSEY. Don, do you--MR. KOHN. Well, I think there is a certain amount ofinertia.SPEAKER(?). Well, it's a certain amount in a series.MR. KOHN. Dave commented on the original reason it was inthere: It was felt that seasonal borrowing behaved a lot likeadjustment borrowing in that it was sensitive to interest rates. Ifyou have more seasonal borrowing, other things equal, then you'regoing to have a little more pressure in the funds market.[Unintelligible] seemed to be just as good. So, given that you hadsomething else that was also related to the funds-rate/discount-ratespread, why not include it in the target variable? Right now--MR. JOHNSON. To me, that implies that you have decided thatthere is more of that [interest-sensitive] component to it than thereis seasonal.MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. If there is more of a seasonal nature toseasonal borrowing, it seems to me that you'd want to leave it outjust because it's seasonal.MR. KOHN. Yes, well--MR. JOHNSON. There's a large seasonal component and whetherit has any effect on the--MR. LINDSEY. Given the results, my view would be that the[borrowing] relationships have been just as close under the currentprocedure as they would have been taking it out completely. It seemsto me that there is a presumption on the part of those who wouldadvocate taking it out that the [statistical] results actuallysuggested it would improve things to take it out. Since the resultsdon't show that, I think the inertia you referred to--having to dowith the market misunderstanding, that they've gotten used to whatwe're doing, and so on--would argue for just standing pat.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, I buy it. I think a good argument fornot taking it out is that it might be confusing to Fed watchers who-17-12/15-16/87have gotten used to it being done this way. But that's the onlyargument I can think of for not taking it out.MR. KOHN. Obviously, it could be done easily; but if it wereout, our reserve projectors would then have an interest-sensitivefactor that-they would be projecting every week. It would become partof "nonborrowed reserves" the same way extended credit is. Generally,those factors affecting nonborrowed reserves aren't interestsensitive; they are market factors. Now, we would be putting a littleinterest-sensitive element in there and we would still end upestimating that seasonal relationship in order to help the reserveprojectors make the right projections. So, I'm not sure how muchyou'd gain. Perhaps that's why there is no improvement on reservethings.MR. JOHNSON. Another vote for funds rate targeting!MR. HELLER. Well, in view of the fact that we are funds ratetargeting anyhow, we can't possibly confuse the market by changing ourprocedure right now. So I think that argument doesn't hold at thepresent time. David, I read the paper a long, long time ago. Yousaid it targeted only adjustment borrowing and there was nosignificant difference in the fed funds rate. Now, I know it wasn'tsignificant, but which direction was it actually moving?MR. LINDSEY. Well, actually it moved a little in favor ofthe present procedure. If you look on Table B-3 of the memorandum,using the spread as the variable the equation tries to explain, the Rsquare is a little higher--.75 versus .70; and the standard error ofestimate is a little lower--32 basis points using adjustment plusseasonal borrowing versus, say, 35 basis points using adjustmentborrowing alone. You could argue that that only comes about becausewe were examining a regime that had been generated under the currentprocedure. You could argue that if we really had switched some yearsago to using only adjustment borrowing, then there might be reason tothink that result might have reversed and adjustment borrowing alonemight have shown up better. But that's pretty speculative and I'm notsure it would be true. I would view these as little to choosebetween, really.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Are there any advantages in your mind to makingit more difficult for the market to understand the significance of theborrowing levels? In other words, would there be any disadvantages topublishing a special situation borrowing number?MR. KOHN. Only if it were known that only one or twoinstitutions were in the discount window and, therefore, we would betelling the public what those institutions were borrowing. It is ourpolicy not to do that.MR. MORRIS. But how would they know there are only one ortwo institutions?MR. KOHN. Well, they might know that a particular bank inNew York had a wire problem or that a particular bank in Oklahoma orTexas had just come in to the window. The [unintelligible] banks12/15-16/87would know. If there were a lot of banks involved, it wouldn't be aproblem; but if a special situation involved one bank or another, Icould see a confidentiality problem.MR. MORRIS. I see.MR. GUFFEY. I can tell you, Frank, having had several ofthese special situations, that the market knows about as early as theFederal Reserve does that a bank is in for special borrowing. They dodiscount it, in a sense, I think.MR. STERNLIGHT. Much of it got into extended credit.MR. GUFFEY. Pardon me?STERNLIGHT(?). When it gets to--MR. GUFFEY. Before it gets to extended credit, it's fairlywell known and the banks are fairly well identified. But suggestingthat we would actually--MR. MORRIS. In that case, it doesn't make any differencewhether we publish it or not.MR. KOHN. They don't know the amounts.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, the dollars--MR. BLACK. Well, a New York press officer does announce thatthere is a special situation borrowing in there without giving anexact amount.MR. ANGELL. So-called seasonal borrowing, it seems to me, issimply adjustment borrowing without a time limit on it for thoseinstitutions that qualify. It has all the characteristics ofadjustment borrowing and it's not taken unless there is an ability toutilize the funds. That is, if banks could lock up that seasonalborrowing and sell it in the fed funds market, then it would be likeextended credit. So, it seems to me, it's more like adjustmentborrowing, as the statistical tests suggested.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else on this subject? GovernorSeger.MS. SEGER. I just have one question as I sit here listeningto comments about why bankers borrow on a seasonal basis. Do we notadminister the discount window in regard to requests for seasonalborrowing in the same hardnosed manner that we do for adjustmentborrowing?MR. ANGELL. No, no.MR. KOHN. No.MS. SEGER. Maybe we should. That's the answer to make surethat their---19-12/15-16/87MR. MORRIS. Well, it's hardnosed in the sense that we havecertain standards that they have to meet.MR. KOHN. They have to demonstrate a seasonal swing in thedifference between their loans and deposits over the previous twoyears. And, on that basis--MR. BOYKIN. It's one situation where we go out once a yearand advertise come on in and see if you can qualify.MS. SEGER. I'm surprised.MR. STERN. Well, if I recall, the origins of that were thatit was precisely to try to get--MR. ANGELL. "Get"--that's right.MR. STERN. --to get at banks that had these seasonals and soforth. That was very much an "eyes open"--MR. ANGELL. Just a bit of populism peeking out.MR. BLACK. It was in the days of trying to sell membershipand this was one of the--MR. BOYKIN. Also, we don't have very many takers onseasonal.MR. ANGELL. That's right.MR. GUFFEY. Some of you don't.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Si Keehn, do you have any comments onthis?MR. KEEHN. No. I very much agree with Governor Angell thatit has all the characteristics of adjustment borrowing, and that beingthe case, it's appropriate to include it. But this certainly would bean inappropriate time to be making a change.MR. JOHNSON. One last trivial comment: I agree that this isnot the time to make a change, but is it too complicated to try toseparate out the adjustment versus the seasonal component of seasonalborrowing?MR. ANGELL. How many Johnsons on the head of a pin?MR. LINDSEY. Actually, in a sense, we have estimatedseasonal factors for the seasonal borrowing. Presumably then, onewould call that the seasonal component with the rest being theadjustment component. That's what we adjusted the total for in thetests I referred to earlier.MR. JOHNSON. Oh, that's what you--MR. LINDSEY. That, literally, is what we did. And when wedid that, it didn't make a dime's worth of difference in the results-20-12/15-16/87in terms of the predictability of the funds rate. So, we actuallymade a stab at doing that.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything else on this subject? If not,let's move on to agenda item 6, with discussion of the monetaryaggregates as long-range policy objectives in 1988. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions of Mr. Kohn? I can't believehe was that definitive!MR. PARRY. Don, I was trying to remember a discussion thatwe had last February. My recollection is that the econometric workthat was done by your staff, and obviously some of the other staffs,would have supported setting targets which were somewhat lower thanthe ones we did set and would have indicated a distinction between M2and M3 growth of perhaps a percentage point. And, of course, that'sthe way things have worked out. But, the complicating factor is thatthe economy has changed a bit since we were looking at it at thattime. Nominal growth in the economy has been higher; probably, if wehad had that nominal growth when we did the analytic work, we wouldhave expected faster growth in the aggregates. But I don't rememberwhat we were assuming about interest rates.MR. KOHN. I don't think we were assuming they would risethat rapidly. My memory of the February exercise was that we saidthat M2 would grow within its range, but in the lower part of it.MR. PARRY. Right. Right.MR. KOHN. Then, in July, I think we tried to make a strongcase to the Committee that at that point there was a distinct dangerthat even without a further increase in interest rates the aggregatescould well fall short of their ranges. And if interest rates rose--which, in fact, they have--the chances were pretty good of theirfalling [below the ranges]. So, perhaps the point here is that themodels are not perfect, but they generally catch the drift. And theyare not bad in that they can explain most of the deceleration in M2and most of the deceleration in M1. So, we have a reasonably good,though not perfect, fix on the demand side; but the problem is that inorder to target an aggregate, you have to know where interest ratesand income are going--particularly interest rates. And, if itrequires much higher or lower interest rates at the beginning of theyear than you think, then you anticipate that in order to get theincome growth you desire, you're going to have much lower or highermonetary aggregates consistent with that income growth.MR. PARRY. Well, the point I wanted to make here is that theaggregates--or at least M2, in this case--are well below their currenttarget ranges, but I don't fault our analysis. I think our analysiswas leading us down the right track, but we were in some waysreluctant to make that kind of a change in the targets--at least inFebruary and to some extent in July--because we thought that might betelegraphing to the markets greater restrictiveness than, in fact, wewere trying to accomplish. Do you agree with that to some extent?-21-12/15-16/87MR. KOHN. Yes, to some extent.MR. PARRY. Good.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. First of all, in view of all this impressiveevidence, I was wondering how people used to conduct monetary policybefore we had all these high-speed computers.MR. KOHN. Targeting the federal funds rate, I think.MR. HELLER. Right. I'm looking at your chart 18, which in away talks about what you can call the efficiency with which you knowof the various measures. Especially for the first year or two, or thefirst six to eight quarters after your shock, M1A seems to be so muchmore superior to M2 than M1.MR. KOHN. This follows page 16 in the thick memo.MR. HELLER. Yes. One could argue that that is a verypowerful argument in favor of M1A, especially over a horizon of a yearor two. I was wondering, first of all, why you don't give a lot ofemphasis to that particular measure. And, second, would you addressthe argument that the narrow aggregates are more closely under ourcontrol and therefore particularly suited as targets, rather than asbroader indicators of what is going on in the economy?MR. KOHN. Okay. With regard first to M1A, I guess wehaven't given it more emphasis because we really didn't trust theresults. This is derived from results over the 1970s into the veryearly 1980s and is specific to the model; that is the period overwhich the model is fit. Over that period, we find that the incomeelasticity of demand deposits, M1A--which was M1 for much of thatperiod in any case--was very high relative to the interest elasticity.When we extend the models out to the last few years, we find fairlylarge misses in the demand deposit model. Furthermore, those missesseem to be correlated with interest rates--that is, we had much moregrowth in demand deposits in 1985 and 1986 than the model thatgenerated this chart would have predicted. And we had much lessgrowth in 1987 than the model that generated this chart would havesaid we should have. Our conclusion was that this ratio didn'trepresent reality in 1987--that interest elasticities were probablymuch higher than in the time period that went into this modelingexercise and the historic relationships it represented. That's why wedidn't put more weight on it. In addition, we did look at a morecomplete exercise in which we ran the whole quarterly model assuming acertain path for money growth. And that helps; that puts in some ofthe errors in the equation that feed back into that modeling process,more so than just comparing elasticities. And that showed M1A asbetter than M1 or M2, but the superiority was not nearly as clear asthis. So, even within the period of fit, the errors in the M1Aequation are larger, and it looks like the out-of-sample errors areeven larger. That's why we didn't put so much weight on it.In terms of controllability, it seems to me that we have atradeoff here in terms of what we can control versus what is relatedto income. Obviously, we can control currency and reserves very-22-12/15-16/87closely, but the question is whether they have a reliable relationshipto income. What we are finding is that the narrow aggregates, which Iagree we can control more closely, are less well related to income.They seem to be more interest elastic than the broader aggregates,which I agree are more difficult to control. But, I do think thatover a targeting period of a year, we could have hit our M2 target ifwe had wanted to. That is, if we had come to the middle of the year,and M2 was at the bottom or below its range and the Committee had saidto Mr. Sternlight, "Operate to hit your M2 target", he could have doneit. Interest rates would have been a lot lower. The whole worldwould have looked different, but we could have operated to controlthat aggregate if that's what the Committee had wanted to do, eventhough it doesn't fit with reserves very closely.MR. PARRY. Are you saying that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Don, I think you made an excellent case for nottargeting M1A or Ml for the coming year. Do you entertain any hope,as I do--although it's becoming a lingering hope, I guess--that atsome point depository institutions are going to alter their pricingprocedures on NOW accounts and OCDs so that they will reduce theinterest elasticity of M1 and make it a better target? Or is therehope that the demand for M1 will become more stable as this adjustmentprocess to deregulation goes further?MR. KOHN. Yes, but I guess the honest answer is that a yearago, I had more hopes than I have now. We have had a year ofadditional experience with NOW account adjustments and part of whathas happened is that they continue to be very sluggish. I harboredthe same hope that you did a year or so ago. And, in fact, the SuperNOW accounts used to adjust more rapidly; but now those accountsbehave as one big lump and tend to adjust more slowly. It could getmore rapid. Or if we do get into a noninflationary situation, or backinto a situation in which interest rates fluctuate over a narrowerrange around a lower level, then you might have a situation in whichthese interest elasticities are less important. But if we have swingsin rates of the sort we have had over the last 7 or 8 years, then Ithink we would have huge movements in velocity as a result. I haven'tgiven up hope entirely, but I have to confess I'm less hopeful than Iwas.MR. BLACK. I will confess to this group that, withconsiderable pain, I share that feeling.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. You used the wealth variable in your demandequations too, right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In M2.MR. KOHN. In the M2 demand equation that was used in thispaper, which is not the same one that is used in the quarterly model,we used wealth only as a short-run adjustment kind of thing--that is,a big change in wealth will cause velocity to deviate for a shortperiod of time from its long-run equilibrium. And, in fact, the-23-12/15-16/87wealth variable that fit best here was one that didn't include stockmarket wealth. Now, in the quarterly model equation, which hasn'tdone as well as the one reported here, it builds up from M1 and addsthe non-M1 part of M2 and then wealth comes into play more directly asthe scale variable rather than income as the scale variable. But wehave found the one reported here to be much more successful over thelast few years.MR. JOHNSON. What wealth variable did you use? What was theone without the stock market?MR. KOHN. I think it was household wealth excluding land andstock market [holdings].MR. JOHNSON. What kind of coefficient is on that?MR. KOHN. It's a very low coefficient; it's not verysignificant and it's very transitory in its effect.MR. JOHNSON. I see. But, it had--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That includes M2, then?MR. KOHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And if you take the stock values outthat would not be an insignificant part of the wealth variable.MR. KOHN. You would have homes and consumer durables; Ithink that probably dominates the levels of the series.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But that means [unintelligible] takingthe M2 out before you do the--MR. KOHN. I'm not aware of--MR. SMALL. We have to find that.MR. KOHN. Excuse me, the model [expert] is here.MR. SMALL. I believe that's right; M2 is still in thatwealth variable as it exists in the model. We have tried excluding itand leaving in the stock market in some of our equations.[Unintelligible.]I would add that that wealth variable is a littleproblematic, as was pointed out. It's something we would prefer notto have hanging around the edges of this equation. But, it has comein significantly [in the regressions] and until we can figure out howto handle it in a better way, in a structural sense, and figure out,for example, what is really determining money demand that isn'tcaptured in services, food, [and other expenditures], it makes a lotof sense to leave it in and sort of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I have a couple of comments that I'd like yourreaction to. As I understand what you're saying, one of the reasons-24-12/15-16/87you're uncomfortable with the narrow aggregates is that thisrelatively high interest elasticity makes them, in some sense, notvery good as automatic stabilizers.MR. KOHN. That's correct.MR. STERN. But I guess I would ask: What is the alternative?It still seems to me that these aggregates are preferable to targetinginterest rates, for example, and trying to adjust interest rates ifyou get a positive or negative spending shock. Secondly, I agree thatthe body of evidence you have here doesn't demonstrate very convincingsuperiority of M1A or M1 relative to M2, but I think you can turn thatstatement around: I don't think it demonstrates the superiority of M2versus M1 or M1A either. In fact, I view all this as somewhat of atossup. I was a little surprised at Bob Black's negative reaction tothis because I don't see any very strong reason for preferring one tothe other on the basis of all we have here.MR. KOHN. M1 does lose most of the horse races, however theyare handicapped. But so far as M1A and M2 are concerned, I have toagree with you--there isn't much to choose from there. But the issueis whether the Committee wants to view this as a question of "Shouldwe target interest rates or should we target the aggregates?" I thinkthe exercise really [addresses the issue of] what weight we want toput on any one thing, given that we're looking at a whole array ofthings.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don, if [unintelligible] implicit inboth M1 and M1A is the required projection of the growth rate, whichis a much larger number than in M2. Can you hear me?MR. KOHN. Yes, of the growth rate, you said.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, the trend.MR. KOHN. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If one is dealing with a trend value ofsay 1 percent, or something like that, versus 0.2 or something closeto 0 with M2, one should at least intuitively argue that the potentialvariation in any particular period in the trend value is more likelyto be mis-estimated with the narrower monetary aggregates than abroader one. At least that's what history seems to suggest. I wasn'taware in the memorandum that that element was brought into the horserace evaluation.MR. KOHN. It was indirectly, in the sense that the way thehorse races were run, to the extent that the trend embodied in theequation was wrong, that would show up in the error. So we simplydiscussed--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unfortunately, the problem is that youcan't pick that up with the particular history you are dealing with.MR. KOHN. I don't know that it would necessarily be the casea priori that one would have more confidence in a trend of 0 than in atrend of 1 or a trend of 1-1/2. I think in this case---25-12/15-16/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would.MR. KOHN. In this case, it's true because the nature of thenarrow aggregates has been changing, with the addition of OCDs into M1and the deletion of those deposits that used to be in demand deposits.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It has.MR. KOHN. So, because of the changing character of theaggregates, I think you're right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think what is relevant here isthe time frame. If I would tell you 20 years, clearly the argumentwould have to be that it's more likely that the M2 trend would be moreprojectable than the M1A or the M1 trend. Therefore, if it's truewith 20 years, then the argument really gets down to what time frameyou're talking about. Well, I've always been worried about thatbecause I was convinced that at some point or other, we would projectand find out it went in the other direction. Bob Parry.MR. PARRY. Don, when you were talking about chart 18, youmade the comment that you thought the current interest elasticity onM1A was probably greater than what showed up in that statisticalexercise. That's probably also true of the other aggregates as well,isn't it? My question is: What has happened to the relativeelasticities of the three aggregates and do you have conclusions onthat?MR. KOHN. I think M2 is less of a concern because a lot ofthe [unintelligible] we are talking about are within M2.MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. KOHN. Surprisingly to me--and I think it's perhaps atouch of luck here--we haven't done all that badly projecting the OCDcomponent of the M1 equation, considering that it has swung around by10 to 20 percentage points in growth rates over the last few years.If I look at the errors in the equation, the largest ones are in thedemand deposit portion of the equation.MR. PARRY. The biggest change would be in M1A?MR. KOHN. That would be my conclusion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Well, I have another idea that I want to lay onthe table. Would this be an appropriate time?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It depends if it's on this subjectmatter or not.MR. MELZER. Well, it has to do with aggregate targets.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's about it.MR. MELZER. I have two comments about the environment we'redealing in. First of all, there is a lot of uncertainty about exactly-26-12/15-16/87how policy is being conducted in the long run. It's not unusual, butI think this is one of those times when there are those kinds ofquestions in the marketplace. And the kind of discussion we arehaving right now is very, very healthy in terms of talking aboutdifferent approaches. But, on top of the uncertainty that I perceivein the marketplace and some of the difficulties with the aggregatesand with interest rate targeting that we have talked about, I'd saythat we are now in a period--and I think it will be exacerbated--whenthere is going to be a conflict between the pressures we facedomestically and the pressures we face internationally in terms of howpolicy is conducted. And, I think there would be no better time tohave some kind of an intermediate target or guide.What I wanted to put on the table was the idea that had beenmentioned earlier of looking at a monetary base target of some sort.There is no question that we can control that, and I think it's a goodindicator of the thrust of policy. I don't have any delusions aboutthe ability to pick a specific growth rate of the base and say wetherefore expect nominal GNP to do "Y". Some of the work we have doneon the base and income relationships would indicate that therelationship is no worse than M2, for example. But, that's not reallywhat I have in mind. I think it is possible to select a relativelynarrow channel in terms of possible growth rates for the base that inthe long run would be consistent with satisfactory economicperformance and, at the same time, preserve in the short run thelatitude to react to all the various types of incoming data that wereact to now. In other words, this approach I'm describing wouldallow for discretion in the short-run conduct of policy but at thesame time--assuming we were to stick with it --it would take away someof the extremes in possible policy results in either direction: thatis, very simply, either too tight a monetary policy, or too easy amonetary policy.Right now, I don't think we have a lot of confidence in theother aggregates and I don't think the marketplace pays that muchattention to them. If we were to substitute some kind of a basetarget, first of all, I think the announcement of that would carrywith it a considerable positive impact just because the market wouldknow in general what policymakers are going to be looking at in theconduct of policy. And this channel that I have talked about wouldtend to eliminate uncertainty and increase credibility. I think theexistence of a target like that--if I'm right about the type ofenvironment that we are in and that we're apt to be in next year in aneven more important way--could be used to diffuse domestic andinternational pressures, to do something in the short-run conduct ofpolicy, particularly to influence rates. And in the long run, ifpursued religiously, I think it would tend to result in more stableand more balanced economic results. So, I guess what I wanted to dowas put the idea on the table. We've done some work, and I think wehave to do a lot more work, but if there were any support for thatkind of idea, maybe with more background work done it's something thatcould be discussed more thoroughly at the February meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would anyone like to comment on that?MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I share Tom's longing for somethinglike that that we can anchor our decisions to; otherwise we havenothing but a series of ad hoc decisions that are disconnected to a-27-12/15-16/87certain degree. I feel very uncomfortable with that because I don'tthink we're really smart enough to do it. If there is something wecan hang our hats on, I sure would feel a lot better. That's why I'mso disappointed that M1 has lost some of that value that it once had.I would encourage experimentation along these lines. There has to besomething out there that we can hang our hats on.MR. JOHNSON. I'd like to comment on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead.MR. JOHNSON. I think that's right. [It would be desirable]to have a sense of credibility that we could set a target and hit itconsistently. But the problem is that I don't think the base velocityhas done much better than the velocity of other aggregates. So, if weconsistently hit a target set on the base, we certainly would havecredibility in hitting the target, but would that credibility extendto economic performance? There is still the question of where to setthe target, and whether or not the target is accurately set relativeto what we want to achieve in terms of the desired results for theeconomy. And I think there is still a big problem with a base targetfrom that point of view.MR. MELZER. Well, just to repeat one thing I said:obviously, you would not use it in the short run to operate policy.But I think you probably could pick a band of something like 2percentage points or so --just looking at data for the 1980s, forexample--that you could argue would give you plenty of latitude ineither direction to get satisfactory economic results, to meet yourlong-term objectives.MR. JOHNSON. Well, one of the problems is that the base isso dominated by currency; it's two-thirds of the base. We have aperiod right now where there's a big surge in currency; and to hit abase target, even with some variation [allowed], we probably wouldhave to drain a substantial amount of reserves.MR. MELZER. Well, this is an extraordinary time.MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. MELZER. It may be one of those times when we wouldn'tstick with the target. But we would have to announce that and wecould explain it very straightforwardly; it doesn't come down toexplanations like, "Well, velocity changed", which is not all thatcredible after a while.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But you don't know what part of thatcurrency item is drug money or what. That used to be a joke, but Isuspect that it's probably getting to be something that would requiresome--MR. JOHNSON. Would you believe it? I heard something on theradio that's just incredible: that samples of currency were taken and9 out of 10 of them had traces of cocaine on them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that right?-28-12/15-16/87MR. JOHNSON. Yes. Did you hear that report? It's justincredible that you can find significant traces of cocaine on 90percent of the currency.MS. SEGER. See, I told you Wayne, it's too dirty!MR. PARRY. That was in Berkeley.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A long time ago, before Tom dropped hisbombshell, Governor Seger wanted to say something. Did we distractyou or--MS. SEGER. No, I just had a question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead. Why don't you raise it so weget back on track?MS. SEGER. I just wanted to ask Don what would happen if allof a sudden Congress saw the light and allowed interest to be paid ondemand deposits. Individuals can go into NOW accounts and, in effect,receive interest on checkable accounts, but corporations or businessescan't. It seems to me that part of the problem is having these twogroups treated in a different way.MR. KOHN. I presume there would be a surge in demanddeposits at that time. Interest is paid implicitly now, to the extentthat firms get credits for their compensating balances in terms ofservices they receive. But, it is also the case that they don't getany credits for excess balances any more; and there are a lot of zerobalance accounts, where the excess is put into RPs or whatever. Theincentive to engage in that kind of deposit-minimizing behaviorobviously would be very much reduced if interest were paid on demanddeposits.MR. MORRIS. Also, the Treasury doesn't collect any revenuewhen balances buy services.MR. PARRY. But that would raise the interest elasticity,wouldn't it?MS. SEGER. Secondly, didn't you say--I read so much forthis meeting I may have just dreamed it--that within the demanddeposit category most of that is, in fact, business accounts? Ifthat's the case, then I think the interpretation ought to bedifferent, because I've never met a big business or small businessthat decides to buy a new dump truck or put an addition on a buildingbecause they have more money in their checking account. I just don'tthink they operate that way. Maybe I would as an individual, or mycousin would, but I think we have to look at how we interpret thesethings because of the change in the ownership of the accounts.MR. KOHN. I think only about 26 percent of demand depositsnow are household deposits; and before the advent of NOW accounts, itwas closer to 40 percent. So, the composition has changed and I thinkthat accounts for some of the change in interest elasticity. I guessI was never a fan of that real balance effect--that you throw money atpeople and they automatically spend it. It seems to me that forhouseholds as well as businesses it was part of a complex process in-29-12/15-16/87which the Federal Reserve changed the liquidity in the economy, andthat changed interest rates, incentives for spending and saving, andexchange rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd like to speak to Mr. Melzer'ssuggestion. I would have great difficulty with anything even remotelyresembling a monetary base operating procedure in the immediate timeframe.MR. GUFFEY. Could you speak up a little, Jerry, please?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm saying, Roger, that in theimmediate time frame I would have great difficulty with anything evenapproaching a monetary base operating target. I say that for severalreasons. First of all, I have never understood the base to beginwith. I have read all the great work that has been done in St. Louisand every place else. But, to me, the thing itself is kind of a pig-in-a-poke. And since I don't really know what it is, I'm not about toput too much reliance on it as a steering mechanism for monetarypolicy. More importantly, in the current circumstances, I'm veryskeptical that the market reaction would be the one that you aresuggesting. Having said that, I certainly share the frustrationsassociated with the current approaches to policy. But, given all thathas happened in the last few years, especially with any formulation ofmonetarism that I'm familiar with, including a base formulation, Ithink the reaction of the marketplace to a policy approach like thatwould be, "Oh no! This ensures a renewed and high degree ofinstability in interest rates." And I suspect that people would taketo the hills rather than raise the flag, because of fears of a greatdeal of instability and volatility in interest rates that we haven'tseen in many years.Finally--I keep coming back to this--I, too, am frustrated bythe lack of a nice firm handle for monetary policy. But let's notlose sight of the fact that despite all the limitations, theperformance of the economy over the past several years has hardly beensomething we need to apologize for. I think economic performance, allthings considered, has probably been as good as it reasonably couldhave been. Again, that does not mean that I am insensitive to thefrustration that you're speaking from, Tom; I share that completely.But I'm very dubious that the base is a way out.MR. MELZER. Jerry, the only thing I would say is that if youlook back over the experience--and I just eyeballed it, this isn'teconometric analysis--at the points in time where there wereinflection points in policy in one direction or another, this sort ofapproach I have outlined would have been consistent with what I said.That indicates to me that, at the extremes, something like this couldbe helpful.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But that's, in part, because youhave an identification problem. One of the reasons you see thatcommonality in inflection points, of course, is that when you look atthe base, or at least part of the base, you are looking at the samethings that people were looking at anyway--reservable deposits, asthey have changed over time. I could almost argue that what you-30-12/15-16/87really should do is go to the opposite extreme. I don't reallybelieve this, but to overstate it a bit, I could make a respectableargument that something like debt--to go the Frank Morris or BenFriedman route--actually has been more useful in many respects thanany of the other money or credit aggregates in recent years. I don'treally believe that, but certainly I could make a point of argumentout of that. In other words, if anything--forget about debt--itshould be going in the direction of something broader rather thansomething narrower. As I said, the big worry I have is the marketreaction. I really do think that if we went out and told the marketstomorrow, "Guys, come hell or high water, we're going to make the basegrow by 5 to 7 percent, or 3 to 5 percent, or 4 to 6 percent" themarketplace would batten down the hatches.MR. MELZER. Jerry, how about the European central banks thathave a base target?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. First of all, in the notable case ofGermany, it's different; it's not the same thing. Second, if you takeGermany as a case in point, right now of course, they are missing thetarget in a very systematic way. That is part of their problem.MR. JOHNSON. You can argue that they hated it being a miss.MR. HELLER. Yes, but I think Tom wouldn't argue that youwould stick to the target in the German situation right now. He wouldsay that if circumstances make you believe that the demand for moneyhas increased, you would be willing to go above the target. You wouldset a series of short-range targets so that you would accommodate thatincreased demand for money--an increase in demand for central bankmoney, in that particular case. I think that's what I heard Tom say:to handle it not in a rigid way by saying "here's the target and youare playing along with it", but to adjust it in the light ofcircumstances as you see the economy and prices evolving, and so on.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's what we're doing right nowwith the monetary aggregate targets.MR. JOHNSON. It's the same problem: base velocity andmonetary velocity itself.MR. HELLER. Except that he says that some of that we cancontrol more readily than the broader numbers.MR. MORRIS. Yes, but if it's not reliably related to income,the fact that you can control it is not very relevant to policy. I'vebeen sitting around this table for 19 years now, and I've concludedthat the search for an indicator for monetary policy that willovercome this yearning is a complete waste of time. I think historyshows that there is no suitable indicator for monetary policy that isgoing to give you reliable nominal GNP results. It's a waste of timeto look: the world is too complicated; the world is just toocomplicated. What we really have to do is go back to the kind ofthinking that was around the table when I first came to the FederalReserve under Bill Martin, and that is leaning against the wind. AndI think the--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then the wind becomes the target.-31-12/15-16/87MR. MORRIS. Really, leaning against the known wind whennominal GNP is really the target, except we don't want to admit thatin public for very good reasons.MR. ANGELL. I hope you wouldn't let the public know!MR. JOHNSON. But it's the same problem. If you don't knowhow velocities behave, you still can't hit nominal GNP. You have thesame problem.MR. MORRIS. But you know what direction you want monetarypolicy to move. The amplitude is where the problem of judgment comesin.MR. BLACK. But, if this is as unreliable as you say, supposenominal GNP is not growing fast enough and you push interest ratesdown and the money supply slows down. You really haven't necessarilymoved in the right direction, even though--MR. MORRIS. Well, if interest rates are going down, you'regoing to have an expansionary movement in the economy regardless ofwhat your money supply does.MR. BLACK. Sometimes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Roger Guffey has been trying to get aword in.MR. GUFFEY. I've forgotten what I was going to say. Well,given the fact that we have to set growth targets for something underthe Humphrey-Hawkins Act, what has come out of this paper, it seems tome at least, is that M2 is perhaps the best of what may be badchoices. M1A may be about the same, but given the fact that M2 isbetter understood by the public and the markets, I would continue withM2. There's one other aspect--and I'm not quite sure that this iscorrect, but my recollection is that Canada has in recent years set atarget over a longer horizon than one year. I think perhaps it's atwo-year target with a moving base and they use that merely for thepurpose of determining whether they are above or below the trend lineof growth that they were shooting for. That has some attractivenessto me, and I think that may be what we should be doing with M2 over alonger-term horizon. I think Canada abandoned that, simply becausethey determined that it was more important for them in current timesto focus on exchange rates, relative to the dollar principally, ratherthan to hit a monetary target, however they defined it. So, it seemsto me that we are talking about two different things. One is how wewould manage monetary policy in the very short run through theseintermediate periods; the other is what we should be focusing on, andthat is a horizon, and probably for M2, over a one-year or two-yearperiod.MR. TRUMAN. With respect to the Canadians, part of what yousaid is certainly correct: they had a longer time period. They didn'tadjust [each year]; they didn't always go from fourth quarter tofourth quarter.MR. GUFFEY. Sure.-32-12/15-16/87MR. TRUMAN. That is correct. They abandoned the targetpartly for exchange rate reasons, because it was so sensitive, butthere also was the conflict between the relationship of the monetaryaggregates to the economy relative to what they were [unintelligible]the exchange rates. The main reason they abandoned it was because therelationship between the aggregates and nominal GNP broke down forfinancial deregulation reasons. And, in fact--MR. GUFFEY. And, in the short run--MR. TRUMAN. Well, for a long period of time. Theyabandoned it in 1982, five years ago. I don't know if they can goback, particularly to something like an M2 target, because they havethis financial deregulation in mind to play with. It is true thatthey had a somewhat longer horizon, though I don't think you describedit exactly the way--MR. CROSS. They were hitting the target, but nothing elsewas happening right.MR. GUFFEY. Because of deregulation?MR. CROSS. Probably.MR. TRUMAN. They had different base points. And sometimesthey extended the targets longer into a year, until they changed thebase, and then they went back and picked up a new base. I think itwould be rather difficult for us to do that, given the structure ofHumphrey-Hawkins; I suppose it might be more difficult to do it forHumphrey-Hawkins. Also, the base period could be varied--like takingthe base in the second quarter and projecting up to the end of 1988.That would put you partly in the Canadian-Japanese [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom, after hearing all those positivecontributions, you may want to think about it and write a memorandumor something like that for circulation. Perhaps we could discuss itat the luncheon meeting the next time or something.MR. MELZER. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think Frank Morris is right in thatit's a futile exercise, but I don't think--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If you could rationalize--and thisis a big if--the whole structure of reserve requirements and all therest of it, that would make a base measure at least moreunderstandable. In other words,--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's the currency that's bothering you?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's partly the currency, butit's also the crazy quilt pattern of the relationship between reservesand other things because of a crazy tiering of reserve requirements,and the reserves on nonpersonal deposits and certain Euro-liabilities,and all the rest. If you had a clean, plain-vanilla kind of structureof reserve requirements that would help a bit, because one problem youget into here that complicates it further--beyond the currency-33-12/15-16/87problem--is the so-called multiplier between the reserve component ofthe base and "money".CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Of course--because of the hugedifferences in the reserve requirements on the various differentelements.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's what I mean by the crazyquilt structure of reserve requirements.MR. MORRIS. But it was a politically determined structure ofreserve requirements.MR. STERN. I wouldn't want to dismiss the base too quickly,though. We have done some of these horse races in the last severalmonths as well; and somewhat to my surprise, in terms of the stabilityof the relationship to income, the base tends to win, though not bywide margins.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but all horses lose.MR. STERN. Yes, right.MR. JOHNSON. Some are better than--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Some lose.MR. STERN. I think Frank is right: we are not going to findone variable. On the other hand, if we're looking at a range ofvariables, I think the base deserves some consideration.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I guess this has been a nice trip back throughFederal Reserve policy in the last 10 years. I think the only term Ihaven't heard was RPDs. Some of you may remember that one. Do youremember that? That [unintelligible] when I left the Federal ReserveSystem the last time. So, it was a fascinating trip, and the debateabout the base certainly brings back the old fervor for everybody.But I don't think Tom's suggestion was that we ought to install thebase as a target and use it right now. I think the suggestion wasthat we ought to take a look at it and maybe get the Board staff totake a look at it, too, since some new work has been done. We justhad a paper presented at the Cleveland Bank by Ben McCallum that youmight want to take a look at. From my point of view, policy has beenwise for five years, but the inflation rate has not been down for fiveyears. Not that the base is going to cure that, but if we're lookingfor a long-term message or consensus on inflation, then we may want totake a look at something like the base to help us get there, not asthe end-all.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the important thing that hasbeen mentioned here is that even if we don't find something to staywith forever, it is certainly true--and we all recognize it--thatprice levels and inflation do have some long-run relationship to themoney stock, however we define it. And I guess that's why I would12/15-16/87depart a bit from Frank's observations. It seems to me that it makessome sense to stay with some [unintelligible]. I get a feeling thatthe monetary base reflects a lot of the other, but it has a little ofa true believer element to it and it may not be all that helpful atthis point. The question I want to direct to Don would be this: Sincethe Humphrey-Hawkins Act does require, in a sense, that we think thereis a long-run relationship, those long-run income and price levelelasticities were very impressive, I thought.MR. KOHN. Well, that's partly by assumption. I amcompletely up front about this. In the--MR. ANGELL. Well, there's just no doubt; I think everyoneaccepts the fact that in the long run the rate of growth of the moneystock is related to the rate of change of the price level.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. ANGELL. And that is important. The Humphrey-HawkinsAct, as Roger Guffey mentioned, does not require us to target M3, andwe have not been talking about M3 here, yet we continue to target M3.If we are going to target two aggregates, would we be better offtargeting M1A and M2 or would you suggest targeting M1A, M2, and M3?What is there to be said for targeting M3 over targeting M1A?MR. KOHN. We haven't done as much work from the demand sideon M3, which is a good reason why it doesn't get the emphasis here.That's because we consider M3 to be primarily a supply-determinedaggregate [unintelligible] to the growth of bank and thrift credit.But to the extent that that credit has some relationship to underlyingactivity, then M3 would have some--MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm not all that impressed by the factthat we can hit it; I'm more impressed with the fact that if we have amoney stock target that we are aiming for and we miss it, we ought tobe able to explain why we are missing in the direction we are missing.I suppose commodity prices might help to explain some of that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And you miss [unintelligible]. BobBlack.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to take issuewith Jerry Corrigan a little about the reserve requirement systembeing irrational. It is rational if you think M1 is the thing thatyou ought to control because all the requirements are lagged exceptthose against M1 deposits. So, if M1 were really what you wanted tocontrol, you would figure out how much you needed in reserves forthose other types of deposits, supply that, and anything else you putout would be used to support M1 and only M1. If M1 is your target,the only thing that would be more rational, I think, would be to have0 percent requirements against everything that wasn't in M1; but, ifM1 is of no value anymore--although I think it once was--then it isirrational. The reserve requirement system was set up that waybecause at that time the prevailing feeling was that M1 was really thebest of the targets. And I think it was.MR. MORRIS. I don't think that's the reason. The reason wasthat, in order to get the thrifts to sign onto the Monetary Control-35-12/15-16/87Act, we had to have a system that didn't generate [unintelligible]with reserve requirements on the thrifts. And, that's the reason forthe structure. It had nothing to do with--MR. BLACK. No, I'm talking about the fact that we lag somereserve requirements and don't lag the others.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That wasn't my point, though, in thefirst place.MR. BLACK. Okay. I thought I finally understood somethingand now I find out I haven't understood that either!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's only one part of my point.My point simply is that the relationship between the reserve componentof the monetary base and anything else, whether it's an M, or GNP, orwhatever, is itself subject to a lot of distortion because of what Icall the overall crazy quilt--not necessarily irrational--pattern ofthe structure of reserve requirements.MR. BLACK. I agree with that on the monetary base. Andwhen I said I had sympathy with Tom, it wasn't that I was favoring amonetary base. I meant that I had sympathy for some kind of an anchorto hang policy on, and if he could demonstrate [unintelligible]--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] of the reserverequirements are on demand deposits. And hence, we assume that therequired reserves are a proxy for demand deposits and currency in use.We have some noise, but substantially what we have now is reserves onM1A plus some reserve requirements on large CDs and a variety of otherreserves on other things. It's interesting, when you take a look atthe monetary base, to subtract those elements out and see whether, infact, you're getting the M1A effect that Don was getting, or whetherthere is something independent there.MR. MORRIS. The weight of currency is much higher in themonetary base and that's--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Of course, sure.MR. MORRIS. That's a major difference.MR. BLACK. Well, I don't think the use of the base as atarget will necessarily imply a steady rate of growth in that. Youwould figure out what non-monetary liabilities were using up in theway of reserves, supply that and then supply the amount you thoughtwas necessary to support whatever kinds of monetary aggregates youwanted. That doesn't say to me that it has to be a steady rate.MR. MELZER. I think that's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Si Keehn, have you any thoughts on thisthat you'd like to express to your colleagues?MR. BLACK. You might not want to ask him; he may have goneto sleep!-36-12/15-16/87MR. KEEHN. At this point, I have nothing to add to thediscussion that hasn't already been said a couple of times at least.But, hearing the conversations and reading the paper, I don't find anycompelling reason to shift to M1A or to add it as a target. I wouldnot be in favor of targeting a narrow aggregate. Jerry Corrigan madethe point earlier that I think is very appropriate: whatever we aredoing, we are doing pretty well. I think the economic results havebeen good. Utilizing, say, M2 and M3 in the way that we have has beenan appropriate way to do it; the results have been good, and we oughtto continue with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anyone else have anything more to say onthis subject? Si, are you going to be able to make it tomorrow?MR. KEEHN. Well, while this conversation has been going on,we were told that it is snowing again and both airports are againclosed. But, we're a bit hopeful that we can get out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We wish you well.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It sounds like M1.MR. HELLER. Si, are you counting on me to come in tomorrow?MR. KEEHN. I'm counting on you, Bob!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we do this? On thepresumption that Si will be able to make it, why don't we adjourn themeeting as of now and reschedule for 9:00 a.m. Eastern time tomorrowmorning, if that's okay with you. I don't know whether or not thatmakes it more difficult for you, Si.MR. KEEHN. We'll work with it. It's either going to workfor us both or not. And if it doesn't, if we could again participateon the phone tomorrow, I'd appreciate that. I'm not going to know foranother hour or so whether or not we can make it out. I'll let NormBernard know.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, 9:00 a.m. it is. Thank you.[Meeting recessed]-37-12/15-16/87December 16, 1987--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In reconvening the meeting, the firstorder of business is Mr. Cross on foreign currency operations.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross?MR. GUFFEY. I would just ask Sam: How much do we have--I amtalking about the System and the Exchange Stabilization Fund--as acache of marks and yen that we can draw upon in the future withoutswap arrangements?MR. CROSS. We have far more marks than we have yen for theFederal Reserve and the Treasury combined. We have about $11.6billion worth of marks, but only about $1.6 billion worth of yen.MR. GUFFEY. That means, if we were to continue [interventionpurchases of dollars] for a very long period of time, we would have touse our swaps.MR. CROSS. We would have to get some more yen fromsomeplace; $1.6 billion is not all that big. The fact is, forexample, that we did $1.6 billion in all currencies in the past sixweeks.SPEAKER(?). Sam, if the official intervention dries up--Idon't mean totally dries up, but if it shrinks--what dynamics doesthat set in motion? The market still has to clear. Does it clear ata lower level by sucking in more private sources or--MR. CROSS. I assume it tries to suck in some financing fromsome source. But that raises the question of on what terms andwhether the dollar would have to become more attractive both throughstability and through interest rates to attract any funds, official orprivate. We still have a pretty big deficit; we're predicting a $135billion deficit for next year in the current account. So, if you lookex ante and ask people how much they plan to increase their exposureto dollars next year, I doubt that it would come anywhere close tothat number. Ex post, undoubtedly, somehow or other our currentaccount deficit will get financed. It's a question of how.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. One of the reasons we haven't had a fasterturnaround in our current account deficit is that the fall in thevalue of the dollar has not even come close to being matched in termsof increasing import prices. It seems to me that exporters to theUnited States can have shrinking profit margins and try to hang on tomarket share, but with the kinds of shrinkages in margins that are atleast implicit in this kind of drop in the dollar-import pricerelationship, I think a lot of these exporters to the U.S. have to behurting pretty badly. I don't know how one measures that--whetherthere's any anecdotal evidence or any evidence whatsoever. But do wehave any sense that we might be seeing more of this dollar shrinkageshowing up or coming through more in higher import prices?-38-12/15-16/87MR. CROSS. Well, I'm sure everybody has his own experienceon all of this. There are these factors: obviously, people who havemarkets don't give them up very easily; also, a country like Japan hasa big import component in a lot of its exports and, therefore, theexchange rate can affect both sides of the equation. I agree with youthat when a currency falls by 50 percent--and we're just about at 50percent of the level of the mark and the yen--that can't be absorbedthrough lower profit margins. The people we talked to on the exportside seemed to be sounding a lot better. Now, another problem is thatsome of the deficit is shifting, or is covered by countries such asTaiwan. Taiwan has a surplus of $25 billion all by itself, and it's atiny economy relative to that size surplus. So some of this deficitis coming from countries that have not had anything like that kind ofchange in the exchange rate vis-a-vis the dollar.MR. TRUMAN. We have taken a look at this question recentlyin trying to get a better handle on domestic production costs and howthey have been moving in some of these countries over the last severalyears. The work that we've done suggests that there probably has beenmore saving on domestic production costs than aggregate measures ofprices in some of these countries would suggest. That, in turn, wouldsuggest that there has been less of a [decline in] profit margins thana 50 percent decline in the dollar would lead one to think initially,though all things working together do produce the results that you'dlike, President Boehne. As a consequence, we have had less priceincrease and less decrease in quantity on the import side, though mostof the aggregate equations have price elasticities that are close to1. So, in terms of the trade balance and what you have to finance, itwashes out. You get less price and, therefore, you get less quantityadjustment. Anyhow, the mix is a little different. As far as ourforecast is concerned, partly based upon these considerations andperhaps some reluctance to project these trends in the future, as wellas some factors like the rise in commodity prices, which haveincreased more over the last eighteen months than over the previouseighteen months, we have projected a much more rapid rise in importprices in the forecast period than we've had to date.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, told me lastweek that their new problem loan area is in loans towhich suggests that maybe some of these countries are beginning tohurt in trying to maintain their market share in the U.S. market.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a very interesting piece of newinformation.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Of course, a lot of thosemanufacturing and export companies, up until recently, were making upfor their income losses in exports by their activities in thefinancial sector. There's no question that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a euphemism; speculating is allpart of the picture.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There's no question about that.That works in the same direction, of course--and land.-39-12/15-16/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mr. Cross? Si?MR. KEEHN. Sam, lacking intervention, what's the comment inthe market with regard to the lowest level that the market wouldexpect against the mark and the yen? How much more [decline] can weget here?MR. CROSS. In what terms? Market pressures are down, andevery time you pick up a newspaper, you have more economists talkingabout the need for x, y, z, including some who say it needs another 10percent; while it was 12 and 15 percent they had been saying the samething. I think the market people are pretty agnostic about this sortof thing. They look at these trade deficits, which are enormous; andthey look at the government policies, which are ambiguous in thisregard. They see the pressures and the consequences are pretty clear.MR. TRUMAN. My sense is that the forecasts, essentially,[unintelligible]. If anything, the prognostications are for anincreasing rate of decline. Last year you might have seen somethingprojected in the 3 to 5 percent range; now you frequently are seeingit built into the international component of a blue chip business.They are talking about an expected 10 percent decline through the endof 1988, or whatever point they set, whereas a year ago they weresaying in the 5 percent range. Forecasters were wrong about theturning point. If anything, in that part of the market they areprojecting a more rapid decline than they had been before by maybe--MR. PARRY. Ted, what is the futures market saying about theyen and the mark?MR. TRUMAN. The rate of decline against the G-10 countriesis something on the order of 1 or 2 percent over the next year. Ifyou look at just the yen market, it's on the order of three or fourpercent. So that's not anything like this. Essentially, that's wherewe have been for the last 2-1/2 years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have one comment and one question. In the lastten days, I've been at two different embassies for dinners and thedinner table talk among business people involved how they thought thedollar had actually become undervalued vis-a-vis European currencies.Now, they were not talking [unintelligible], which I thought wasinteresting, because it wasn't a central banking group; it was amixture of business people and embassy personnel. My second point isa question. You mentioned the Taiwan case and their gigantic tradesurplus, etc. I'm mystified as to the process of getting some ofthose devils to adjust their currencies. What does it take? Does theTreasury have to lock them in a room? Does it take legislation ordoes it take negotiation of some sort? I honestly don't know theprocess.MR. CROSS. Well, the Treasury has been working on it. Ithink the Treasury so far has used all of the above: they've lockedthem in a room and they've tried everything. There has been somemovement.-40-12/15-16/87MS. SEGER. But, it has been pretty pathetic, when youcompare it to--MR. CROSS. This will make it 20 percent in the past year.MS. SEGER. What has Hong Kong's movement been then?MR. CROSS. Zero. But, if you look at it in terms of thesurplus, Taiwan stands alone as having the largest imbalance. And, infact as everybody knows, they have a large reserve. The three largestreserves are Germany, Japan, and Taiwan; and I think Taiwan's ishigher--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not necessarily in that order.MR. CROSS. No, not in that order. Taiwan, I think, isnumber two.MR. JOHNSON. Isn't it true, Sam, that the dollar did notappreciate against those currencies very much?MR. CROSS. That is true, it did not go up as much as theyclaim; it didn't [unintelligible]. Again, we are generalizing, but interms of the Taiwanese dollar it did not appreciate as much when itwas going up. But the surpluses have grown really unbelievably large.Meanwhile, there are these reports out there now that their dollarholdings have gotten to be so large that the governor of their centralbank has been under enormous political pressure to get rid of thesedepreciating dollars and get some D-marks and so forth; and he seemsto be doing that. So, that's not a very encouraging sign at all.MR. PARRY. Isn't the decline since the beginning of the yearof the Taiwanese dollar--MR. CROSS. Twenty-two percent is the figure I have in mind,but it's--MR. TRUMAN. A little less than 10 percent against the yen.MS. SEGER. I still think that the trade statistics suggestthat something has to be done about those currencies if we really aregoing to improve the situation with regard to imports without buildingwalls.MR. CROSS. Well, the Treasury is working on it.MR. TRUMAN. Including the question of [unintelligible], theclosest thing to getting legislation without legislation.[Unintelligible] that Taiwan in particular enjoys, [unintelligible]all the events you have cited [unintelligible] legislation.MS. SEGER. I can send them some alley toughs from Detroit.MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible] Mr. Volcker's speech.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.-41-12/15-16/87MR. HOSKINS. You used the number of $100 billion spent forsix months of this year by G-10 countries.MR. CROSS. No, so far [this year]--11 months. That doesn'tinclude Taiwan which is another and a lot of othercountries. It includes only those that are on our concentrationnetwork, which is the G-10 plus some assorted European countries.MR. HOSKINS. I'm just curious: Has anybody speculated as towhat we bought with that $100 billion and where we would be had we notspent it? And, secondly, you described a situation that seems to meto be indicating some strains amongst the G-10 countries regarding thenotion of further intervention. Does that imply that we are going toalter fundamentally some monetary and fiscal policies? In otherwords, are we not going to sterilize?MR. CROSS. What I was saying was that it's not going to beas easy, looking forward, as it has been in the past. Everybody hassubstantially higher dollar balances; countries are under pressure;there are public commentaries. For example, in London in theFinancial Times, there's an article by Sam Britton asking why theBritish are holding all of these weak and depreciating dollars, andsaying they should be moving into marks [unintelligible] in thisstory. There undoubtedly are going to be pressures on a lot ofcountries to be a lot more reluctant than they have been to add totheir dollar holdings.MR. BLACK. Has this switching to diversified portfolios hadmuch downward effect on the dollar?MR. CROSS. Well, it is one of the elements. I don't knowhow widespread it is. We hear reports of a few countries here andthere.MR. TRUMAN. President Black, President Hoskins' question isthat if the intervention has no effect, then the switching fromdollars to DM also has no effect, other than the effect on psychology.Essentially, if it doesn't work, it doesn't work.MR. HOSKINS. Well, if intervention doesn't work, to me it'sobvious, then, that you can draw any conclusion you want to.MR. BLACK. I would say switching had to have had someeffect, even though I'm not much of an interventionist.MR. HOSKINS. I'm sure it has. To my mind, it certainly hasan effect. It has an effect as one country sees another countryshifting away. Every time we get into periods like this, certainlythere is a tendency for Latin American countries--those that have anyreserves--to switch a little; some of the Asian countries have a greatdesire to make the best of their reserve holdings and do someswitching. I don't want to exaggerate what we have seen to date butthere are some important [unintelligible] as the dollar has continuedto weaken. It's not surprising that you see these kinds of pressures.MR. BOEHNE. It has a clear effect on how we finance ourexternal deficit.-42-12/15-16/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the crucial point.MR. KEEHN. That's the main piece of it because the marketdiscipline would have been much stronger on the U.S. to get theadjustment process moving forward more rapidly without this foreignofficial financing.MR. CROSS. If they hadn't bought $100 billion worth ofdollars then I would ask the question: How would we have financed thedeficit last year? There's a big hole there somewhere.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can't finance it if it doesn'texist. Maybe it would have been small.MR. CROSS. If we had adjusted and eliminated the deficit,that would be a different story.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any further questions for Mr.Cross?MR. JOHNSON. Nobody really knows which way this is going butcurrently there is some downward [movement] in oil prices. How isthat likely to affect the currency markets? Last year it seemed tohave put downward pressure on the dollar relative to the deutschemarkand the yen, and some downward pressure on the pound sterling, too. Idon't know if you have any idea about that, given these low levels,but--MR. CROSS. It seems to have different kinds of effects.There is the fact that Germany and other countries are more dependenton oil than we are, for example. There is also the fact that oil isvery heavily a dollar-financed phenomenon. So there have been timeswhen changes in the oil price seemed to affect the dollar one way andtimes when it affected it another way. I would assume that thereluctance that we are seeing now might be, on balance, helpful.MR. JOHNSON. How is it affecting the pound?MR. CROSS. Well, sterling has been a little softer in thepast few days. One possibility is that it has been reflecting whathas gone on in the oil market but there are some other things goingon, too. The British seem to have had this policy of trying tomaintain the pound at 3 DM and they have held that pretty firmly andhave undertaken an enormous amount of intervention [unintelligible].Some people think that maybe the message that they are going to holdit is beginning to be accepted and that part of the decline insterling reflects that.MR. JOHNSON. Up until that oil price change, the pound hadpretty strong upward momentum and they were really fighting to hold itdown.MR. CROSS. Quite apart from what they did recently,There was heavy upward pressure on thepound during much of that time. And, there are questions aboutwhether the British will, and should, reduce their interest rates.12/15-16/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Cross? Ifnot, I'll entertain a motion to ratify the transactions of the Managersince the last meeting.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, approved. Mr.Sternlight on domestic open market operations.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.] I also have a leeway recommendation, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bring that in after [the questions].MR. PARRY. I have a question regarding liquidity and qualityconcerns. Is central bank intervention in foreign exchange marketsalso a factor? And if it is, doesn't that imply that we will have tosee not only quality concerns go away but also greater stability inexchange markets before we can see more traditional relationshipsreestablished?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that at the short end that probablyis true and that a further factor is the Treasury debt management,which has been continuing to shrink the supply of bills very slightlyrecently. But that [unintelligible] also.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you think that's a big factorinvolved with the quality?MR. STERNLIGHT. The quality concerns have been the moremajor factor there, I would judge.MR.BOEHNE. Looking ahead to year-end, how do you go aboutdealing with a period like this operationally? We expect much morefunds rate volatility; how do you proceed operationally through thisperiod that we have coming up?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it could take a certain amount offeeling our way as we go along, because every one of these periods iskind of unique unto itself. But just the way the calendar works, thistime is particularly unusual. We have a maintenance period that endsDecember 30 and another that begins December 31. How much of thenormal year-end pressures might work into that December 30 periodright now is a big question mark in my mind. I think we just have toget a sense of it as we go along through that period. I'm sure therewill be some particular pressure that is left for that December 31date. That Thursday begins a long weekend. Right now our reserveestimates do not show a very large reserve need coming up to thatperiod, partly because some of the weakness of money has brought downexpected required reserve levels. We probably will have to make someallowance--maybe in the December 30 period and almost certainly in thenext period that begins December 31--for additional demands for excessreserves. I think we will get clues from the money market itself asto how to respond as we go along.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions?-44-12/15-16/87MR. HOSKINS. Given your reference to divine interventionearlier, would you figure that this is an appropriate time to thinkabout starting option (3)? Would you be comfortable with that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think it's appropriate to beginthinking about it, and letting it work if it didn't cause too great aswing in money rates. I would want to be a bit leery about it throughthe year-end period, and maybe just let a little show through--MR. ANGELL. What was the question?MR. HOSKINS. The question was that we have a fluctuation inthe funds rate on the down side, and therefore, we could perhaps beginto move toward [accepting] more volatility in the funds rate right nowsince it moved in the right direction for us first off.MR. ANGELL. Well, that very well may be due to the fact thatwe're so sensitive to any increases in the fed funds rate above the 6-3/4 percent level and we're not sensitive about it moving below that.MR. JOHNSON. That's not true Wayne. Earlier, when thefunds rate fell below the 6-3/4 percent level, we put off reserve addneeds, giving a strong signal that we didn't want it lower either.MR. ANGELL. Well, my view was that yesterday we had a needto take reserves out of the system and we didn't because funds weretrading at 6-3/4 percent. So, we said we won't take the reserves outof the system that policy would have called for; we, in effect, put aceiling--MR. JOHNSON. But Wayne, what is policy? Policy was thefunds rate range around 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent, not a borrowingstarget.MR. ANGELL. If that was the policy, then this morning Ipresume we should have gone in immediately, acting to keep it at 6-3/4percent.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think [unintelligible] postponed.MR. ANGELL. How did the fed funds rate get to 6-1/4 percentthis morning?MR. JOHNSON. Float?MR. ANGELL. Well, I know, but if we had a fed funds policy,what would you have done if it got to 6-1/4 percent?MR. JOHNSON. Just what I said before: When funds were on theweak side earlier, we postponed an add need, and that was a signal inthe markets that we didn't desire funds trading below 6-3/4 percent.MR. ANGELL. My view is that we did have some notion aboutthe amount of borrowing that would be associated with a 6-3/4 percentfunds rate and the need came yesterday to drain reserves. And wedidn't drain reserves, it seems to me, because we were sensitive tohaving the rate go above 6-3/4 percent. Is that right, Peter?-45-12/15-16/87MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that's right.MR. ANGELL. Okay, Peter says that's right.MR. JOHNSON. Wait! I think you have to ask yourself whatthe policy is. What's the basis for adding or subtracting reservesunder these conditions? The policy is to maintain the funds ratearound 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent. There's not any other independentfactor deciding whether we have an add need or a subtraction need. Sowith the funds rate trading at 6-3/4 percent, why would you? There isno add or subtracting need.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I declare this a draw. I don't carewhether or not there are Johnsons or Angells on the head of a pin!Are there any other questions for the Manager? If not, I'd like toentertain a motion to ratify his previous actions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I will move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Do you want to now[make a recommendation] on the leeway?MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would someone like to move thatprovision?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, approved. Now we'llmove on to Mr. Prell and the economic situation.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]. Mr. Chairman, I think I'll conclude on that decisivenote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought you were going to go further.Any questions or clarifications for Mr. Prell?MR. HOSKINS. I have a clarification on the NationalAssociation of Business Economists survey. Mike correctly reportedthat nearly half of them expected to see a recession in 1988.However, that's a general question asked to them about recession. Butthe data with respect to questions on their own firms are inconsistentwith their forecasts of recession. In other words, most of themcommented that the order books in their own firms were fairly strong.MR. PARRY. Mike, you talked about the decline in interestrates and I wonder if you could give us some idea, in terms ofnumbers, of what kind of short-term rates you expect in the first halfin that Greenbook forecast.MR. PRELL. Basically, we have both long and short ratesdeclining between 1/2 and 1 percentage point by the middle of theyear.MR. PARRY. That's fairly significant.-46-12/15-16/87MR. PRELL. Given the elasticity of response of some of thesesectors, that's not an enormous amount; but it's certainly noticeablein terms of the increments that we have been talking about around thetable.MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. I have a follow-up on that particularquestion. My understanding is that you have a funds rate change inthere of about that magnitude. Is that right?MR. PRELL. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. What would the forecast look like assuming nochange in the funds rate?MR. PRELL. We used our quarterly model to try to answer thatquestion and, essentially, if we just held the funds rate where it is,that tighter monetary policy would chip off a fraction of the GNPgrowth over the coming year. Most of the effect would be in thesecond half of the year, so that we probably would not see a verynoticeable pickup in the second-quarter rate. For the year as awhole, growth would be somewhere approaching 1/2 percentage pointless, according to the model.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. I was looking at your linkage modelestimates and I guess I would have the same sort of assumptions.Those estimates are -.6 percent for the first quarter, and that's adownward revision since the last estimate, since supposedly itincorporates trade and retail sales numbers. But I notice it has astandard error of about 3 percentage points around it, which means itcould be anywhere from -3-1/2 to +2-1/2 percent, I guess; but thecenter of gravity is on the negative side. I was just wondering whatkind of discretionary factors you have added to that to bring it up towhere you are.MR. PRELL. I wouldn't--MR. JOHNSON. They have revised down and you revised up andthat's why--MR. PARRY. What is that forecast?MR. JOHNSON. The linkage model forecast.MR. PRELL. That is just an experimental tool that has beenunder development for a while and we don't approach our forecasting byadd factors, so to speak, to that model. That model was done with aminimal amount of judgmental add factoring and tended to be veryresponsive to incoming data, and we've been working to moderate that.As a matter of fact, the one that you have doesn't incorporate theinventory data we received or the housing starts released today, andit has a fairly strong short-run sensitivity to the stock market. Ithink that is one of the factors that yielded the negative result forthe first quarter. But let me just say that, given those confidenceintervals, I wouldn't want to try to distinguish very much betweenthat reading and growth in the 1 percent neighborhood in the firstquarter of next year.-47-12/15-16/87MR. JOHNSON. Sure.MR. PRELL. I think that model has difficulty picking up suchthings as incentives in the automobile market and many other things.So, I wouldn't want to make much out of that difference. As Isuggested, if you apply any reasonable confidence interval around ourprojection, you certainly can't rule out a negative quarter in thefirst or second quarters.MR. JOHNSON. All right. On the housing numbers, I noticepermits are still trending down. I realize there's not much of acorrelation, but do you read anything into the fact that permitscontinue to trend down versus starts?MR. PRELL. I think that the permits number was aboutunchanged in November from the October level.MR. JOHNSON. It was down 0.7.MR. PRELL. Given the volatility of these numbers, that'scertainly an insignificant change. Basically, the number doesn'tappear to be inconsistent with the starts level running somewherebetween 1.5 and 1.6 million over the next couple of months. So, Ithink that's very much in line with our sense of not very much goingon at this point in the housing market. Our forecast doesn't showmuch of a movement in coming months.MR. JOHNSON. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mike, as you're well aware, there's a school ofthought out there that the economy has been running on the stronggrowth of the aggregates of a year or a year and a half ago and thatthe economy is about to go downhill as a result of the much flattergrowth of the aggregates in the last 9 or 10 months. If that's notyour expectation, then would you assess that expectation?MR. PRELL. I suppose it is possible, if the outcome issimilar to our forecast, that people who would want to read the moneystock numbers as having those kinds of implications would feel thatthey had been vindicated; that would be a noticeable slowing from whatwe have seen over the first few quarters of this year. We don'tapproach the forecasting process with that kind of simple connectionof money stock to nominal GNP and real GNP outcome. But obviously, ifwe had forced money stock growth to be faster this year, then we wouldhave had, at least for a while, lower interest rates and possibly alower dollar, and a number of other events which might havestrengthened the outlook for nominal GNP in the coming months. So Idon't see an inconsistency; but we're not putting a heavy weight onthat monetary deceleration per se now.MR. KELLEY. At what point in time would you start to givemore weight to it? How long can the growth in the aggregates stayvery modest without beginning to be a drag?MR. PRELL. Well, I think much depends on money demandbehavior. Our forecast is not built on an assumption that we will-48-12/15-16/87continue to have that kind of slow growth. We have M2 and M3 growingat rates that are well within the target ranges tentatively set fornext year. So that would represent, particularly in the case of M2, anoticeable acceleration from what we've been seeing.MR. KOHN. I think the related point is that the aggregatesjust haven't been very good predictors of what's going on in theeconomy in the last couple of years. I have here a simulation of theDarby model using M1A, and it has the economy slowing down. It hasmuch slower growth for 1987 than it looks like we have been gettingand a picture for next year that isn't all that different, assumingsome pickup in the aggregates, from the forecast in the Greenbook.But it has much more rapid inflation both this year and next year--onthe order of 7-1/2 to 8 percent this year and 7-1/2 percent next year.I wouldn't put much confidence in that, because it plays off the veryrapid money growth, which we never really saw feeding through in 1985and 1986. Those aggregates in and of themselves have not been verygood predictors of future developments in the economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When you're looking at the monetaryaggregates, I think it's important to recognize that when they wereworking and you could see the plumbing operating--meaning you couldsee the effect of changing monetary aggregates reflected in real GNPand the price level--the relationship was in sync. The problem thatwe have now in evaluating these data is that, essentially, we havegone through a cycle and a half in which the plumbing has beendisconnected. In a sense, we're getting very significant changes inthese monetary variables, but we don't see any filtering through. Theargument that slow money growth will inevitably lead to a recessionmay turn out to be true. The trouble is that there is no mechanismwhich can tie it together at this stage. We're caught in a situationwhere I suspect that the plumbing is going to get reconnected at somepoint and it's going to work again. The real trick is going to befiguring out when that's going to happen. The assumption that it isalready happening is not verifiable in the information, at least as Isee it.MR. HELLER. It probably happened when we started ourmonetary targeting, because according to Goodhart's law, anything youwant to control will get out of hand. But that isn't my question.According to your projection, the deficit is going to worsen by about$20 billion to $165 billion. According to the Administration, it'sgoing to improve by about $20 billion to $123 billion. I waswondering what would happen to your forecast if the Administrationwere right.MR. PRELL. I don't think we have a really current set ofnumbers from the Administration. I suspect that if the Administrationis right, in essence it would be because there is a stronger[economic] performance. That's the answer itself. I think that'slargely where we differ with the Administration in terms of their mid-session review prognostication for FY 1988.MR. HELLER. Mike, your forecasts are quite far apart on theexpenditure side, too. Some of that is cyclically related, so youwouldn't see much of a weakening of the economy if the budget cuttersactually succeed in [unintelligible].-49-12/15-16/87MR. PRELL. Well, we built into [our forecast] theirsucceeding, in essence, in what they agreed to in the compromisesession. That is a moderate restraining influence on aggregate demandin the coming year, but it's not an enormous effect. It's one moreingredient that one wouldn't want to overlook. It's a magnitude ofroughly half a percentage point on GNP.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I was quite influenced by an article I read inthis morning's Wall Street Journal about Marshall Fields, where SiKeehn lives, in the suburbs of Chicago. He has to get out and do moreshopping! Anyhow, it made me think about the retail sales report andyour comment that the numbers were revised downward in September andOctober and showed only a modest gain in November. You said this iscausing some downward revision in your real GNP estimate for just thisquarter. You're not thinking of this as something that will spillover into the new year also? I wasn't sure I heard the--MR. PRELL. I tried to suggest that if indeed we get thatkind of greater weakness in consumption expenditures, there probablywould be some higher level of inventories, which would tend to weakenthe early part of next year. At this point, given the uncertainty ofthese numbers, I am more inclined to think of it as enhancing thelikelihood of our getting the kind of deceleration that we forecast inthe first part of next year rather than influencing the[unintelligible] level we forecast. But I think we had a rather braveforecast in that we were looking for a very noticeable slowing inproduction growth without having any real sense that there was aninventory accumulation going on to trigger it. Basically, we have avery rapid response of producers to that incipient weakening. If itturns out that consumption is weaker in this quarter than we think ithas been, it's almost certain we would get that kind of slowdown.MS. SEGER. That leads me to my next question. If that'shappening--if there are inventories building up that are not planned--in the past that has often led to some sort of liquidation. Maybe itis just because I've been around for a long time, but that's typicallywhat happens at the retail level, wholesale level, etc. So, at whatpoint might that kick in?MR. PRELL. As I said, we would expect a fairly promptresponse in which production would slow down considerably in early1988 if we do get that pattern. I must say, some of it would probablyshow up in reduced import demand, thus not affecting domesticproduction so heavily. But at this point I just don't have thefeeling that the inventory position, by and large, is thatuncomfortable. Certainly, it didn't show up in the Beige Book, whichis the information from two or three weeks ago. While you hear thesestories, and they vary in the retail sector, there isn't much else tosuggest we're getting massive inventory accumulation.MS. SEGER. My final question involves the trade statistics.I guess the numbers were disappointing on both sides, but the exportsran quite a bit below what we had expected. Again, at what pointwould you think that this might mean more serious trouble and not justa one-month blip on the screen? We have a lot of eggs in the one12/15-16/87basket next year--mainly an assumption of a strong trade turnaround--in order to get the kind of real growth that we have for 1988, as Iread the forecast anyway.MR. TRUMAN. Well, Governor Seger, as Mike said, most of thedisappointment was on the nonagricultural export side. The press wasdisappointed by the imports, and if there was a surprise it was in theoil. That seems to build up imports of products, which seem to fallinto the inventories, and I could tell a better story [unintelligible]statistical effect in the first half of 1988. The surprise was on theside of the nonagricultural exports and if that's a true indication ofthe trend, then obviously they are much weaker than the outlook thatwe have [unintelligible]. I don't think there's anything in theanecdotal evidence that suggests that month is anything other than afluke; but if the next two months of the quarter begin to look likeOctober, then I would be worried about the outlook.MR. PRELL. From my less informed standpoint, the anecdotalevidence and the manufacturing employment numbers and physicalproducts data that go into our industrial production index just don'tjibe with that kind of disappointment on the export side. I thinkeverything is pointing to substantial export growth. In fact, thatgives us some confidence that probably this will turn out to be noiseand that there will be some offsets in coming months.MS. SEGER. It's just that I'm a cautious person, and whenyou put a lot of eggs in one basket I think you really have to makesure you check the assumption very, very carefully.MR. TRUMAN. Well, we think we will have something close to$40 billion or a bit less in nonagricultural exports, in 1982 dollars,over the four quarters of 1987; and we have a little more in [ourforecast for] next year. In percentage terms it is slightly less, butwith a higher base it's essentially the same pattern of growth as overthe four quarters of 1987. Now, there are people who have forecaststhat are much more optimistic than ours. We have tried to be a bitconservative. That's not to say that we can't have a boom in exports,but not an explosive pattern. And the forecast, while it probably isoff by several billion dollars one way or the other, is a reasonableprojection, I think. I am much more comfortable about making theforecast for the four quarters of 1988 than I was a year ago when Iwas making a similar forecast for the four quarters of 1987.MS. SEGER. Was $40 billion what we estimated?MR. TRUMAN. Essentially, we have had nonagricultural exportsright on--plus or minus a few billion dollars--since the beginning ofthe year.MS. SEGER. I know we expected a big turnaround; I couldn'tremember the exact number.MR. TRUMAN. There was some slight offset in GNP terms butwhere we have been wrong has been on the nominal import side becausewe haven't had the price, we haven't had the quantity trade balances[unintelligible]. We've had more imports; therefore, the statisticalGNP has been not quite what we thought it would.-51-12/15-16/87MR. PRELL. Just to cite the numbers: in our FebruaryGreenbook we had forecast 10 percent growth in real exports, and wehave 15 percent at this point. And our confidence has definitelyincreased since [several] months ago.MR. PARRY. How much of an adjustment would you make to thefourth-quarter net export number given October's rough order ofmagnitude? We have $18.5 billion included in--MR. TRUMAN. We went back maybe about $4 or $5 billion. Nowagain, part of that is in oil. [Unintelligible] because consumptionpicked up on that side; and on the export side, if you don't take the[unintelligible] out of production, the exports going into inventoriesmight drop by a billion dollars, in 1982 dollars, in the fourthquarter; so we have [net exports] going down from $18.5 billion to $13to $14-1/2 billion GNP [basis]--MR. PARRY. With a small change like that, it might be tooearly to give up on that 3 percent for the fourth quarter.MR. PRELL. Looking at the labor market data, we could easilysee 3 percent [GNP] growth. But I recall that a year ago in thefourth quarter we were looking at very strong labor input, and evenafter GNP revisions we only ended up with 1-1/2 percent. So there'sconsiderable looseness in this; but there is the potential for itbeing strong if, as we hope, it wasn't all inventory.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Prell onsubstance? If not, let's now go around the table on our own views onthe economy. Who would like to start off? Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, as far as the national economy, wecertainly agree with Mike Prell's presentation. In our District,we're seeing some slight improvement, we think. Of course, with whatlittle improvement we do see, we're growing at a slower pace thanother parts of the country. There is considerable improvement inmanufacturing employment; in fact, we're keeping pace with thenational statistics in that regard. We don't see the possible $2 or$3 drop in the price of oil doing a great amount of damage to ourDistrict in terms of oil exploration, primarily because most of theplanning has been done assuming an oil price of about $15. However,there are implications other than just for exploration in terms ofrevenues to the state and subsidiary effects that could go along withthat. The peso reevaluation is probably a somewhat neutral [event]because we've had diversification along the border, with not so muchreliance just on the retail side. While that does affect retail sales[negatively], it improves the myceladora, the twin plant concept. Sothat turns out to be somewhat of a wash. We feel pretty good aboutagriculture; it has been considerably better this year. Energy, sofar at least, has held its own. Construction, we think, is levelingout. Granted, energy is at the bottom and nothing is going on, but nofurther deterioration is indicated. Manufacturing plus services areremaining fairly even, although we may see more improvement inservices than we are forecasting. So, while it's not a really brightpicture, I do think and hope that, aside from the situation of ourfinancial institutions, we are at the bottom and that there isimprovement coming along.-52-12/15-16/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I don't have anyparticular new insights on the immediate outlook, but I have becomemore and more preoccupied with the longer-term question of how to dealwith these fundamental imbalances in the world economy. What I'vedone, for a change, is ask myself the longer-term question rather thanwhat's going to happen next quarter. And the way I went about thatwith my colleagues was to say, let's take the 1988 forecast as is--andthere's no great difference between the Board staff and the New Yorkstaff forecast--but then superimpose on that by assumption, differentpatterns of behavior over the 1988 through 1991 period to see whatkinds of conditions in that overall period can get us out of the boxwe're in. And there are really four questions that seem to meimportant: (1) Can we get out of that box without a recession? Ithink the answer is yes. (2) Can we get there without entailing very,very clear risks on the inflation side? I think the answer there isno. I'll explain these answers in a minute. (3) Can we get therewith the current exchange rate structure? And the answer to that isyes. (4) Can we get there without a long period of subpar growth indomestic demand in the U.S. economy, and by implication, a slower risein the standard of living than we've been used to? Unfortunately, theanswer to that question I think is unambiguously no, we can't. Nomatter what you do, all scenarios that I can visualize involve, amongother things, a large increase in U.S. market share abroad and also alarge increase in our external financing requirement over the period.With my colleagues, the way I tried to get a fix on the dynamics ofthe long-term problem was to just take a couple of simple arithmeticexamples and work back. The first is one that simply postulated atrade deficit of $50 billion in 1991 and then asked what it takes toget there given a 1988 forecast like that in the Greenbook. What ittakes is something like this: growth in U.S. domestic demand of about1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent over the entire period; growth in U.S. GNP ofabout 2-3/4 percent, growth in foreign domestic demand of about 3-1/2percent and growth in foreign GNP of about 3 percent. And byimplication, it will require, over the entire period, U.S.manufacturing output increasing by 4 percent and growth in capacity ofplant and equipment in the United States from year-end 1988 levels ofsomething like 3-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's annual?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. Achieving either one, in thecontext of the kinds of things that have been going on, is a longshot. But to put up an argument, even if all of those things workedright, the end-of-period situation, by assumption, would still leave atrade deficit of $50 billion and using very conservative interest rateassumptions, a current account deficit of $77 billion, or 1.3 percentof GNP. Our net foreign indebtedness at the end of the period wouldbe $900 billion, or 15 percent of GNP, and a country with a netforeign indebtedness of 15 percent of GNP--other than in war time orin the early stages of development--is quite unusual indeed. That'sthe kind of gradual adjustment scenario. Incidentally, that case alsoassumed no change in the real exchange rate from current levels.Another way to think about it is to impose a constraint onour current account balance by the end of 1991, again assuming nochange in the standard of living which means, among other things, no-53-12/15-16/87change in the real exchange rate. In that case, U.S. domestic demandkind of by assumption is 2-1/2 percent but real GNP would have to be 4percent. Now, here's the killer: foreign domestic demand would haveto be 6.6 percent and foreign GNP would have to be 6 percent. Thepoint, of course, is that I don't see any conceivable way to get fromhere to there under those kinds of assumptions--that is, maintainingdomestic demand growth and expecting that the whole adjustment, ineffect, is going to take place externally. That kind of scenariowould require growth in U.S. manufacturing output of about 5-1/2 to 6percent and growth in physical capacity of about 5-1/2 percent.Again, I just don't see how that could happen. But it would result ina trade surplus at the end of 1991, a $25 billion current accountbalance, and our net external debt would be about $785 billion, or 12-1/2 percent of GNP.The third approach that one can think of is something thatcombines a little of both: to superimpose on case 1, if you will, a 10percent further devaluation [of the dollar] that is front-end loaded--in other words, it comes mostly in the early part of next year. Thenagain, if the constraint is a current account balance in 1991, inorder to get there, U.S. domestic demand growth would have to besomething like 1.2 percent; GNP growth, 2.5 to 2.6 percent; foreigndemand growth, 3.5 percent; and foreign GNP growth, 2.9 percent or so.That would require manufacturing output growth in the U.S. of about 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 percent and capacity growth again of about 4 percent.That would also get you a current account balance in 1991. Theseestimates are obviously nothing more than an exercise in arithmeticand there's no suggestion that they are anything more than that.Obviously, one could quibble with any one of them, or all of them, butI think the broad profile that emerges from that kind of an exerciseis right. That broad profile says to me that any way you cut it, wehave a situation involving a huge unfunded external liability sittingout there that is going to have to be attended to. It says to me thatdomestic spending, at least by historical standards, is going to haveto be restrained and that there is considerable force to the argumentto stabilize exchange rates sooner rather than later. I can see verylittle to be gained by further instability in the exchange markets andfurther downward pressure on the dollar. As a matter of fact, itseems to me that the risks of further downward pressure on the dollarare rather asymmetrically on the side of making things worse, notbetter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman. Do Iassume, incidentally, that implicit in that is that if we are going to[unintelligible] some of these very large external fundingliabilities, we may have to do it in currencies other than the dollar?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If things started to rupture, that'sright. There's a lot of risk, and I should say that right now, atthis precise point in time, I think the risks are on the financialside. I regard those risks as a matter of particular concern. What Iam trying to say is that, as great as those concerns are right now, Ithink the longer-term problem remains; and, in order to try to dealwith the problems today, we need to do it in a way that recognizeswhat we are up against over a long period of time.-54-12/15-16/87MR. PARRY. A point of clarification: Are you saying thatpolicy today ought to be directed at preventing the dollar fromdeclining?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I didn't quite say that. But thequestion is what kind of policy would produce that result? I don'tthink that is totally within our control. I think it has a lot to dowith the attitudes of the U.S. government as a whole. But if I had noconstraints, and you asked me if my preference would be a policy thatputs heavy weight on stabilizing the dollar, my answer is yes--notexclusive, but heavy--yes.MR. BLACK. Would you go so far as to say that recession isalmost inevitable to get a desirable result?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No. In my mind, that's the value ofdoing this kind of exercise, because it does tell me that we can avoida recession. It tells me that we have a very thin line to walk andvery little maneuvering room. But the comforting thing is that itdoes say to me that there is a conceivable set of circumstances over aperiod of time that can produce a desired result without a recession.If we make too many mistakes, one of the biggest risks in this longterm is that it involves a lot of inflationary pressures over a longperiod of time. Obviously, if those inflationary pressures escape us,that is one of the things that increases the risks of a recession.But the comfort I draw from this is that it does suggest you can getthrough this without a recession.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Where are the inflationary pressurescoming from in this arithmetical scenario?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, part of it is what's alreadybuilt in. But when you have growth, say, in manufacturing output, inthe ranges that are implied even in the gradual adjustment scenario,and the need to increase plant and equipment spending in sufficientmagnitudes--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible.]VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's true, but we're talking abouta pattern of behavior over a number of years with a starting point ofan unemployment rate of 6 percent, when the starting point in terms ofcapacity utilization--and in this scenario we use the rate forecastfor the end of 1988--is 82-1/2 percent. The overall rate is[projected to be] up to 82-1/2 percent, but there are about 8 or 9two-digit SIC industry groups that are big exporters where thosecapacity utilization rates are already pushing de facto fullutilization. So, it does take a not inconsequential amount of hardinvestment to be able to sustain that kind of export-driven output inmanufacturing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you make use of sources and uses ofinvestment and savings in this study?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What it implies is that the budgetdeficit comes down in proportion to the reduction in the currentaccount, in rough order of magnitude, so that in the so-called gradualadjustment case the budget deficit in 1991 is down around 1 percent of-55-12/15-16/87GNP. But it also implies that the saving rate comes up more in linewith early to mid-1980s experience as opposed to the experience oflast year. Of course, if either or both of those things don't happen,then you have problems because if the saving rate doesn't come up, andthen you superimpose a higher level of consumption spending than whatit is already, then your domestic demand --CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then you won't get the adjustment inunemployment.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right.MR. HELLER. What are your inflation rates? You said theywere increasing?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In this? The inflation rate in thisis basically held stable at 4-1/2 percent by assumption. That's oneof the things that permits an orderly interest rate outlook here.Again, I want to emphasize this is just arithmetic; it's not a modelor anything like that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not exactly, but you do haverelationships between foreign demand and U.S. exports.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Oh, yes.MR. BLACK. Is business saving rising as well as personalsaving?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Excuse me, the overall saving rate--MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, the one thing I want to say aboutthis is that it's got 1 percent more growth abroad than any foreignofficial is prepared to target.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right.MR. TRUMAN. And, if you put their growth not at 3-1/2percent, but at 1-1/2 to 2 percent--which has been the experience sofar--then I think you get a very different set of scenarios.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I hate to admit this but I find thescenario that the Vice Chairman has been outlining more benevolentthan any of them that I've been contemplating.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's not without risks. But, Bob,to answer your question, it's not all that precise. The overallsaving rate goes up, almost by assumption; it's the only way you canget that result.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But that is only arithmetic.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That is right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because, if you start with the GNP thatwill relate to income, you have a consumption element fit in--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It has to go up.-56-12/15-16/87MR. BLACK. You almost have to have a rise in businesssaving as well as personal, I would think, under that scenario.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's probably right.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, as Alan said before, in thisscenario--assuming there's no generalized outburst of inflationdriving up wages--presumably the profitability in manufacturing wouldbe fairly robust in these circumstances.MR. BLACK. That's what I was implying: that you would haverising capital consumption allowances and profits.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But, there's a whole bunch of thingsthat have to work right. As Mr. Truman said, even this gradualadjustment case assumes foreign domestic demand growth of 3-1/2percent and foreign GNP growth of 3 percent.MR. BLACK. That's what really bothers me more than anythingelse, I guess.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. I really don't have much to say. I think thestaff did an exceptionally good job on the Greenbook, and Mike reallycovered all the caveats that we now are throwing out. I'm sympatheticwith what Governor Kelley said about worrying about the aggregates.To use your metaphor, Mr. Chairman, we don't know if the plumbing hasbeen reconnected or not; but I do strongly suspect that it will bereconnected before we know it has. And I'm wondering if these couldbe flashing danger signals. But, on the other side of that, theemployment [outlook] from the National Association of PurchasingManagers report was extremely strong. We went back and telephoned thecontacts that we usually talk to when we produce the Beige Book to seeif we could find any evidence that there were changes in expectationsor sales. We looked at 25 retailers, for example, and 18 said thatrecently their sales definitely had been running well above what theywere last year; only three said they were down.MS. SEGER. What is well above?MR. BLACK. Well, Martha, I was going to get to this in aminute, and say you were spending more than Si Keehn, because thein Washington, Baltimore and Philadelphia, said thatsales were exceptionally strong. In Washington, they were running 16percent ahead; in Baltimore 13 percent ahead; and in Philadelphia 18percent ahead.MR. HELLER. Is that dollars or volume?MR. BLACK. Dollars.MR. PARRY. Probably volume as well.MR. BLACK. There's a lot of discounting, so I don't know ifit's more or less. If there's more, then that means that you have-57-12/15-16/87more volume, really, than these figures would imply. We also lookedat our industrial--MS. SEGER. Is that for one month?MR. BLACK. It's since Thanksgiving, which is really thebeginning of the Christmas season. She was very optimistic, much moreso thanBut it was really amazing to us that wecouldn't find more evidence; nobody had scaled down estimates of whatwould happen next year. In looking at the industrial contacts it'spretty much the same sort of thing. So I guess you can just summarizetheir responses by saying that going into the details just didn't showany real signs of weakening at this point. So, for what that's worth-It makes me feel better than I thought I would feel at this timefollowing the crash on October 19.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, looking ahead to 1988, I toodefinitely think the October events [unintelligible]. I agree withBob on that. While obviously those events were hardly positive, theyhave not had a fundamental effect on the economy as I had thought theymight, at least as yet. Therefore, our outlook is not at allinconsistent with the staff forecast. We may be a touch on the morepositive side. I have just a couple of specific comments. On retailsales, I certainly agree with Bob Black. I talked to somebody Mondaywho has important operations in the Midwest and, for the Christmasselling season so far through Sunday, their sales have been 5 percentover last year; and he thinks that for the balance of this Christmasseason their sales will improve over that. The outlook for retailsales appears really quite positive at this point. Capital spendingprograms have not been cut and I've talked to an awful lot of peopleabout that over the last two or three weeks. Most companies havecontingency plans in place and they are taking a very careful look.They have a cautious attitude but, so far, nobody is reducing theirplans and they are really carrying on with them in a pretty good way.There are two dichotomies here that I have a hard timeunderstanding: first, on inflation, I keep hearing these anecdotalreports about very significant price increases for a variety of rawmaterials, steel in particular. I have heard some huge numbers onsteel from some people--30 percent increases on an annual basis; and Ihave heard of paper products and chemical products also moving uppretty rapidly. But these are offset by comments of other people. Ihave met with major companies, and one very, very large manufacturingcompany that I talk with pulled out their material prices for me. For1987, excluding steel, their material prices have only gone up .7percent; and for next year they are forecasting an increase of .5percent. For steel for this year, they in fact had a price decreaseof 1.8 percent; for next year they are expecting an increase of only0.4 percent. So, there is this tremendous difference between largecompanies that have big power and the smaller companies that reallydon't. Certainly, the increases are not showing up in the inflationnumbers. On the labor side, the news continues to be very good.Three-year contracts, at least in our District, are very standard. Insome cases, annual increases in all costs are under 2 percent andcertainly, 2 to 3 percent is quite standard. The productivity work-58-12/15-16/87rule changes have been very important. Therefore, the productivityincreases for some companies have been very impressive, so that unitlabor costs indeed are coming down. So, with regard to the inflationproblem, at least as I talk to people, certainly the pressures at thispoint are not nearly as great as I would have expected last summer.In fact, at least some of the heat has come out of this problem.The other dichotomy, which we have talked about a little, isthis trade balance issue. A lot of people I have talked to are reallygetting much better results on their exports; they are operating athigh levels in some specialized industries but, at the current levelof the dollar, they can easily compete in Europe and the Far East.But again, this is not universal. There are other people who are nothaving a similar kind of experience. I am reminded by people thatwhen the dollar was so very high, dealer and distribution networksreally came down very significantly; and those who were dependent onsuch networks are having a bit of a problem re-establishing them. Butfor the long run, I do agree with Ted Truman and Mike Prell that thefundamentals have to be very, very good and that, at some point, we'regoing to begin to see these improvements on the export side. On net,given the reduction of the dollar, and if the foreign markets hold upand indeed begin to improve, I think that we are going to see thisincrease in exports. If the consumption numbers hold up--andcertainly I have this early look that they are moving along betterthan I might have expected--I think the staff outlook is a little softon the consumption side. I do think the outlook for 1988 continues tobe positive and not inconsistent with the results that we've had thisyear.MR. BLACK. It's the sort of scenario that would worry JerryCorrigan.MR. KEEHN. Yes, that's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. As far as the overall Greenbook forecast, Ithink it's reasonable. In our own District, we continue to see strongemployment gains. And in those areas where we've seen some slowing inthe growth--Delaware, for example--I think it is more because ofsupply constraints than demand constraints. We've been seeing thesame thing that Si Keehn has: the manufacturing sector is picking uphandsomely and I think that's largely attributable to improvedexports. Growth in construction, while slowing, still is at a fairlyhealthy level, particularly in the nonresidential area. On retailsales, we've been picking up; as I've heard around the table, they aredoing really rather well. Our retailers say that they are holding upto pre-stock market crash expectations and it is very hard to see theeffect of the stock market on retail sales. So, in a nutshell, theregional economy continues to do well.I would like to piggyback very briefly on this adjustmentprocess issue that Jerry brought up because it seems to me that wehave to view the economy and the outlook a good bit differently withthis overhang of the adjustment process than we ordinarily would. Inthe past, we've gone through periods where inflation was a problem andwe've had to make some adjustments. We've gone through periods whereaggregate demand was too weak. We've had recessions and we've had to-59-12/15-16/87make adjustments. I think this is the first time that any of us hasgone through an international adjustment process of this magnitudewith the U.S. because I don't think we've been in this kind of asituation. We'd have to go back to before the World War I period. Wemay get this shift from consuming more than we produce to producingmore than we consume; we may be lucky and get that magnitude justright. We may get the changes in exports and imports so that we cankeep aggregate demand going along at what most of us would consider anacceptable growth rate. But we may not be so lucky; we probably won'tbe. There are a lot of scenarios here, but my sense is that we aregoing to have to be prepared to accept slower growth than we wouldotherwise think of as being desirable in the interests of thisinternational adjustment process. Some of this slower growth may beforced on us by market discipline of the kind we were talking aboutearlier. We may have to begin to settle our foreign liabilities inother currencies rather than the dollar. But, I think there will comea time--probably sooner rather than later--when monetary policydecisions are going to have to be increasingly influenced by thisadjustment process. We can lean toward helping the adjustment processor we can lean against it; but I think we are going to have to thinkmore in terms of what we can do to lean in the direction of helpingit. It just may mean that we will have to accept growth rateincreases that are less than we ordinarily would in order to do that.But I think it is better for us to get ourselves in that kind ofthought process rather than have the market disciplines coming down onus very hard, which they will if we don't.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard to the regional economy, as somepeople have already suggested, it remains quite difficult out our wayto find any pronounced negative effects as a consequence of the stockmarket decline in October. Most sectors in our District continue todo reasonably well. Anecdotal evidence is generally positive,particularly with regard to manufacturers and what they are seeing interms of trade and international competitiveness. It leaves me, atthis point, with very little doubt as to where we are going in thatdirection. I'm not sure that this continuing strength in domesticdemand is all to the good at this point, as Bob Black alreadycommented. As for my view of the national outlook, I'm going to echoEd Boehne here to some degree. The Greenbook may be certainly asatisfactory outlook, and it may be about as good as we can expect. Ihappen to think that we are probably in the midst of this transitionto an economy in which growth will be driven by growth in trade and,for a time at least, in inventory building and that domestic finaldemand will be subdued. I'm not sure that we can go through this kindof adjustment process, this transition, and avoid a recession. Itseems to me that that's a risk that we have to run and that we may nothave much choice about it. I have been struck that--at least untilwhat's been happening with OPEC the last several days--the bondmarket, as far as I can read it, has been reacting to declines in thedollar kind of the way it was back in April and May and again inAugust and September. That's one form of the market discipline thatwould be foisted upon us if we don't take steps to promote thetransition ourselves, or at least to allow it to occur.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.-60-12/15-16/87MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, after looking at thesurprisingly strong October-November employment gains, it would seemthat when the stock market decline hit us we had an economy with avery strong head of steam, particularly in the manufacturing sector.Perhaps the stock market drop will turn out to be a blessing indisguise in that it has taken at least a little of the speculativeeuphoria out of the system. The only impact we see in New Englandfrom the stock market decline is changed expectations as to the growthrate of the financial services industry, which had been growing veryrapidly in New England, particularly the mutual fund business.Looking at the forecast, it seems to me that the risk is that theeconomy will grow more rapidly than we are forecasting, particularlyin the business fixed investment sector. I know that the currentquite modest projection is in line with the forecast, as Mike Prellsaid. But if we keep moving in the direction of greater utilizationin manufacturing capacity, which I think is in the cards, I wonderwhether the rate of growth of business fixed investment in 1988 mayturn out to be substantially higher. Then we could have a situationin which the economy is growing faster than we can afford to see itgrow. Maybe we could grow at a 2-1/2 percent rate without generatingacceleration of wage increases. But if growth is much beyond 2-1/2percent, I think we run the risk of making a fundamental change inthis benign wage environment that we've had. So, I don't see that wehave a lot of room to maneuver here. And I think the risk in theforecast is that we forecast too low a rate of growth in businessfixed investment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In our District, the real strong point isemployment. Non-ag employment has kept pace with national growthrates. And we've seen particular strength in manufacturingemployment; in the three months before October, that was up over 4percent. Construction has been notably weaker in both sectors but fora long time it was stronger than the rest of the economy. I would saythat the retail sales situation is a little more moderate thandescribed in other areas. I talked to a major national retailer abouttwo weeks ago and they were disappointed with their November results.December started off better, but their profit plan for Februarythrough August has been nudged down significantly; and they're takingabout 10 percent, or $75 million, out of their capital spending planfor next year which, in a sense, doesn't surprise me. This individualalso mentioned that apparel manufacturers are talking about doubledigit price increases for the spring line and he does not see thatthat's in the cards at all, based on his outlook of demand. Adding towhat Jerry Corrigan and Gary Stern said about the adjustment processthat Jerry was describing: it seems to me that the big risk--and I'mtalking in the broad sense, not about monetary policy specifically,though it certainly fits into the picture--is that if we are perceivedas not pursuing underlying policies that are consistent with thatadjustment process, then it will trigger prices in exactly the way SamCross was describing before. As I said at the last meeting, I don'tbelieve in defending the value of the currency; but the fact of thematter is that I perceive that we are in a financial situation wherewe just don't have a lot of room to ignore it. I wouldn't put my viewin the context of specifically defending the currency but I do thinkthat we have to run policies that are consistent with that adjustmentprocess. That gets back to Ed Boehne's point that we have to be-61-12/15-16/87looking at lower demand growth than we might otherwise be willing toaccept.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the generally healthy TwelfthDistrict economy has experienced few significant changes since thestock market decline. The firms we surveyed indicated that they weregoing ahead with planned capital spending projects for next year.Moreover, retail sales appear to be holding up well, according torepresentatives of several major department store chains.from September to date, whichof course, is the most important part of the Christmas period up tothis point, his sales were up 13 percent. He has had no priceincreases so that is basically a volume increase. Evidence from themortgage market in our area is mixed but, on balance, activity in theresidential area appears to have weakened slightly in the wake of thestock market decline. One little vignette in terms of exports comesfrom a large lumbercompany. He said that, unless there is a significant decline in thedemand for lumber domestically, there is no room for further exportsof lumber; capacity in the industry is not going to be added tosignificantly for the next two years, and you just can't count onlumber exports at a higher level unless there is a significant declinein domestic demands. Our economic forecast has a little more strengthin activity next year and the same rate of inflation as the Boardstaff's forecast. The slowdown that we have in the first half, ofcourse, is a result of the negative effects of the stock marketdecline. It is important to point out that both our staff's forecastand that of the Board staff--and I think a lot of the forecasts thathave been mentioned around here--have included a fairly significantdecline in interest rates in conjunction with the slowdown. It wouldalso appear that those forecasts imply an easing in policy in the nearterm. Now, I want to emphasize the point that the forecasts allassume the negative effects of the stock market. And it seems clearto me, at least at this point, that as yet there haven't been anysigns of such slowing. The second-half pickup, which is a littlestronger in our forecast, results from the dissipation of the adversewealth effects. In addition, the decline in interest rates in thefirst half has a role in causing the economy to grow more rapidly inthe second half and, finally, the recent sharp drop in the dollar alsoadds strength to the second-half growth rate. Finally, althoughshort-term prospects for inflation appear comforting, I don't think Icould describe the expectation of 4 percent inflation next year,following a similar increase this year, as comforting at all.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have just a couple of comments. A few weeksago I met with the chief financial officers of about 125 Fortune 500companies. One of the things that I asked them about was theirreaction to October 19, both individually and corporate-wise.Basically, they were sort of frozen in place. They hadn't dealt withthat kind of situation before so they hadn't recommended dramaticchanges in plans to their CEOs nor had they changed their profitplans. Most of them were right in the middle of the profit-planningseason for 1988. Because most of them hadn't been through this-62-12/15-16/87experience before--and, unlike us, they didn't have models that wouldpredict the impact when there hadn't been a similar event--they wereplaying it by ear, I would say, and trying to get readings on what thesales of their companies were doing, and so forth. They were going tocontinue to look at them and there might be changes forthcoming; but,at that point, they were simply not sure. They said the biggestimpact was on the bonuses and the value of the stock options. As onefellow said, one of the biggest shocks was having to get his CEO outof a board meeting and tell him that their stock had stopped tradingon the New York Stock Exchange. That shook things up quitedramatically. The one company that really has reacted to this,though--and I think I mentioned this before--isThey have done such things as: cut back on a major plant modernizationjob; pushed the completion date into the future for an addition thatwas going on at a similar plant and delayed a new techcenter they were going to be building out inAlso, they continue to fiddle with their pension plans, building moreliquidity, raising cash, and cutting back on holdings of stock andalso of long bonds. In addition, they continue to fiddle with theirproduction schedules. As you know, Ward's announced that the autoindustry as a whole was planning for production for the first quarterof about 14 percent below the first quarter of this year; butis making plans that are more pessimistic than that. Also, I was toldby them that some of the other auto companies probably would becutting their first-quarter plans more deeply and that, therefore, theWard's number would probably turn out to be a little overlyoptimistic. Also, the inventory situation in autos is really, reallysevere. As of November 30th, the days' supply was 86 days as comparedwith 73 days a year ago. At the end of December, they think it willbe 98 days. That certainly is consistent with the idea of cuttingproduction because these incentives that they have tried to use forthe last year and a half have less and less "oomph" every time theydrag them out. And so, they just have to do something else. Thefinal point is that there is great concern about the deterioration inconsumer confidence, looking both at the University of Michigan surveyand also the Conference Board's. One of the points made to me wasthat averaging the results of these two surveys, the latest numbershowed the lowest reading in this recovery after registering thehighest level for this recovery in September. So, they are concernedabout what that will do to future consumer purchases of theirproducts. If you want a group that isn't rolling in the aisles withoptimism, I would recommend that you talk to some of these people.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. The manufacturing side of the Fourth Districtis strong and it is strong based on the dollar. From what we cantell, it is strong in steel, chemicals, and capital goods. Theemphasis on the customer side has been more on delivery times asopposed to price, which implies some increase in price of very[unintelligible] commercial side. It is very consistent with respectto not bringing on [line] a lot of old plant; they want to wait awhile longer to see if the demand lasts. On the retail side, it'svery much the same as everyone else has reported. Higbee's, May's,and Federated all have reported strong sales gains since Thanksgiving.None of the weakness that we've all been anticipating has shown up, todate. In terms of the longer-term forecast, we have no really majordifferences with the Greenbook forecast. In terms of the adjustment-63-12/15-16/87process we were talking about, I suspect surprises in the futurerather than disappointments will be on the side of a quickeradjustment rather than a slower adjustment than we have seen lately.And the reason for that has to do with what is going on, at least insome companies, with respect to their profit margins. The profitmargins of foreign companies are being squeezed; they are holdingmarket share, as everybody has discussed. But they are doing the samething that the Americans did six or seven years ago: they are puttingplants in place in domestic markets or buying plants in domesticmarkets to retain their market share. So, they are going to suffer aprofit squeeze for a while, and then they will be up and running withdomestic plant production which would then imply less imports fromabroad. So, I have some view that the adjustment process, at least asforced by the marketplace, is going to go a little faster than perhapswe are expecting at the moment. It doesn't mean that we shouldn'tworry about the things that Jerry Corrigan and everyone else areworrying about. But my emphasis would be that, obviously, we don'thave a lot of control over all of those variables. One we do at leasthave some influence on is price stability. And I would find aconsensus around the table for moving more towards zero over the nextfour or five years more comforting than 4-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Guynn.MR. GUYNN. This is my first time here, and this process isfascinating. Economic development in the Southeast appears to be verysimilar to what I've heard others comment on in the national picture.Manufacturing and trade-related activity--and in our case thatincludes textiles and chemicals--clearly are doing better. In Texasand Oklahoma the oil and gas industry is finally showing some signs oflife. Yet, I think there's a little concern that some of the projectsthat are still on the shelf and that haven't been restarted could bediscouraged, or at least put off further, if the price of oil doesfall back or stay at lower levels. So, that's a minor concern in thatoil patch of ours. in the paperboard packagingbusiness, reports backlogs have grown and he can't even shut hisplants for normal maintenance. So somebody, somewhere, thinks thatbusiness is going to be good. Very much like I've heard others sayaround the table, our retailers also report that their sales have comein close to expectations. But we've had a number of people point outthat they had scaled back their expectations for the last half of thisyear even before mid-October, so I don't think we would use words likestrong. We've even had a few retailers, as Tom Melzer indicated,point out that they have a little concern about the early part of nextyear, after we get past the Christmas season. Finally, with regard tothe region, at our last board meeting a bit of uneasiness about theearly part of next year was expressed from Tennessee, which has becomekind of a mini- Detroit with a lot of automobile and consumerdurables-related businesses. But Tennessee has done well and they arelooking through that and see that it is only a temporary problem witha little disappointment perhaps in their minds for the early part ofnext year.Nationally, we, too, are comfortable with the Greenbookforecast; our differences are marginal. We might see modestly lessimprovement in the trade deficit but we see the prospects formanufacturing investment perhaps being even a little stronger thanindicated, as Frank Morris suggested; so, those tend to balance out.-64-12/15-16/87Overall, we are reasonably comfortable that we will get moderategrowth in 1988. I am a little concerned that perhaps the downsiderisk in the early part of next year might be a little stronger thanthe upside risk.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with a lot of the comments. I'mpicking up the same thing: that the export side of things is verystrong. You don't hear anyone complaining about orders coming in andtheir ability to compete at these exchange rates and the activity oftheir businesses at this stage, so I think that on the production sidethings do look very solid at the moment. What's starting to troubleme a little though--and maybe I'm smoking something because I seem tobe a bit out of sync with some of the other views--is certainly not onthe production side right now but on the sales end of things. We gotrevisions on October and September retail sales, which were downconsiderably and down relative to the Greenbook, if I remember right.We have revised down the retail sales figures even [for the period]before the stock market crash; our view of domestic demand is weakergoing into the stock market crash than in fact we thought before,relative to the forecast. Now, I agree with everyone else: I haven'tseen the impacts of the stock market decline on consumption at thispoint. Retail sales were actually up modestly in November; automobilesales seem to be holding up, although that's mainly an incentiveissue. But we haven't seen a really severe hit to domesticconsumption since the stock market crash. What I'm worried about alittle is that we may not quite be seeing it yet but, given the factthat sales are running below what we anticipated them to be before thestock market crash, there's a little more downside risk, in my mind.I think some circumstantial evidence is that we have seen weak creditdemands in November. How you translate that, I don't know; but it'sthe first time in a while that we actually have had a decline inoverall credit demands for the month of November.I don't place a lot of emphasis on the aggregates but thefact that we are now projecting an actual decline in M1 growth inDecember, when we were hoping for an increase, is a little bothersome.I can't really explain it and I don't want to have just a knee-jerkreaction, but it bothers me that I can't rationalize it either. So Ithink there is some near-term risk, but I agree overall with thelonger-run view that we have to see consumption run lower than we havein the past to get the adjustment we need. I think the externaladjustment is taking place; exports look very strong, and evenadjusting out oil imports, non-oil imports don't look bad at all. Butmy concern is that things don't sneak up on us on the domestic demandside--that while we are expecting slow domestic demand and we are sortof looking the other way, the numbers go down sharply. I don't wantto get caught in that side of things. We do have to resist a strongexpansion in domestic demand or we have to have a very conservativeexpansion in that area or maybe even almost flat; but that's differentfrom a sharp decline. But, once again, I don't see the sales numberssharply weaker since the stock market crash. I'm worried more that wewent into that on the weaker side than we thought. That's sort ofwhere I am on the adjustment process. What I'm worried about, though,is that if we end up with a sharp downward reduction in consumption asthe adjustment mechanism, we're just simply going to replace privatesector demands for financing with public sector demands for financing,because we are going to see a huge swelling in the budget deficit.I'm not sure that our needs for foreign capital flows are going to-65-12/15-16/87improve under that adjustment process at all, substituting governmentfinancing needs for private financing needs. And the interest rateimplications of dependence on foreign sources of capital flows arepretty scary.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. My outlook and the staff's are very, verysimilar. There is only one modification and that is that I see asstrong an economy as the staff sees only without the 1 percentagepoint decline in interest rates. I guess that would mean that I seean underlying strength of capital spending that would be able toaccomplish the contribution that the staff has laid out even withoutgetting the interest rate decline. That adjustment, I think, canstill give us strength. There are three uncertainties that we are allfaced with: consumer spending; the impact from net real exports andthe dollar; and the foreign exchange rate/capital market adjustmentproblems. Let me mention, first of all, consumer spending. It seemsto me that the consumer spending effect of the episode of October 19and the days following is less than the impact of the exchange rateand interest rate changes that have occurred since then. That is,consumer spending is not apt to be affected in a worrisome way, givenwhat has already happened. If we do not have another event, it seemsto me that, of course, we will have employment effects in some of thefinancial service industries and that would be consistent with someslowdown. But I would note that personal consumption expenditures forthe third quarter 1987 over the third quarter 1986 contributed about1.5 percent out of a 3.1 percent economy. So, Jerry, I think thisadjustment you're talking about is really already under way. My view,Jerry, is that it's helpful to lay out before us, as you did, the kindof adjustment scenarios. But it seems to me that there's just noquestion that these adjustments are going to take place. We are notgoing to be able to operate with the kind of imports of capital andthe kind of balance of trade deficits that we've had; the market isgoing to bring some adjustments. The question is whether theadjustments come in the way we would like them to come or in a waythat would be very unfavorable and maybe close to disaster. I wasvery pleased to hear Tom Melzer, Bob Parry, and Lee Hoskins allmention the fact that inflation of 4 percent is not satisfactory. Ofcourse, if we have low wage rates and high inflation rates, that's oneway we could get an adjustment. I would join them in saying that'snot a satisfactory way of getting an adjustment.Our real net exports, as you know, have been increasing in arather dramatic way. I guess, Martha, I'd be on the side of callingthe November numbers a fluke or a one-time occurence. I'm not willingto rely on that as compared to twelve months of movement in the otherdirection. When we look at third-quarter rates of 18 -19 percent onreal exports, it seems to me that one of the problems we are facedwith is that real exports are growing at such a dramatic rate. Wepick a high [unintelligible] exchange value of the dollar and we saywe don't want to tie monetary policy to that. I understand why, butwe may have overlooked the fact that that foreign exchange value ofthe dollar is producing a real export role and a crowding out ofmanufactured imports at a rate that's going to be difficult tomaintain, even given the heavier capital spending taking place there.So, it seems to me important for us not to make any gesture in thedirection that would tend to exacerbate that problem. I tend to-66-12/15-16/87think, as Jerry Corrigan and Sam Cross and some others do, that that'sthe real factor that could give us the recession that everyone isworried about. I don't think it is going to come because of slowmoney growth. The money growth path that we've had, it seems to me,is not a Federal Reserve starvation growth pattern. It isn't becausewe shut off reserves. If that were the case, I think we would seesome other factors occurring: I'm sure that the foreign exchangemarkets would show more evidence if we really were being thatstringent on reserves; that the Treasury yield curve would show it;and that we would be getting some declining commodity prices. But Ido believe that the real risk that we face is a foreign exchange rateupset that could, in a sense, give us another financial market episodein equities. I understand why the monetarists argue for floatingexchange rates, but you just don't get something for nothing. If wehave floating exchange rates, then we'd have to accept floatinginterest rates also. And it would scare me as to what a precipitousmove in exchange rates might do to U.S. interest rates. Frankly, Ithink that the stock market episode and the recent oil price move havesimply given our bond markets some opportunity not to face the realconsequences that a continuation of the dollar on this course wouldmean. It's in that context that I've been, I suppose, oversensitiveto any tendency on our part to peg the fed funds rate. I'm justafraid to peg the fed funds rate in an environment in which we wouldnot have interest rates responding to those real forces. I share theview that letting the dollar go is a recipe for disaster. We're notgetting the kind of help we ought to be getting on Capitol Hill, butit seems to me we either have to take some steps in that direction, orwe're going to get an experience that none of us wants.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I was quite surprised to hear the high degree ofoptimism from all parts of the country expressed around the tablehere. I was surprised because an awful lot of people talked abouttheir agreement with the Greenbook. And if you look at the Greenbook,the next quarter's GNP is down 1.1 percent: consumption is negative;durables and nondurables are negative; industrial production is downto a 1.0 percent increase; housing starts and auto sales are at thelowest levels since 1983. Yet everybody is extremely optimistic.MS. SEGER. [Unintelligible].MR. HELLER. Martha hasn't spoken yet? Well--MR. KELLEY. I haven't spoken yet.MR. HELLER. The optimism is also in contrast to what I wouldalmost call a barrage of visits and letters that have been coming inhere during the last couple of weeks and days. Curiously, many of theremarks by those representing the national associations--often of theindustries that some of you were talking about--were very much on thepessimistic side. Obviously, we have some problem here of looking atthe trees versus the forest. And, having lived off Coricidin for thelast three or four days, I really don't know how to sort it out. Icome down with Mike Prell, who says I see a lot of good things and Isee a lot of bad things, and I really don't know which way theevidence is pointing. But there is a marked contrast between theoptimism that seems to be being picked up in the anecdotal evidence12/15-16/87and the outlook that I would argue is not at all optimistic, accordingto the Greenbook. Also, if you look at some of the monetarystatistics, we have a real money supply that has been falling nowsince May, and reserves are flat. So, if all that optimism is outthere, I'm still curious why people don't hold that money. Those arealso some of the remarks I seem to be hearing, at least from our Deskpeople. They say, well, the demand for money just isn't there. So,I'm puzzled. Obviously, I hope it will turn out the way the vastmajority here describe it to be, but I think that there are a lot ofreasons for unease in that optimistic outlook, because I think some ofthe more macro forces may not be all that sanguine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, I'm glad to follow your speech, Bob,because I think I'm coming from very much the same place. I have someconcern, too, because I'm getting somewhat different reports than I'mhearing around the table this morning. In fact, the reports I'mhearing around the table this morning encourage me greatly from whereI was when I came in here. My suspicion is that we are getting thisadjustment, as Governor Angell suggests; and I also suspect that itmay be this very slow aggregate growth and reserve growth that BobHeller was talking about that's doing it. I'm not confident thatretailers are doing that well. The sales I hear about across thecountry--when they started and the extent of them--make me wonder howstrong things are. Indeed, there are a lot of reports coming in fromassociations that are not as strong as we are hearing here thismorning. Martha, you were quoting from I had a visit froman economic consultant who works with and this fellow istelling that the economy is going to fall off the cliff inthe first quarter on account of the growth in the aggregates. Thatmay be part of what's going into their planning. In short, Mr.Chairman, to go back to your analogy about plumbing and Bob Black'scomment on it, I wonder if the plumbing may not be beginning to workagain. In any event, I suspect it will work a while before we realizeit is working. Given that the retail economy is as important as it isto the overall picture, I think that we should be very alert to thestate of the plumbing--what the aggregates are doing and what effectsthat may be having. I would be very happy with the staff forecast for1988, and I basically agree with it. But that's where my concernabout it would lie.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey, do you want to sayanything?MR. GUFFEY. Well, it's getting late, Mr. Chairman. I wouldjust add to the optimism in a sense, particularly from the Districtperspective, although we are lagging the national recovery both interms of employment gains as well as personal income gains.Nonetheless, looking back from where we started, in energy,agriculture, aircraft, and so forth, things are looking much better.That's particularly true in the agricultural area, where things suchas agricultural real estate values actually have increased in thesecond quarter--very modestly to be sure, but nonetheless there is anincrease. Energy rig exploration is something in the neighborhood of35 percent greater than a year ago. However, given what's happeningnow with the potential fall in the oil prices, I'm not sure that willcontinue. With regard to retail sales, the report that we have is-68-12/15-16/87that they are modestly higher, some 5 percent higher, than the sametime last year, with a lot of sales and discounting, which meansvolume should be moving through those retail elements. As a result, Iguess I would say we feel better than we did a year ago, and betterthan we did six months ago. The clouds on the horizon might be a dropin energy prices as the result of OPEC's problems and/or a change inthe agricultural subsidy provisions from the federal government, bothof which would impact the Tenth District. However, looking at 1988,the latter would suggest that it will be a fairly good year, givencurrent commodity prices--if they hold up. Agricultural exports arevery encouraging to the people in our area. Those are mostlygovernment-subsidized exports, I might say, but the inventories thatbuilt up in the last couple of years are being worked off.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we take our break at this timeand continue with Don Kohn's report.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don, why don't you get started?MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Kohn. What I wouldappreciate everyone doing in the process of expounding your views onpolicy is to first address the issue of whether or not we should beshifting to some other basis, in the context of our discussionyesterday. What I'd like to do is merely reiterate the four differentoptions that were outlined yesterday and ask that as part of yourexposition you stipulate where you would like to be in those variousoptions. As you may remember, option (1) was to retain the currentemphasis at least until markets calm further and borrowing behaviorreturns more to normal; (2) was to place even more emphasis onachieving a predetermined federal funds rate or a narrow range; (3)was to shift back toward more emphasis on achieving the borrowingobjectives, but with greater flexibility and attention to the federalfunds rate than before October 19th; and finally, (4) was for theCommittee to return to the previous emphasis on borrowing and reservepressure objectives. In the context of that, it also would be usefulto indicate your general view on where you think the funds rate shouldbe as well as the borrowing objective. Also, in expressing theborrowing objective, differentiate between the current borrowinglevels, which are subnormal relative to the funds rate, and the normalborrowing levels so that, in the event the relationships started toreturn to normal, the Desk could make the appropriate adjustments inthe context of the wishes of this Committee. At the moment, I wouldgather that the abnormal spread is approximately $100 million to $150million.MR. KOHN. Yes, I think it is. I think it'd be fair to saythat the normal borrowing for a funds rate of about 6-3/4 percentwould be in the $400 million area. As we said in the Bluebook, weexpect about $300 million after year-end, allowing for some downwardshift, but not as much as we've been getting recently.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So you'd say it's a $100 million shift?-69-12/15-16/87MR. KOHN. After year-end. Right now I'd say it's probablycloser to $200 million, but I'm guessing that some of that is saved upfor year-end.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I have a question. If we specifywhat we want the level of the fed funds rate to be will that then gointo the minutes? I'm assuming that if we come up with a fed fundslevel that it would be appropriate for that to be in the minutes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it will depend, I think, on theanswer to the first question. If it is the consensus of the Committeeto target the funds rate--if we go with, say, either option (1) or(2)--then I think probably that's appropriate.MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we go with option (3) or (4), I wouldsuspect not.MR. ANGELL. I agree with you.MR. JOHNSON. How was it done last time? We went to a fundstarget last time.MR. KOHN. Well, we did it sort of by analogy with theborrowing. We never mentioned the borrowing specifically in thepolicy record.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It sounds like we didn't go quiteas far as we apparently went, either.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I agree. I didn't think we--MR. KOHN. We didn't mention a specific funds rate.MR. PARRY. I think it would be a real mistake to indicatethat we're following a funds target for the short term because I thinkit will really confuse the market, particularly if we intend to switchwhen things become more normal in a couple of weeks. I think handlingit the way we did before is a better --CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I misspoke. I really meant if wedid (2).MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We actually did option (1) and we didn'tput the funds rate [in the policy record]. So it's only if theCommittee chooses option (2) that I think it will require that.MR. ANGELL. I wouldn't agree with that. If we do (1), itseems to me that we would have to report that in the minutes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we do this. Let's actuallysee what evolves, and then we'll deal with it.MR. ANGELL. Okay. And then we'll look at that question.-70-12/15-16/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just open up by commenting thatin listening to this discussion I was surprised, in a way, about thespread that exists between the Board members on the one hand and thepresidents on the other. I suspect that's a short-term phenomenonbecause the real world is going to impinge on us very shortly and pushus together. The trick is to figure out where. I must admit I'msomewhat surprised at the strength of the economy. You can see it inthe orders and you can see it in the burgeoning capital goods markets,which in many respects have been getting less emphasis here than theretail sales figures because in one respect, it's pretty easy toforecast retail sales. They're going to be dull and the reasonthey're going to be dull is that the saving rate is very low and it'svery difficult to come up with an optimistic scenario on retail salesno matter how you play the game. Fine tuning the Christmas sellingseason I find is a wonderful experience fraught with failure. Thereason is that customers go to the best deal. Unlike the numbers forcapital goods orders which, if you get a sample of five or six majorcapital goods producers in a particular industry no matter where theyare in the country, would all look the same because they'rearbitraged; retail sales don't arbitrage. You don't get the sameretail sales pattern in Boise as you do in Atlanta and as aconsequence, you need a very large sample. What all of the datasuggest to me is that none of us has been able at any time in the pre-Christmas season to get enough of a sample to give us a really goodjudgment. I suspect no matter how Christmas comes out, it's going tosurprise us, either plus or minus. And we really won't know whatChristmas sales were until February, probably. In any event, I thinkwe have to assume that the retail markets are dull and that basicallynothing is going to happen there.The crucial issue is going to continue to be the basic plantand equipment numbers. It's becoming fairly obvious why the stockmarket has not had the effect that a lot of us were concerned itmight. I guess the best way [to describe it] is to draw the analogyof the market going up 500 points in one day then going down 500points the next day; it's unlikely to affect anybody's behavior. Ithink we're all aware of the fact that if we had had a 500 point dropback to levels of 5 years earlier, we would have had some reallysignificant effect. But the issue is that we have wiped out asubstantial amount of unrealized gains; what we were not aware of wasthat nothing was heavily committed; the extent of leveraging againstthe stock market gains was apparently really not all that large. Ithink that's the answer, but I must say at the moment that I feeluncomfortable with it. I still do not believe we are out of the woodson the market; I don't think all of the yield spreads have gotten backto where they were. All objective measures of stock market levelssuggest that, if anything, we are still above normal and that we arevulnerable to a significant decline. Consequently, even though undernormal circumstances I would say that in this type of environment weprobably should be in something of a tightening mode, if rates go upunder these conditions I suspect the stock market would go down, andI'm fearful of the extent of that particular decline. On the otherside of this, I feel uncomfortable about the money supply figuresmainly because, as Governor Kelley said, we don't know when theplumbing will be hooked back in and something could give at some pointbefore we know it. More importantly, despite the 4-1/2 percentinflation rate, the debt levels, the aggregate levels, are allperforming reasonably well now even though the Ms are all over the-71-12/15-16/87place. If we take the oil price decline realistically, I thinkinflation is in the process of easing. So, on the other side of this,one could argue--and I'm sure a number of you will--that we should beeasing from here. But, if we ease from here in the context of stillsoft exchange rates, I'm fearful that the system will crack, with thehuge holdings of dollar-denominated assets in the world. Despite theheavy central bank accumulation, those holdings actually have neverbeen other than a net plus for the private sector of the world. If weever had private holders starting to try to liquidate, I think theeffect would be a real free fall that could bring the stock marketdown and that would crash us. So, between Scylla and Charybdis, Isort of come out for alternative "B".MS. SEGER. May I just ask one question about what Don saidthese new numbers were for the aggregates in December? I didn't hearwhat--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They were revised down.MS. SEGER. I heard him say revised down, but I didn't hear--MR. KOHN. The December aggregates--is that what you'reasking?MS. SEGER. Yes.MR. KOHN. We're now looking at about a -4 percent on M1.That is composed of a further drop of about 16 percent in demanddeposits and a small rise in other checkable deposits. And we haveabout a 2-1/2 to 3 percent increase in M2. Some of the revision to M2is not only this demand deposit drop showing through, but theovernight RPs and Eurodollars also came in quite weak. That's ahighly volatile series, so I'm not sure how much emphasis I'd put onthat. The household parts of M2--the bank and thrift savings and timedeposits and money market funds--don't look much different than theydid last week.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I also would favor "B". I would define that asa $400 million borrowings target. In my mind, that's where we wereand what we've done since then was really to accommodate the specialconditions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is on the normal part.MR. MELZER. On the normal relationship. I would expect thatto be associated with a 7 percent funds rate and I would besymmetrical in terms of the language. As to the other--I guess Ishould have done that first--I would favor alternative (4). Iwouldn't go back to it abruptly; I think I'd use the year-end as acover, but I would get back to that relatively promptly. I reallydon't know what (3) means.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Three means to give discretion to Peter.-72-12/15-16/87MR. MELZER. I like Peter, but I think I like number (4)better.MR. BLACK. How about Peter in consultation with theChairman?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I would favor alternative (3) and probably wouldmove in that direction after year-end. With regard to thealternatives, if I were to follow the analysis of my staff and that inthe Greenbook, I think it would lead to a recommendation that monetarypolicy soon be eased in response to a significant expected slowing ofthe economy in the first half of next year and the accompanyingdeclines in interest rates. However, to date, I haven't seen thesigns of the negative effects of the stock market decline.Consequently, I would support alternative "B" with asymmetricallanguage providing us with the flexibility to ease before the nextFOMC meeting should that become necessary. With regard to thespecifics of the funds rate and the borrowing, I'm completelysatisfied with the work that the staff has done in the Bluebook. Itseems to me that the 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent funds rate is reasonable.In light of what we've seen with regard to the demand for borrowings,I also would accept their $300 million borrowing number, expectingthat it probably would be below that between now and year-end.Conceivably, we could get to the $400 million level after that, but Idon't know how fast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I'm essentially for "B" but a bit split as faras the timing is concerned, maybe along the lines that Bob Parry wasjust talking about. Through the year-end, and as long as the dollaris under pressure, I would stick to the fed funds rate at 6-3/4percent. If the pressure on the dollar eases, and once we get throughthe choppy weather of the year-end, I would switch more towards a (3)type policy with emphasis on the borrowing again. I would beasymmetrical in the easing direction, too, so that might allow the fedfunds rate to drop a bit. Probably a normal borrowing target of $300million would be appropriate for that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, that is three that would beconsistent.MR. HELLER. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I'm for alternative "B" with normal borrowing ofaround $300 million, which would give us a federal funds ratepresumably of 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent. I would prefer a symmetricaldirective and --CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sorry, that was symmetrical?MR. BOEHNE. Yes, symmetrical. And I like option (3) interms of implementation. As to whether one begins the process beforeyear-end or starts after that, I think that's a judgment call. One-73-12/15-16/87can't make that call at this point and I think we're going to have tolet Peter and the Chairman decide that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I'd take "B" and I would want the normalborrowing, which I guess would be $400 million after the first of theyear. I will not mention any fed funds rate. I want no tilt and Iwant (4) just like Tom Melzer. But I do think if we're going to do(4) that we might consider an announcement. Someone mentionedyesterday that we might make a very simple statement indicating thatwe were reemphasizing adjustment plus seasonal borrowing so that themarkets would not assume that we had made a policy move.MR. JOHNSON. Symmetric or asymmetric language with that didyou say?MR. ANGELL. I want no tilt.MR. JOHNSON. No tilt, I'm sorry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I, too, would favor the specifications ofalternative "B", although I'm a little uncertain about exactly whatnormal borrowings means in this context. Let me come to that. Interms of implementation, I would prefer alternative (3). My guesswould be that we might as well start around the turn of the year anduse that as a cover because I don't think we're going to have muchchoice. There's a chance that the markets are going to do somethingunusual. There will either be pressure or maybe a lot of excessreserves around, depending on how people position themselves. I don'tthink we want to sit there and work real hard to try to offset allthat. But it seems to me to be a logical time, maybe an unavoidabletime, to start. As I said, whether the borrowing that would beassociated with that is $300 million or $400 million, I'm really notquite sure. I would start with the intention of keeping the federalfunds rate roughly where it has been; but as the period develops,obviously, I wouldn't expect that it was going to stay thereprecisely. And I would prefer a symmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I guess I'd go with alternative "B", with somereluctance, over the concern about the aggregates and the continualdownward revisions. That causes me some concern about going forward.Obviously, the optimism we see right now is related to some eventsthat have already happened, if we believe in lags. So, I'm concernedabout going forward. If we're going to look at an aggregate, I wouldtry to pay a lot of attention to M2 and whether we're going to get thegrowth there or not. If we get continued shortfalls in that, then I'dbe concerned more than I would be otherwise. I'd want to go withoption (4) if we're going to use the announcement. I don't see anyreason not to announce to the markets that we're making a change.We're sitting here looking for year-end cover and all that kind ofthing; it seems to me we can get where we want to be very quickly withless misinformation or miscues by making an announcement. If we're-74-12/15-16/87not going to do that, then I'd worry a little more about markets andgo with option (3).CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Symmetrical?MR. HOSKINS. Symmetrical, and $400 million borrowing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. $400 million?MR. HOSKINS. That's as good a guess as I can come up with.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No funds rate?MR. HOSKINS. 7 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would go with option (3) and begin themovement when it seems appropriate. I'd go with alternative "B" andprobably a $300 million borrowing assumption. I would assume that itcould be adjusted up the same way it was adjusted down in the interimbetween our meetings. And I would have symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you want to say anything about thefunds rate?MR. BOYKIN. About where it is now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would maintain our basic policystance that's indicated by a federal funds rate centered on 6-3/4percent. I think we ought to continue the present operatingprocedures for the period immediately ahead but I'd like to takeadvantage of some of these year-end pressures to allow the funds rateto begin to move around a bit more than it has. Then as we move intothe new year, I'd like to go to alternative (3) whether or not there'san announcement effect, as indicated in Don's and Peter's memo. Iguess that would call at that time for about $400 million inborrowing. I would keep the asymmetrical language unless we removethe sentence that says, "still sensitive conditions in the financialmarkets."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, you're saying you would stay withsymmetrical or what?MR. BLACK. No, I'm saying I would keep it asymmetric, as itnow is, unless we remove the reference to still sensitive conditions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'd also be in favor of alternative"B". With regard to the other four alternatives, I kind of like allof them in proper order other than alternative (2) which I do notlike. Certainly between now and the end of the year, I think it wouldbe appropriate to keep current procedures in place until we aresatisfied that we've come out of that particular adjustment period;then I would shift to alternative (3) but lean toward alternative (4).-75-12/15-16/87Specifically, a fed funds between now and the end of the year at 6-3/4to 6-7/8 percent would be appropriate, with a borrowing level notunlike what we have now. But I think as we come out of that year-endperiod, we would want to get back toward alternative (3) and then movefrom alternative (3) to alternative (4) with a borrowing level ofabout $400 million. I wouldn't necessarily want to judge a federalfunds rate that would be appropriate for that borrowing level; I'drather let the market determine what would be appropriate. In termsof the language, I would be in favor of symmetric language. But I'dalso pick up on the same directive language that Bob Black mentionedwith regard to sensitive market conditions. I think that phrase oughtto be dropped and I would use symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I like Si Keehn's concept ofmoving in the right order from (1) to (3) to (4). I would go to (3)after the first of the year, moving toward (4) later on. And I wouldencourage some sort of an announcement at a proper time. I favoralternative "B" with probably a $300 million borrowing target andasymmetric language on the easing side. I'd keep the funds rate aboutwhere it has been, calling that 6-3/4 percent, tending on the downsiderather than the upside from there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Thinking back to the market reactions early inDecember when the fed funds rate passed 7 percent going north, I'mconvinced that market participants are very sensitive to what happensto the fed funds rate on particular days. So, I would prefer, short-term anyway, to stick with option (1) which really watches the fundsrate very carefully. If there's a decision to tighten that's onething; but if there isn't, then I think the message that comes from afed funds rate hitting 7 percent or higher is one of tightness and I'dbe now very cautious about that. Eventually, I certainly would bewilling to go (3) or even (4), but I don't think that now is the timeto do it. And it may not even be the time to do it until we get tothe February meeting. In terms of the choices facing us here, I guessI'm going to be a nonconformist and go with "A", which gives us aslight easing. I certainly hope that the exports stay very strong butI just feel that there is some risk there. Also, I remember howdifficult it has been in the past to read consumption events andconsumer behavior. It seems to me it was back in 1980, when I wasn'there but some of you may have been, when the credit controls were puton in March of 1980 because consumer demand was so terribly strong.Of course, later on we learned that we were already in a recession.And I think back in 1974 a similar thing happened when we handed out"WIN" buttons and that encouraged people to slice up their creditcards and so forth only to find again that we were already in therecession. So, I am really concerned about misreading the retailsales reports. We're all hearing different stories--some of strength,others of weakness. And consumption is a big chunk of GNP, as we allknow; so I think there is some risk here. I also feel that maybethere's more of an inventory problem out there than we have yetidentified. And I'm impressed with the fact that the inflationnumbers look far better than any of us thought they would if we goback to our discussions in the spring or even in the summer. I thinkinflation psychology has simmered down. The Dick Hoey survey, which I-76-12/15-16/87didn't believe then and probably shouldn't now, nevertheless, forthose who follow it, does show some cut in the inflationaryexpectations going forward. So, I think that's good. I'm not amonetarist but I am paying close attention to what's happening to thereserves and the monetary aggregates; and I think that is something tobe slightly concerned about. Having said all that, I would like to gowith the modest easing identified as alternative "A".CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's the borrowing with that?MS. SEGER. Well, because of the sloppiness of therelationships, I'm not sure what that would be. I guess I would justconcentrate on a fed funds rate of somewhere between 6-1/2 and 6-3/4percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think you're right that, atleast temporarily, we're really locked into a no-change policy, whichI would interpret as alternative "B". I would make the directivesymmetric. With regard to operating procedures, I would stay with ourcurrent stance of trying to stabilize the funds rate over the next fewweeks in the 6-3/4 - 6-7/8 percent area. But once the Desk hasconcluded that the year-end adjustment is over and the relationshipsappear to be moving back toward normality, I would move to option (4),our pre-October 19 operating procedure, with a borrowing level of $300million.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I would choose alternative "A", I think, if Iweren't somewhat concerned about the potential effect on the exchangerate and the fragility of the financial markets right now. I stilllean that way, but I guess I would be happy with something likealternative "B", with asymmetric language toward ease if events unfoldin support of that. Like Frank Morris, I would prefer currentoperating procedures in terms of emphasizing the funds rate. So, I'dsupport alternative (1) until we see a stable relationship develop.Once we see that, I'm for going back to our old procedures. In otherwords, I'd stay with (1) and, when we are sure that we are back to atraditional relationship, go to (4). So, I'm at alternative "B", withthe 6-3/4 - 6-7/8 percent range on the funds rate, and asymmetriclanguage. I have no real borrowing number because I don't see how wecan decide on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have a multitude of problems. Myfirst problem is that, going back to the last meeting, I frankly didnot realize, or did not fully appreciate at the time of the meeting,how far we seem to have gone in terms of an operating strategy that sonarrowly pegs the federal funds rate, as indeed emerged over theperiod. It may be that I missed the nuances of the discussion, but Icertainly didn't view policy quite in that strict light of literallyresisting even one-eighth of a percentage point wiggles in the federalfunds rate. As I said yesterday, that approach to policy, even on avery short-term basis, is one that I find very, very troubling. So,on the strategy question, I would favor going back to (4) as fast as-77-12/15-16/87possible. I don't think I would condition that on a stablerelationship because there has never been one and never will be one.The whole idea is that part of what we're providing is room for themarket itself to play a role in the process. So, moving back to (4)promptly is something that I put some importance on. I don't want tobeat a dead horse here, but it seems to me that doing so at year-endis the perfect way to do it. The Chairman could say in testimony orin the question and answer [session] at the end of this week that weexpect, as always, some volatility or churning in the markets at year-end, so don't read any policy significance into it, because there'snone there. In my judgment, that provides the easiest way to get backto (4), but I think that is your call, Mr. Chairman. If you prefer todo it otherwise, I could live with (3) over the next couple of weeks.But getting stuck on something like what current policy has turned outto be would be a very big mistake, I think.As far as the basic thrust of policy is concerned, were itnot for the proximity to October 19th, I would actually favortightening policy right now on the grounds that I regard the currentexchange market situation as perilous. I recognize that there arerisks on both sides. The exchange market could trigger a blowout inthe stock market; or, the other way around, a blowout in the stockmarket could trigger a blowout in the exchange market. But what liesbeneath both of those concerns, at least in my judgment, is a greatdeal of agnosticism or skepticism or cynicism about the thrust of U.S.economic policy in general. And I don't think that is going to goaway very easily. However, I can't ignore October 19th, and I don'twant to throw out the baby with the bath water, so I could live withan alternative "B" that would have borrowings, depending upon what wewant to do with the strategy question, at $400 million, at least afterthe year-end. I would associate that with a federal funds rateroughly in the range of recent experience, but I would define recentexperience in somewhat broader terms than an eighth-of-a-point spread.On the language of the directive, I have no trouble with a directivethat is asymmetric toward easing in a context in which the pattern ofeconomic statistics is distinctly weak. On the other hand, I wouldstrongly favor a directive that is at least potentially asymmetric totighten if we run into another rout in the exchange market.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's basically symmetric.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's not because if thecircumstances are not significant--MR. ANGELL. But, you could say it symmetrically both ways.You could say that if your weakness--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I know [unintelligible]. In otherwords, it's not the list of items that we have to determine how we aregoing to behave; and we have both of those in the instructions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The difference is that the onlycondition under which I would be willing to ease would be because ofthe economy itself. The ideal order [in the directive language is aproblem]. In other words, I wouldn't be persuaded by---78-12/15-16/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I understand what you are saying. Theonly argument seems to be, I would assume, that everyone who wastalking about symmetry would not have the same problem.MR. ANGELL. Do you want a tilt to tightness?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, he doesn't.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No. The condition under which Iwould tilt to ease is only one and that is decisive weakness andevident weakness--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Evident weakness.MR. ANGELL. But all of us who favor symmetry would havethat.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, that's not what this says.MR. ANGELL. Well, we can get the directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The directive says: depending on thestrength of the business expansion, indications of inflationarypressures, developments in foreign exchanges as well as the behaviorof the monetary aggregates.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I've always interpreted that to meanyou'd ease depending upon any one of those.MR. ANGELL. No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I've always interpreted it to meanthat each individual who talked about asymmetry would be willing totighten or ease depending on how any of those four behaved.MR. ANGELL. Correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I can't seriously believe that we'd allput the same weight on all those variables; it's inconceivable.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's my point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I've always assumed that--unlessI'm naive as a newcomer.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I get hung up on the language, solet me stress the point that I'm trying to make. Under whatconditions would I be willing to tighten? There are severalconditions under which I would be willing to tighten: the exchangemarket or strong economic numbers or a buildup in inflation or--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But only one in which you would ease:the economy.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But only one where I would bewilling to ease. That's the distinction I'm trying to make. That's along-winded "B".-79-12/15-16/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm going to put you down as symmetricbecause that's the way I interpret it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, we'll see what the languagesays.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice President Guynn.MR. GUYNN. Basically, I favor no change in policy at thistime, although I must confess that I have a nagging gut feeling thatwe could be in for a little disappointment in growth in 1988. Becauseof that, I have a very mild preference to tilt the directive verygently to suggest that we would ease more quickly than we wouldtighten. I don't profess, after one meeting, to know whethermaintaining policy is $300 million to $400 million borrowing in normaltimes. I, too, would favor shifting back at the first opportune timeto targeting borrowings rather than fed funds. If that can beaccomplished around year-end, I would be in favor of that. I assumethat would imply some tolerance of more fluctuations in the fed fundsrate, but I would not want to let the fed funds rate gyrate to a greatextent over year-end. We have a great deal invested in trying to keepthings calm and stable; if that means stretching out the adjustmentback to borrowings into next year, I'd be in favor of that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that we're missing PresidentGuffey. Do you want to give us a summary?MR. GUFFEY. Well, the summary would be very short. I wouldfavor alternative "B", with a symmetric directive. With respect tothe operating procedures, like several others, I would like to move toalternative (4) as quickly as possible. I'd do it under the cover ofthe year-end uncertainty. Alternative (3) has some attractiveness tome, but it seems to me that this Committee ought to be making thedecisions rather than putting that burden upon you, Mr. Chairman, andPeter on a day-to-day basis. As a result, I think alternative (4)ultimately is where we should be. And with regard to alternative "B",I'd associate that with a federal funds rate in the range of 6-3/4 to7 percent, with whatever borrowing is commensurate with that, which Iassume would be around $350 million to $400 million.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I add these numbers up, there's amajority for (3), and alternative "B" with $300 million borrowingseems to be prevalent. There's one alternative "A" and, in this typeof analysis, I'd put that as asymmetric to ease, which makes four. Sowe come out with symmetric language on "B". We didn't specify thedirective range on the funds rate but I would read that, to the extentthat it's relevant, as 4 to 8 percent. Is that what we had? Do youread that pretty much the same?MR. ANGELL. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The language for the operationalparagraph then reads: In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the degree ofpressure on reserve positions.MR. KOHN. It should say the existing degree.-80-12/15-16/87MR. BERNARD. The existing--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Several individuals, but not all,raised the question about that "still sensitive" portion. In view ofthe fact that most did not, I infer that that was acceptable. Thoseof you that did not mention it and would prefer that that be deleted,I would appreciate your speaking up. If not, I will assume that thesentence remains as is.MR. ANGELL. We could take the "still sensitive" out andleave the "uncertainties" in. It seems to me you might leave in thereference that uncertainties may call for a special degree offlexibility; that would be consistent with (3) rather than (4).CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In what sense do you mean? The wordsstill sensitive imply a bit more emphasis on certain fragilities.There are always uncertainties in the economic outlook. I don't thinkthe word uncertainties captures it. It is saying something different.I inferred from what I was hearing that there was no objection to thatremaining in, although a couple people did raise the question. I wantto make certain that it wasn't inadvertence that--MR. ANGELL. Well, I didn't mention it and I would like itout.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Let's quickly run down themembers of the Committee and poll on this. Just say in or out.MR. BERNARD. Vice Chairman Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's hard to answer that questionwithout knowing what else is going to be in. I guess I'd say out.MR. BERNARD.President Boehne InPresident Boykin InGovernor Heller InGovernor Johnson InPresident Keehn OutGovernor Kelley InGovernor Seger InPresident Stern InCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the "Ins" clearly have it.MR. ANGELL. You were correct, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One never knows. [The language wouldread]: "The Committee recognizes that still sensitive conditions infinancial markets and uncertainties in the economic outlook maycontinue to call for a special degree of flexibility in open marketoperations. Taking account of conditions in financial markets"--Iwould tentatively read that as "somewhat lesser reserve restraintwould or somewhat greater reserve restraint would be acceptabledepending on the strength of the business expansion, indications ofinflationary pressures, developments in foreign exchange markets, aswell as the behavior of the monetary aggregates. The contemplatedreserve conditions are expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and-81-12/15-16/87M3 over the period from November through March at annual rates ofabout--" What are we using for these?MR. KOHN. About 5 and 6 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. "5 and 6 percent, respectively. Overthe same period, growth in M1 is expected to remain relativelylimited. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if itappears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditionsduring the period before the next meeting are likely to be associatedwith a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8percent."MS. SEGER. But is that really what's going on? We put thisbroad range in there and it sounds--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have that question at virtually everymeeting.MS. SEGER. Oh, I know that. For 3-1/2 years I've--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we were targeting federal funds, Iwould say that would be irrelevant. The trouble is that in thiscontext everyone is used to that language and I'm not sure they takeit very seriously any more. If we were to change it, it might be aslippery thing.MS. SEGER. I was just wondering whether there couldn't besome way to suggest that there might be situations where consultationswould be helpful even if the fed funds rate were in the range.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's generally implicit,Governor. If such a situation arises, I think the Chairman wouldcall--MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, if we're going to (3), and thatdoes involve a transition, it seems to me that we do not know at thispoint how the $300 million on borrowing that we've specified will turnout. Would it be appropriate for a telephone conference call to takeplace at the first of the year to get a better feel of that so that wewould not have eased inadvertently in going to that number.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, (3) itself has language in itthat provides for increasing flexibility on the borrowing level, as Iread it. Is that correct?MR. KOHN. Well, increasing flexibility around the fundsrate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Using a borrowing objective?MR. KOHN. Right. It does still suggest that the Desk wouldbe attempting to hit the borrowing number but would be willing toadjust if it looked like the relationship were way out of whack.MR. ANGELL. In other words, if the fed funds rate weremoving down decidedly, you might not pursue the borrowing objective asprecisely as you did before October 19?-82-12/15-16/87MR. KOHN. Well, as the Manager saw that that was consistentwith market conditions--MR. ANGELL. But you would be pursuing the borrowing as yourprimary operating strategy?MR. KOHN. I see (3) as moving in that direction.MR. ANGELL. Yes. Now, my question relates to the transitionfrom where we are to that. If the transition entails an acceptance of$300 million of borrowing and that turns out to be easier than wethought, would it be appropriate for us to have a conference call?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it probably would. Even thoughwe have what seems to be relatively firm language here, we are in anenvironment in which the potential volatility that exists is fargreater than normal. And I think it is incumbent upon us to seekguidance from the Committee if something rather different than what iscurrently in the economic environment or the financial environmentbegins to emerge. It's quite possible that when we get into thebeginning of the year things will look different. If so, I would saythat some sort of consultation would be desirable and advisable.MR. MELZER. Could I ask a question? I had a similarquestion last time. How will the policy record reflect what happenedhere? I think some people interpret the $300 million as kind of wherewe were and as no change in policy; others interpret it as a change inpolicy in that we're moving the borrowing target down from $400million to $300 million, albeit under that flexibility arrangement.If somebody reads the policy record next time and the directive talksabout the existing degree of reserve restraint, where does it getmemorialized that the degree of reserve restraint was changed, if infact it was? How will that be read?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it really wasn't changed.MR. ANGELL. No, it hasn't been changed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It wasn't changed, but the particularborrowing objective number came about largely because as the Desk readthe directive in conjunction with our appraisal, which was pretty muchthe same--although I guess it's different from Jerry's--the emphasiswas on the funds rate and secondarily on the borrowing target. Thus,when the divergence occurred, we stayed with the funds rate asdistinct from the borrowing target. But in no way was the Desk tryingto [unintelligible] what was inferred and was the directive of thisCommittee as the extent of pressure in the markets.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Leaving that aside for a minute, Iinterpret the combination of a consensus for number (3) and theconsensus to leave in that second sentence on still sensitiveconditions in the context of your remarks still to be consistent withan operating strategy (3) and a prompt move to (4). That, in turn,means that before we get to $400 million on borrowing we are not, evenin the next couple of days or weeks, slavishly seeking a federal fundsrate of 6-3/4 or 6-7/8 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well done.-83-12/15-16/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Pardon me?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What you're saying [unintelligible].That's correct.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Okay.MR. MELZER. What would be the equilibrium borrowingassumption?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way: If therelationship between the funds rate and borrowing objectives goes backto where it was, I would interpret this to mean $400 million, not $300million.MR. ANGELL. Okay.MR. MELZER. Fine.MR. HELLER. Then borrowing at $400 million could beassociated with fed funds trading above 6-3/4 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If it worked the way we thought itwould work, that would not be the result.MR. HELLER. It would not be the case. Okay.MS. SEGER. What if it does come to that?MR. ANGELL. Well, it does; and if it goes below it, it goesbelow.MR. HELLER. Well, there was quite a consensus, though not atotal consensus, for symmetry; there was a very substantial minoritythat was asymmetrical toward easing. Implicit in that view was [anunderstanding] that the fed funds rate would come down from the 6-3/4percent level rather than go up as we move to a borrowing target.That was implicit, at least in my mind.MR. ANGELL. That wasn't a majority though, was it?MR. HELLER. No, but which way are you moving? As you get upto the 6-3/4 percent and you move to a borrowing target we all figurethat the 6-3/4 percent is associated roughly with $300 million, right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Currently.MR. HELLER. Currently. And, as you move toward the$300 million--MR. ANGELL. Let me ask a question. I thought we had assumedit to be $300 million before the end of the year, but would assume itto be maybe $400 million after the end of the year. Is that right,Don?MR. KOHN. No, I don't think so, Governor Angell. Peter andI had extensive conversations on this, I would add, and we wereequally uncertain about it. But our presumption was that some, but-84-12/15-16/87not all, of the reluctance to borrow would go away because we stillwould have a sensitive economic environment. We would have the Bankof Boston situation and a lot of things going on which might makebanks a little reluctant to be seen at the discount window. So, ourpresumption was that $200 million was more appropriate now and thatwould rise to $300 million after the end of the year; but there wouldstill be a margin below the $400 million.MR. ANGELL. Well, I think Tom Melzer has a very good point:that the FOMC has not voted at any time to take an easing step and weought not to get a translation of this into an easing step without avote to ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. I think you'recorrect in raising the issue. If the issue becomes ambiguous and if,in fact, Peter and Don are wrong about the judgment as to where therelationship between borrowings and funds would be at the end of theyear, in order to make a judgment with respect to how it is playedthen I think it would be advisable to come back to the Committee for ajudgment at that point.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Good.MR. STERNLIGHT. Just a footnote on Don's comment: If itturns out that a number of banks borrow on December 31, on that longweekend, that could throw the borrowing number for that particularperiod into--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way: I will stipulatefurther that the judgment as to whether that is happening is yours.MR. MELZER. He likes you too, Peter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Today--oh, yes, a good point. In thiscontext, how do you read the issue you raised about--MR. ANGELL. I feel satisfied that with the $300 million to$400 million that we not go through the process of mentioning it inthe minutes. I would not have felt satisfied before because there arepeople in the market who do read these minutes on a belated basis verycarefully, and I would feel a responsibility that if we ever make sucha move that we should let the markets know. I believe the marketswork best when people have accurate information.MR. JOHNSON. If we make it into what?MR. GUFFEY. Well, this number doesn't appear in the policyrecord or the directive; it's not in either one.MR. MELZER. No, but the language on reserve restraint--MR. GUFFEY. Yes, but it only talks about the level of theborrowing target.MR. ANGELL. No, I feel satisfied that it's not the end underthis specification.-85-12/15-16/87CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter is [unintelligible] this. Can weget a vote on the directive?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Can I just ask one other question?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I want to come back to this dollarbusiness--not that it's necessarily directly relevant to the vote, butlet me raise the question anyway. In the circumstances that we faceright now we literally have risks all over the table. And everybodyis talking about this. There are very few things that we caninfluence directly, but I continue to be deeply concerned about ourability to have any constructive influence on any of this so long asit is perceived to be the policy of the Federal Reserve on the onehand and the United States Government on the other hand to beindifferent, to the point of embarrassment almost, about the exchangerate in the circumstances that we face right now. If there isanything that can be done--through G-7, G-5, G-10, or any othermechanism available--to try to stabilize that situation, that issomething I want to be strongly associated with.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What specifically do you have in mind?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Do you mean if I had my druthers?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No. What I'm trying to ask is: Do youmean some joint venture by the G-7 in which the basic purpose is inthat direction?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's correct.MR. ANGELL. Do you mean specifically the use of monetarypolicy to add to exchange rate stability?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That was the point I was makingbefore. That's implicit here under certain circumstances, but I don'tthink that's enough. I think what is needed is going to have to gobeyond that.MS. SEGER. Are you talking about a discount rate hike? I'ma little confused.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.MR. JOHNSON. No, Jerry's talking about fiscal policy.MS. SEGER. I thought you meant monetary policy.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm also saying that I do thinkthere are things that can be done in the G-7 context that would becompatible with that objective. And unless, or until, there is somemovement in that direction, the risks that we are running in terms ofthese massive unfunded liabilities constitute, in my view, the largestsingle risk of the many risks that are in front of us right now. Andif push comes to shove, whether it's monetary policy or not, theanswer is going to come in the form of higher interest rates with or-86-12/15-16/87without monetary policy. What I'm trying to avoid is getting therethe hard way. There's no choice here.MR. JOHNSON. You say unfunded liabilities. I agree thatthey are unfunded to the extent that they're financing the deficit forconsumption purposes. They're not unfunded if they're private sectorinvestments; they are funded.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Prospectively, they're unfunded.MR. JOHNSON. If there's a rate of return included in theinterest rate it's not unfunded.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me ask you this: Is this relevant tothe vote that we're--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's relevant to my reservationsabout the vote, yes. Even though I have to vote--MR. ANGELL. You're just talking about what the minutes saythen?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, I'm--MR. ANGELL. You're not talking about the minutes?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't care about the minutes.MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason I asked is that we can have aformal discussion on this if you want.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson NoPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you want to reopen this?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, as I see it, we're on atightrope and I'm at the point where I think that a real effort shouldbe made to try to stabilize the exchange market. By that I mean thatthe dollar has gone down enough. What policy tools are available todo that? The problem is damn few. We're not going to get anythingmore on the fiscal side or elsewhere. We could tighten monetary-87-12/15-16/87policy, including raising the discount rate, but that entails allthese risks in terms of both the real and the financial sides of theeconomy. Or we could try to paste together some kind of a Louvre IIagreement backed up perhaps by using swaps or some foreign currencyborrowings. But I'm dubious that that by itself, without some kind ofpolicy initiative, would be convincing. On the other side of thecoin, if the skepticism about policy continues and if we have arenewed run on the dollar, it seems to me that that's going to produceprecisely the kinds of things that we're all so afraid of, including afurther break in the stock market. And that's the dilemma. But inorder to solve that dilemma, there has to be some movement someplace.And I ask where? And this is the thrust of my argument: that at thispoint some of that movement has to come from the United States. As Isaid, there are several ways to do it; but with the vulnerabilitiesthat I see right now, it is a very high-risk approach and I don't likeit. I think it's very dangerous.MR. ANGELL. I would like to associate myself, as youprobably understand, with the remarks that Vice Chairman Corrigan justmade. I believe it's a high-risk approach. And I also believe that avery clear-cut policy on the part of the U.S. Government and theFederal Reserve would not require as much interest rate cost as weotherwise will have to bear. It would be more consistent with lowerinterest rates and faster money growth than our ignoring the exchangevalue of the dollar.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone else want to address thisissue?MR. JOHNSON. There's not enough time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If not, I just want to confirm that thenext meeting date is February 9 and 10. I will entertain a motion toadjourn.MR. JOHNSON. I so move.MS. SEGER. I second it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No objection.END OF MEETING-88-