Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 7, 1984A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Wednesday, November 7, 1984, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMs. SegerMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles,1/ Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Kohn, Lang, Lindsey,Siegman, and Stern, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Left meeting before action to adopt domestic policy directive.11/7/84size of their reserves and figuring 10 percent on that and the trooppayments, they should be selling much more. That's really what theirprinciple is.MR. CROSS. Well, they don't sell only on those celebratedoccasions when they have come in and hit the market, of course. Theydo put some of this in over time. For a long period of time they hadfollowed, in varying degrees, the practice of putting these amounts induring periods when it seemed sensible to them or when they wanted todo it. They don't follow and have not followed, as far as I know, thepractice of consistently putting these amounts in the market on aregular basis.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If I remember correctly--Ted Trumanmight know--when I was at the Treasury the amount of the two itemsthat Henry mentioned was $1 to $2 billion a year. And we did not urgethem to follow a policy, Henry, of immediately selling it out as theygot it in, but they did try to follow an overall, longer-term policyof averaging out that way.MR. CROSS. They've been doing this for many years and havealways done it in this way. The amounts I think are larger than--MR. TRUMAN. It sticks in my mind that troop payments weresomewhat less than $100 million a month. That would be somewhat morethan $1 billion just on that score alone in a calendar year and thenthey would have a couple of hundred million in income.MR. CROSS. Troop costs certainly used to be at least thatmuch; that may have declined.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other discussion? Well, I take itthat there is a willingness to renegotiate all the swaps or to renewthem for another year. There is not much renegotiation involved.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do we need a formal vote?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we don't, do we?MR. CROSS. I will assume the Committee agrees and willproceed accordingly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll approve them when they are done. Wehave to ratify the transactions.MR. MARTIN. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions?MR. WALLICH. On this foreign issue: If the spread firstwent down and then went back up to where it was at the time of theissue, is there any justification for any bank to say that they wouldhave lost money had they gone in on that and that they were smart notto go in on it?11/7/84MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think some who went in on it feltthat it was worth something, just for the prestige or the advertisingfactor. One had that sense on the bids that came in, and I think thatsome modest losses probably were taken in the course of doing that.Certainly, one hears that the next time around the spread is notlikely to be as large as that 32 basis points--that maybe half thatwould be justifiable. That was the feeling I was getting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Japanese felt an obligation tocooperate. I think that was a significant factor that wouldn'tnecessarily be there in the future to such a degree.MR. GUFFEY. I would like to inquire, Peter: When did wedrop the borrowing level from $750 to $700 million? I must tell youas a preface that I was surprised. The first time I realized it wasfrom the Bluebook, which I thought was a mistake; I went back to thedaily wires and there was no indication that I could find that theborrowing level had been dropped.MR. STERNLIGHT. Just a week ago, I believe. I am confidentit was mentioned. Well, I can't say I read the wire of the call. Iknow that it certainly was reviewed at the conference call.MR. AXILROD. If it wasn't in the wire, it should have been.It must have been an oversight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Last Thursday or Friday.MR. GUFFEY. I think I went back over [the wires of] the lastweek.MR. AXILROD. It was right after that first week of the two-week period. We ended up at $700 million right about that time forthe average borrowing level and it seemed sensible to make it $700million, given all that had happened. It should have been in thememorandum of the call. If it wasn't, it was certainly an oversight.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I could be mistaken, but I don't think so.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It has been an interesting market. Ithink that the range of short-term interest rates is predicated moreon a market anticipation of a fed funds rate closer to 9-1/2 percentthan the 10 or 9-7/8 percent that it has been averaging lately. So,there is a question--not that we're getting into that now--butassuming there's some further easing, the question is whether marketswill assume that's the last; I doubt that they will. They'll probablyassume there will be a discount rate cut later on and the markets willthen take it even further and we may continue to get some lower ratesthan the projections.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments? We have to ratify thetransactions.MR. MARTIN. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]11/7/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say the economy was expanding morerapidly in September and October. This is what the employment figuresfor October show as I understand it. That does not seem to be matchedby industrial production or by consumption necessarily.MR. KICHLINE. We said more rapidly in October than inSeptember.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In employment.MR. KICHLINE. That's true. The gains in employment inOctober were rather spectacular; it's the highest increase in over ayear. I think that's unsustainable. It looks a little odd.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand the number. How do youinterpret the unemployment claims figure?MR. KICHLINE. To start out I mentioned conflicting signs,and that indeed is one of them. Initial claims for unemploymentinsurance have been edging higher, including those for the week afterthe labor market reports were taken. We are estimating, as I noted,that industrial production was up about a quarter of a percent inOctober and that's better than a 0.6 percent decline. But the Octoberlevel of production is still below what we saw in the summer. Thereare many what I would view as conflicting indicators of what ishappening.MR. PARTEE. Well, a lot of that increase in employment inOctober was in nonmanufacturing.MR. KICHLINE. The bulk of it. I think industrial productionis related [more] to the manufacturing employment. But for somereason, people are going out and hiring lots of new employees inservices and trades.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To unload the imports and sell them!MR. PARTEE. To get them off the docks? Well, that could be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I met yesterday with the chairman of theI asked him about the October retail sales. He saidthat their sales were lower than they expected and as a consequencethat their inventories are up about 5 percent from where they thoughtthey would be. He attributes it largely to the fact that Octoberweather was unusually warm and that people just don't buy winterclothing until the weather turns cold. He is expecting a very strongChristmas selling season. That, for whatever it's worth, is theview.MR. PARTEE. He does recognize that he had a very softOctober?MR. MORRIS. Yes. But he thinks he knows why--the weatherfactor. It wasn't something that alarms him.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.11/7/84MR. MARTIN. I just want to underline some of the mixedsignals, Jim. I note that the Michigan consumer confidence measurewas off a little in October. I don't put a big weight on that. Thehours worked quantum always puzzles me a bit, but I notice the hoursworked were down in October according to the Labor Department. TheChairman has mentioned that initial claims for unemployment were up.The purchasing agents survey is not a good quantitative measure--itwas revised three times ex post out of the [unintelligible] data--butfor whatever it's worth it shows reductions in new orders, deliveryspeed, inventories, and payrolls, and less price increases. I thinkperhaps more important were the preliminary indications that thethird-quarter real GNP may be revised downward due to the merchandisetrade deficit number. If that is 1.7, not 2.7 percent, it may requirea rethinking of some of the inventory changes. It already has beenrevised down once from 3.6 percent. I don't know what a soft landingis, but an 80 percent decline from the first half, when we had GNPgrowth of 8.4 percent--I don't know how soft that landing is. Theundercarriage of the vehicle may be slightly bent in that kind of[scenario].MR. PARTEE. Well, it's still above the runway.MR. MARTIN. It's above the runway but perhaps without anywheels! At any rate, your comment with regard to oil prices, foodprices, and other indications of inflation out there in the future isreassuring. Imports are still soaring--I'm tying onto the Chairman'scomments as usual here--but those imports are having employment andincome effects in U.S. firms. We know that. It seems to me thatthere is a risk of a growth recession in the first and second quartersof next year. I too have talked to retailers who feel they will getthrough the holiday selling season well and then have very quiet firstand second quarters. And I see the risk of a growth recession, withrising unemployment and very low real growth taking off from that 1.7or 1.5 percent. I saw one model's output that had 1.2 percent for thethird quarter, which I don't believe, but it begins to get yourattention, I think. The consumer comes into the first and secondquarters with all those new cars bought on credit and all those otherconsumer durables and is paying the kinds of real interest rates onepays today, and I don't know whether that adds up to a snapback ornot. It doesn't to me. I think that the risk is so high that weshould be very concerned about it. If we get your [projected] 3.5percent real [GNP] for the fourth quarter and run along at about 3 or3-1/2 percent for 1985--given the margin of error, no disrespectintended--it seems to me that again gets to be a precarious positionto be in with a substantial downside risk. If we get one or twoexogenous factors in there when the economy is hovering around a 3percent level, unemployment can get started up again. The foreigncompetitor is still cutting into those employment rolls. So, I thinkthe margin of error is substantial. I would hate to see the Congresscome back into this town, this font of all the wisdom in the universe,facing a 1 percent real growth figure and rising unemployment. Wewould just get some dandy decisions in the fiscal area in thatcircumstance. I think we are facing an increasing downside risk.MR. PARTEE. Jim, the last time you talked some about theprobabilities. May I ask whether you have anything new to say aboutthat? That is, have you increased the probability of something aroundzero compared with six weeks ago or whenever we met last?11/7/84MR. KICHLINE. There is a probability of negative growth inthe fourth quarter of 19 percent.MR. BLACK. Are you rounding, or is that--?MR. MARTIN. Jim, what about the probabilities in the firstand second quarters?MR. KICHLINE. This comes out of the econometric modelexercises we performed. The model said 19 percent for the fourthquarter and 15 percent for the first quarter; then it drifts in therange of 25 or 30 percent, let's say, in the latter part of 1985.MR. BALLES. Have you checked it with [Jimmy] the Greek?MR. KICHLINE. No.MR. GRAMLEY. What is the probability of two consecutivequarters of negative growth?MR. KICHLINE. Two consecutive quarters is very low--1 to 2percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, Governor Martin said a good part ofwhat I had in mind except that I don't expect a growth recession inthe first half of next year. I don't have any major argument with thestaff forecast. But I am more comfortable with the longer-term partof the forecast than I am with the forecast for the current quarter.As was pointed out in the briefing, the performance of the currentquarter is very sensitive to the increase in consumer expenditures; wehave to get a substantial increase--on the order of 5 percent plus inthis quarter--in order to get the projected growth for this quarter.In addition, even if we get this substantial increase in consumptionexpenditures, the stimulus to GNP depends on the distribution of theseconsumer expenditures between imports and the rundown of inventory.So, the net stimulus to real GNP may not be as strong as projected.On the other hand, it may well work out that output does increase inthe range of 3-1/2 percent. My only point is that for this quarter weshould be prepared to see an increase in real GNP of significantlyless than 3-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Perhaps in line with previous comments, I'mbeginning to sense what I think is quite a different tone in our areathan what I reported at the previous meeting. I have suggested in thepast that the Middle West has not participated very fully in therecovery and expansion, and that continues to be the case. But somethings may be developing that signal broader problems. The badbusiness has continued to be bad. The backlogs of orders are runningdown. But those businesses that have done better than others arebeginning to feel the slowdown. One CEO that I talked with who workswith what he calls pressure curves, which are some kind of regressionanalysis on the rate of incoming orders, says those are beginning toindicate to him that we are heading into a downturn. Specifically:The appliance business is noticeably weaker; heavy trucks, which were11/7/84very strong early in the year, are now turning down; and the trucktrailer business market was up because of a legislative change but isclearly turning around and slowing down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What business?MR. KEEHN. Truck trailer.MR. PARTEE. That means double trailers.MR. KEEHN. There was a legislative change that provided fordouble bottoms and that really ballooned the market. That is comingdown.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interrupt for a second. I hadthe impression that heavy trucks were doing well--that they had gonedown and then gone up.MR. KEEHN. Orders booked for very heavy trucks, Class 8trucks, are down substantially and their production is down. A largeretailer--which is frankly a euphemism forMR. MARTIN. Let's see if they told you the same thing theytold me!MR. KEEHN. We had a meeting of [local] economists a week orso ago and their representative, who had been quite optimistic aboutthe Christmas outlook, is now a lot less optimistic.MR. MARTIN. They did.MR. KEEHN. They are expressing some doubts about the outlookfor retail sales. This suggests that while we thought the softlanding--or the reduction from the very high first and secondquarters--was a welcome thing, it may be something a bit morefundamental. I'm beginning to wonder about that. I don't disagreewith the staff forecast, but it tends to be a little on the high side,to me at least. The GNP numbers look high both for this quarter andfor next year. Housing starts and auto sales look a little high. So,consistent with [the views of] Governor Rice and Governor Martin, Ithink there is an increasing risk of low or perhaps even negativegrowth rates.I just can't let the moment go by without commenting thatconditions in the agricultural sector are continuing to deteriorate.What has been a very difficult situation has only gotten worse withthe passage of time. The rains are now complicating the harvestseason; commodity prices are down; meat prices are down; and landvalues are continuing to decline. [The latter] is particularly truein Iowa where admittedly they have come down from pretty high levels,but they are in a decline that's very significant. This is beginningto back up even more with regard to nonperforming loans in theagricultural banks. The banks keep saying that their problems aremanageable; nonetheless, these are the kinds of things that can turnaround pretty rapidly. Based on the calendar we are at a time of theyear when for the next few months things [should] only get better.They ought to be better now than they are. And the fact that they arebad would indicate that in the next few months things are going to get11/7/84worse. Agricultural equipment manufacturers are continuing to gothrough just a very dismal period. The outlook is poor and they arepulling down their production schedules very significantly. There isplenty of tractor and combine equipment at the retail level, soproduction is going to be very weak well into 1985. Our agriculturaleconomist, who is a pretty conservative guy not given to extremes,said that in his view we are facing the worst set of circumstances inthis area that he has known in his whole experience at the Bank. Idon't think that we are at a turning point here, but I would certainlythink that the odds have changed significantly and that theprobability of going into a period of lower rates of growth than wethought in the past is increasing. It is certainly higher than it wasat the past meeting or two.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. In my District if you talk to people who arerunning companies, they still have fairly good expectations for 1985but are less sure. Some doubts are beginning to creep in and I thinkwe're in a period where expectations could change. The currentresults are quite mixed. Manufacturing tends to be flatter. Inretailing, I find that we talk to one retailer and things look good inOctober and we talk to another retailer and things were pretty flat.So, the current indicators are rather mixed. I do think, however,that if we continue to get these mixed current indicators, the longer-term expectations are going to shift. If you start out with reallygood feelings about 1985, I think uncertainty tends to undermine them.So I think, as has been said around the table starting with GovernorMartin, that there has been a change. I don't think it is a definiteturning point but it's a period of increasing doubts. And if we don'tbegin to see some pickup very soon, attitudes about 1985 will shiftsignificantly. If you felt strongly a month ago that we were having asnapback, you have to be a lot less sure about that now. If lastmonth you were leaning toward [an expectation of] a growth recession,you have to be leaning more in that direction. My own view is thatI'm fairly uncertain. There is a high degree of uncertainly aboutwhere things are going, but I think the risks have shifted toward aslower economy than I, at least, would have thought a month ago.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I approach this with alittle different view from the other speakers this morning. That'sprimarily, I suppose, because of where I live and work. To be sure,economic activity in the Atlanta District did go through a period ofmoderation in the summer but we have seen some pickup. Generallyspeaking, I think that economic activity is fairly healthy. Most ofthe indicators show strength, although there are some weak areas. Wehave heavy defense spending, particularly in the electronic andaerospace industries; oil and gas [activity] is even picking up in theLouisiana area; and the carpet industry, construction, and housing arepicking up. In fact, housing surged by about 52 percent in theSoutheast in the month of September. Tourism continues to be good.The weak spots are forest products and textiles and other export-related areas. Now, retail sales have been off even in our area; theypicked up in September and fell off again a little in October. All ofthe retailers I speak to are experiencing downturns from theirprojections; their sales are not up to plan. They attribute this, as11/7/84others have said, to the unusually warm weather in October. They area bit cautious about Christmas, although I think most of them arefairly confident that they are going to have a good Christmas season.Agriculture is a mixed bag because of a number of factors, includingdrought followed by very heavy rain in early November.Looking beyond the Southeast, which is perhaps not typical[of the nation], I tend to agree with the staff forecast of renewedgrowth in the fourth quarter and in 1985, particularly because I thinkthat we have not yet seen the effects working through the economy ofthe lower interest rates that we've recently experienced. On theinflation side, I am a little less confident about the staff'sprojection. I still think that is a problem that we really have tokeep our eye on. I think the dollar is going to come off although,like everybody else, I won't be very quick to say when that willhappen. But I think we are going to see the dollar coming off, withits implications for inflation. Also, the numbers that I have seensuggest that wage settlements in the service sector have not beennearly as low as they have been in manufacturing. And, of course, wehave the fiscal stimulus, which I don't see being removed very quicklywhen Congress comes back. So, on balance, Mr. Chairman, I think wecan expect reasonably good growth in 1985. I view the risk not as oneof negative growth but rather of renewed inflation. Even if we didn'tget 3-1/2 percent real GNP in 1985, I think that even 2-1/2 to 3percent growth would still be fairly decent and not anything to beterribly worried about. At this point, I am not concerned aboutrecession or any kind of negative growth in 1985.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Well, the staff's projection for the fourthquarter is about in line with what most private forecasters have beensaying; it's certainly plausible and maybe even the most likelyforecast. But I have to agree with Preston Martin and Emmett Rice andEd Boehne and Si Keehn: I believe the risk has shifted to the lowside since we last met. As Jim Kichline pointed out, there arecertainly some statistics that suggest that growth picked up inSeptember--the employment figures and the figures on retail sales.But I think we have to bear in mind that given the export/importpicture, even if final demand strengthens, that doesn't necessarilymean that we are going to have equivalent strength in domesticemployment and demand. People may, as you said, Mr. Chairman, belining up to unload those imports. Moreover, the lack of growth in M1since midyear certainly makes it less likely that there will be anysustained resumption in growth any time soon. In short, I see someserious risks in the near-term economic future and I think we ought tokeep those in mind as we address policy today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I am agnostic on the outlook. I think ithas deteriorated somewhat. I made a list for myself of strong andweak factors and I stopped when I reached 12 on each side and had anumber more. But I think the nature of the choices that we have is alittle different. Expansions don't go on forever; at some point therewill be a pause--a growth recession, hopefully not a real recession.If we had the choice of a growth recession in the near future or areal recession a year later, for instance--11/7/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's a growth recession?MR. WALLICH. When unemployment rises but GNP still rises--inother words, growth below potential. If we had that and it werereversed subsequently, that to me would be a less ominous thing than anew real recession. And that might well be a choice because thethings one would have to do in order to make sure that there is nogrowth recession may very well generate imbalances or maladjustmentsand set in motion [forces] that a year or two later might produce areal recession. They might also, of course, get us back intoinflation. Starting from 5 percent inflation, it seems to me oneought to use special caution in dealing with that prospect. It's notas though we were starting from close to zero.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not exactly at 5 percent either.MR. WALLICH. I think the underlying inflation rate is ofthat order if one removes all the temporary [influences]. If we lookat the probabilities of what is going to happen, they may be evenlybalanced between a resumption of the expansion or a growth recession.I doubt that it would be a real recession. If we look at the risksthat lie beyond that, action to keep [the economy] growing at allcosts might produce a much worse situation later and might conceivablyrelaunch us into inflation. I think those possible costs are muchhigher than if the economy wants to take a short pause and then resume[growth] again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. As I look at the numbers coming in, I aminclined to agree with the staff that they do suggest there is someimprovement in activity going on. When I think of how the numberswere coming in a month or two ago, the recent figures look to me a lotmore optimistic. The last figure on new orders for nondefense capitalgoods was up after a couple of months of decline. Shipments were upquite strongly. The last figure we had for retail sales was up; wedon't know what October will bring. I read the Beigebook and Ithought it was saying that the gains we had in September seemed to besustained in October even though that doesn't seem to be confirmed bydepartment store sales.MR. PARTEE. Nor by the comments around here.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we haven't heard from everybody yet. Butcertainly, the comments in the Beigebook did not reflect what we'rehearing today.MR. PARTEE. I think somebody else wrote the Beigebook!MR. GRAMLEY. We're now looking at a period of rising autoproduction--increasing availability of models instead of the reversethat was going on in the summer. The last figures on housing startsand new home sales were up in contrast to earlier weakness. TheOctober employment data were considerably stronger than the datacoming in during the summer; indeed, we had a turnaround inmanufacturing employment from a rather sizable decline in September toan increase in October. In a period like this there is bound to beuncertainty. As Henry mentioned, you can list a dozen factors on the-10-11/7/84positive side and a dozen on the negative side, and there is room fordoubt among reasonable people as to where things are going. We'vebeen through this sort of pause many, many times in periods ofeconomic expansion. If you asked what basic factors were driving theeconomy during the first six quarters of recovery--strong fiscalstimulus, a lot of consumer confidence, low inflation, the technologydriving business fixed investment--I think those factors are stillthere. And I'm about 75 percent certain, personally, that theincoming figures a month and two months from now will show a morepositive trend. I do not worry about the possibility that third-quarter GNP growth will be revised downward. I don't doubt that atall. That is what happened in the past. Indeed, if it turns out thatthe downward revision reflects a lower rate of inventory investment,that would be on balance a plus and not a minus. I agree with thestaff forecast. I think we will see some strengthening in activity.I don't know whether it is going to be in the fourth quarter and Idon't really care. It's a question of whether or not it comes alongsoon enough, as I think it will, to generate the kind of growth thatthe staff is forecasting for 1985. And I think they are about righton the button.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. In the Twelfth District, the pace of economicexpansion really has slowed dramatically. We just haven't seen thebounceback in sales that is reported in some Districts. One thingthat is going quite strongly in our District is nonresidentialconstruction; in some of our leading cities it's almost of boomproportions. But it's certainly clear that the reduction we've seenso far in mortgage rates has been insufficient to prevent both theconstruction and the sale of new homes from falling further. That's aweak area. And as I've been reporting for a long time now, the strongdollar and the situation with foreign imports are hurting a good partof Western industries such as forest products and primary metals, andthat is reducing the overall growth of manufacturing employment to acrawl. The agricultural situation is pretty grim in a good many ofour states. In sum, I think the balance has changed toward the enginestalling here. If the plane is still in the air, it's about to makesomething worse than a soft landing. I agree with much of what wassaid by Governors Martin and Rice and Presidents Keehn, Boehne, andothers. Monetary policy is supposed to be flexible and I think thetime has come to err a bit on the side of ease unless the situationclarifies.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. My own view is that the staff forecast isprobably about on the mark. In fact, I still very much lean to theview that in the next two or three quarters as a whole, there is agood chance that the economy will be stronger than the staff forecastrather than weaker. I may be a little less certain about that nowthan I was six weeks ago, as are other people; nevertheless, that'sstill where I'd put the probabilities. The uncertainty factor clearlydoes reflect the very, very near-term outlook. What is this mishmashof statistics and anecdotes really telling us? On the retail salesside, we had meetings last week with the CEOs of all the big companiesin Minneapolis--and there are two very sizable retailers headquarteredthere--and they,-11-11/7/84remain extremely bullish about the outlook for retailsales in the near term notwithstanding this pronounced slowing in thelast two weeks of October.On the other side of the picture, a couple of the companiesin the Twin Cities that are major manufacturers and suppliers ofelectronic gear and happen to be thought of as computer companies--infact, they make lots of components that go into both commercial andresidential construction--reported a surge in industrial bookings inOctober. That was the word that they used. Insofar as the equipmentthat they manufacture and sell is associated with housing, they don'tknow whether it's related to new housing or renovation, of course.But in October, or I should say the 30 days ending last Thursday, theyhad an all-time record 30-day pace of activity for bookings andshipments of electronic components that go into residential units.Maybe that's consistent with the view that the decline in interestrates that we've seen is beginning to take hold a little. While thehousing sales figures in the last set of numbers were somewhat mixedgeographically, there was some spark at least for one month evident inthose statistics as well. When I put it together, again, I wouldagree with many of the comments that the immediate situation is harderthan usual to read. I personally do not see a recession in sight oranything that would remotely qualify as a recession.I have two quick comments on imports and agriculture. Thisimport phenomenon, as I think I said once before, is really off thechart. There is no doubt that that makes it extremely difficult tofigure out where the driving forces are, but I will just try to putthat in perspective with a couple of concrete examples. For example,one of these companies told me that just in the past six or sevenmonths they have started buying disk drives for floppy disks forsmaller computers from a Taiwanese supplier. They are delivered inMinneapolis for $60 a unit whereas the cheapest they can make themwith no markup--the cheapest they can-manufacture them themselvesanyplace in the United States--is $140 a unit. Another very largehigh-tech company reported to me that within the time frame of thisyear they started buying transformers for their medium size main framecomputers from Far Eastern sources. Again, the price delivered tothem in the United States is one-third of the cheapest price they canmanufacture that type of component. Indeed, one of these companiesreported to me that the situation has reached a point where, no matterwhat one assumes about exchange rates or anything else, from the pointof view of their corporate long-term strategic planning they have nowfound themselves forced for the first time to consider seriously goinginto off-shore supply in a major way through their own facilities.They find that very distasteful but the economics of it are such thatthey find themselves compelled to think in those terms.On the agricultural situation, I would just echo what SiKeehn has said. It is not pretty. And I think it is now starting toback up in a way that you can see the implications of it on the smallbanks--all these darn small one-bank holding companies that aresitting out there and are leveraged to the hilt. It could be verytroubling.-12-11/7/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. The situation from the vantage point of theCleveland District isn't much different from what has been expressedby a number of people around the table. The Fourth District'sdifficulties are probably due to a [concurrence] of circumstances.First, there are the ongoing structural problems and the intenseimport competition, which we feel so strongly, together with the pausein economic activity. Most of our capital goods industries, excludingmachine tools, have noted a flattening in orders and shipments. Insteel we've had a few more furnace shutdowns. Housing in the Districthas been flat at best for several months and our bankers continue tocomment on the difficult income situation that farmers find themselvesin and the problems they will have servicing their debts. The result,as has been pointed out, is increased uncertainty about the outlookfor next year. In our District we still have the basic view that theconsumer will lift the economy into growth next year; around theDistrict a strong Christmas is widely expected. Expectations are alsofor a continued thrust from business investment, although presumablyat a slower pace. We have a basically positive outlook but a lot ofconcern is expressed; I think the concerns of many people arise inpart because of how discouraged they are with the very strong importcompetition. Others focus on the long-term problems of the economy:the need for fiscal policy changes, the inflation problems, and soforth. Also, expectations are generally damped by the pause that wesee. Although expectations are for growth next year, they are veryshaky, and sometimes I wonder if they are held with enough confidenceto get us over a few disappointments that we might see in the comingmonths.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I think it is fair to characterizethe situation in the Eleventh District as one where we are continuingto see some improvement. Employment is increasing, industrialproduction is still moving up, and retail sales look fairly good. Iwill say that we have had slowdowns from earlier in the year.Weakness, of course, continues in the energy industry, and that mightbe getting a little worse. We also have had a downturn inconstruction but, as I indicated last time, I really don't thinkthat's all that bad. I would pretty well agree with the Board staff'sforecast. I would expect the fourth quarter obviously to look alittle better than the third quarter. At least from the people I'vetalked to down our way, I have not picked up any real concern about arecession on the horizon as we go into 1985. The confidence factor,at least my own confidence factor, is not quite as strong as it wasearlier. So, I'm not really complacent. On the other hand, my degreeof discomfort, if you will, is probably not as great as that expressedby a number of people here. It seems to me that we're just cominginto a period when there is uncertainty and when decisions become verydifficult. I think there is an awfully great risk of overreacting towhat might or might not happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.MS. SEGER. I have been somewhat concerned about slowingbusiness conditions for several months and I still am. I won't repeatall the signs; I heard them earlier and you have also. I will just-13-11/7/84add two things that I haven't heard mentioned so far. One is that intalking with a number of business economist friends who are neitherkooks nor politicians I sense a big change in their attitudes in thelast six weeks or so. In general their confidence in their forecastsfor next year seems to have diminished. Frankly, if I had to point myfinger at one factor that is responsible for this, it would be thesignals that we have been sending from this building. They arelooking at the slower monetary growth in the last four months and as agroup are not interpreting that as poor marksmanship or the inabilityto hit our targets. They are interpreting these numbers as an actualtightening, particularly when they saw the fed funds rate shoot backup in August. So, I think that has led to some of the changes inattitude. Secondly, I was talking to a top economist for one of theBig Three auto companies who said that when they were doing theirmodeling and trying to forecast auto sales for next year they lookedat the usual relationships among employment, income growth, creditavailability and all the things that they know influence auto sales.They came up with a particular forecast, yet because of their lack offaith in that number, they peeled off about 300 to 400 thousand unitsfrom that because in the pit of their stomachs they didn't think theycould hit the number that came out of their model. I am mentioningthis to suggest that if there is a risk, I think it is that thesenumbers [forecast] for the fourth quarter and for 1985 will be toohigh rather than too low. I am not saying that there is a recessionaround the corner; I am not that good a forecaster. But I think thereis the risk.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. One thing that worries a person who looks at thebusiness statistics all the time is a situation that can't very wellbe explained on the basis of past experience. And I can't very wellexplain why business is as weak as it has been in the last few months.That makes for considerable discomfort in a professional economist. Iam very nervous at the present time. I felt confident that therewould be a resurgence in the economy this fall because, like Lyle, Ithought that we had just a temporary spell of reduced consumption. Ithought the economy would come along in the fall because incomes andexpectations and confidence and the real financial value of assetswere all there to support strong consumer spending. I guess I stillfeel that. I am closer in view to the guy from than I am tothe guy from in thinking that we're going to have a goodChristmas. Nevertheless, there is no real indication of such aresurgence in attitudes of manufacturers and business peoplegenerally. The one thing that I have never dealt with is the problemof a steadily rising proportion of total markets being taken up withimports. Because we haven't had that in the 35 years that I have beenan economist, it does occur to me that it's possible that retail salescan look good and strong and that plant and equipment spending canlook good and strong and it won't do anything for the domestic economyif an important increment of that demand is going into imported goods.Therefore, it is quite possible that we could have strength in theindicators of the kind that Bob Forrestal talked about--retail salesand so forth--but weakness in the underlying performance of theeconomy. I think that's a big change from the past, and it seems tobe a trend that is still persisting.-14-11/7/84The other thing that may have occurred--and it's very, veryhard to know--is that, in fact, inflation expectations may havesubsided over the last six months. We are getting some indications ofthat from these horseback surveys that people do on inflation. But Idon't think they are much good; they really just reflect what hashappened most recently. But it may be that we've had a period of lowincreases in wages and low increases in profit margins for a longenough time that people are now beginning to believe that by gollyinflation isn't going to go back to 7 or 8 or 9 percent! You mayremember in the spring that it wasn't hard to find outliers likeMilton Friedman who thought that inflation would be at double digitsby the end of this year. That has disappeared entirely. That also issomething that could affect attitudes and the speed with which plansare put in place in order to beat price increases, because now peopledon't expect the price to increase whereas before they did.I would point out that the staff forecast is nothing to writehome about in terms of great strength. The forecast is for a littleover 3 percent real growth over the next five quarters. That's not ahigh number. I would also point out to you that there is an importantpresumption in that forecast and that is that real imports go nohigher than they are now--that the whole import thrust is behind us.In the Greenbook, if you look at constant dollar net imports on a GNPbasis, there has been a deterioration of $35 billion over the pastfour quarters. Over the next four quarters there will be nonewhatsoever, if that forecast is accurate. And that goes into the GNPforecast. If you don't believe that the import surge has ended, thenyou can't really believe a forecast as strong as the one the staff hasshown. I don't know what you think, but I think that imports arestill rising pretty darn rapidly and that the growth in imports willnot be over until we can change the terms of trade in which the UnitedStates deals. So, the forecast of a little over 3 percent assumesthat net imports stopped growing as of the third quarter, which isalready behind us. That's not such a very strong forecast.Henry speaks about inflation. He says a base rate of 5percent; I would say 4 percent. It is [not] zero. But unemploymentisn't zero either. As a matter of fact, we have 7-1/2 percentunemployment; it has been hanging at that number, Henry, and I wouldargue that a 7-1/2 percent unemployment rate gives us room for furthergrowth in the economy in the sense of looking at the performancecompared with some kind of norm--what we would like to see ideally.The unemployment rate is about as distressingly above where it oughtto be as the inflation rate is above what it ought to be. As I seeit, it's a situation in which one can say inflation has done betterthan one would expect based on recent track performance. Unemploymentis worse than it ought to be at this stage of a cyclical recovery.Therefore, although I'm not sure what is going to happen in theimmediate future, I think that the economy is not going to go into agreat resurgence in terms of output and employment and I think thereis room for some more growth than seems in prospect in the numbersthat we have.MR. TRUMAN. May I just correct one comment on the forecast?I don't want to dispute the basic thrust of your argument, but on theimport side we have identified a couple of areas--textiles and steel--where it is pretty clear that there was a buildup in imports inanticipation of trade policy actions that did occur and are going to,-15-11/7/84at a minimum, put us back toward the trend of where those imports wererelative to GNP. It is partly because we have taken out that smallpiece--$2-1/2 billion in 1972 dollars--which is not trivial in termsof the numbers we are looking at. It's 2 or 2-1/2 percent,essentially, in current dollars. We have taken that piece out andallowed some payback of it so that we get the absolutely flat picturethat you so accurately described. So we do have a continued rise inimports at least to the middle of next year absent that factor, whichtells us the dollar's depreciation, putative depreciation, takeseffect. But the reason you get the picture in the Greenbook islargely because we have that offsetting payback in the short run onimports.MR. PARTEE. Well, am I looking at this table correctly?MR. TRUMAN. No, that's right.MR. PARTEE. A year ago you had a plus $12 billion; in thethird quarter of this year it's a minus $22.6 billion. That's achange of $34-35 billion.MR. TRUMAN. No, no--MR. PARTEE. And now, with this little $2 billion difference,you have essentially stability from now on out?MR. GRAMLEY. Is this imports of goods or goods and services?MR. PARTEE. The only one they have in constant dollars isgoods and services. I am looking at page 1-21.MR. GRAMLEY. But I think the staff's forecast is for someincrease in the constant dollar value of goods counterbalanced by adecline in the services component, which largely reflects reducedinvestment income.MR. TRUMAN. Well, but the basic story is correct. Third-quarter [imports] of goods were something around $100 billion 1972dollars, which is close to $20 billion higher than it was a year ago.[Unintelligible] another $3 or $4 billion in goods because you haveoil in there over the forecast period. So, imports of servicesdecline somewhat and that gives you the flat number on a GNP basis.MR. PARTEE. And that is in the GNP forecast. Am I right,Jim?MR. KICHLINE. Correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. I am seeing in my District some of the changein attitude that has been commented on by others. I had a meetingwith about a dozen chief executive officers of large companies lastweek and their consensus was that business had turned toward the softside. They were generally concerned about inventory levels; it wasnot that inventories had gotten out of control, but the focus of theseCEOs had moved to the control of inventories. The retailers spoke ofa good Christmas instead of their previous very optimistic-16-11/7/84expectations about the Christmas season. They are reassessing theirprospects in the retail area, and this group included four nationalretailers who had a pretty good feel of conditions nationally. Theywere focusing particularly on [sales in] recent weeks. In themanufacturing sector, one thing that struck me was that withoutexception, none of them sees any inflation anywhere either in whatthey buy or in their ability to change prices of what they sell. Theyrelate this principally to the import competition, which seems to bepervasive. All of them one way or another seem to be experiencingthat across the board. The other thing that impressed me was thatthey all felt that wages were under complete control--that settlementsthat had occurred were very modest indeed, and their expectationsabout wage settlements were of the same variety.The housing area has been fairly stable; we have had somesoftness in single-family starts offset by multifamily starts. In theappliance manufacturing area, we have seen specific reductions. Forexample, the GE manufacturing facility in Louisville has justannounced another 1400 layoffs, including about 300 white collarworkers. In the textile area, where import competition has a bigeffect, four plants in Arkansas have just been closed involving about22,000 workers. The shoe industry in Missouri is in extremis, as theysay, in terms of import competition. Agriculture in particular ishurting now because of rains that are delaying harvesting and causingsome problems. We are getting reports that harvesting of animals isincluding breeding stock and that is an indication of problems there.So, when I put the whole thing together, I see a change of attitudeand conditions from a slowing in the economy to an economy that hasflattened out. My judgment is that the staff forecast is probablyoptimistic for the fourth quarter and for next year as well. My bestguess is that, absent a significant change of policy soon, the nextmove in the economy will be down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. On the other side of Missouri--MR. ROBERTS. It's a very thin edge.MR. GUFFEY. But an important thin edge. In the TenthDistrict there has been no improvement in those areas that I haveexpressed concern about before--principally agriculture, energy, andthe aircraft manufacturing industry. There are a couple of factors,however, that may influence the future. One, in the agriculturalsector, is the Administration's program that was announced a month orso ago for delaying or setting aside some of the debt of theproducers. That is now being put into place and they hope to have itoperational by January 1. For your information, it involves amongother things setting aside 25 percent of a producer's total debt up to$200,000 and delaying that for a period of 5 years with no interestand no payback. It is a guarantee program also with respect to thecommercial banks that are financing agriculture, if that comes about.It's a pilot program in five states--Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska,Minnesota, and Iowa. There is some mixed reaction from theagricultural sector, but it is something positive and they are tryingto assess what the impact will be. After it is in place in these fivestates, they expect to expand it nationwide.-17-11/7/84With respect to the energy area, OPEC and the lowering ofcrude prices have damped the enthusiasm, which was not very great, inenergy discovery. Another factor that has come to pass most recentlywas the announcement by Canada that they were going to reduce theprice of natural gas imported into the United States by 25 percent. Alot of the Tenth District is very heavily engaged in natural gasproduction, so that could further depress any interest in discovery orexploration in that area. There is a fairly large segment of theDistrict involved in high-tech business, particularly on the easternslope of the Rockies. Most recently there have been rathersubstantial layoffs--about 2,000 people--in that area who were engagedin the production of semi-conductors. I'm told that the demand forsemi-conductors worldwide has diminished but it has impacted thisparticular area more dramatically than I think any of us realizes. Onthe positive side, auto assembly [activity], in which we have a verylarge number employed, is going full out. Everybody is back andemployed. Nonresidential construction is experiencing boom conditionsin several areas in our District. Recreational activity is very high,with tourism and the ski industry looking forward to a very good year.I'd just note that in New Mexico, which is a very small part [of ourDistrict] population-wise but very important in the defense industry,is experiencing a boom particularly in the Albuquerque area simplybecause they are deeply involved in the production of defenseequipment.With respect to the outlook, I would agree with those whothink the Greenbook is about right or maybe not optimistic enough. Idon't see the dangers that everybody expressed around the table thatwe are going to drop into a growth recession, if you will, in thefourth quarter and the first quarter of 1985--or even if we did, thatthat would be all bad. In other words, I don't see the potential ofrecession as a very high probability or any probability at all. Onthe national level, I would accept the staff forecast as being aboutright. And if we get it, I would be delighted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I would like to associate myselfwith the Lyle Gramley school of predicting where we are. I think it'svery typical toward the second year of an expansion to run into aslower rate of growth in the economy as the economy shifts to a lowerrate of inventory accumulation. And I think that is exactly what isgoing on right now. I would assess the risks of a recession as closeto zero. I think the underpinnings of the economy are very strong.The most surprising statistic of the last month was the 440,000increase in employment. That--particularly the 55,000 increase indurable goods manufacturing employment--was much bigger than I hadexpected. These are not the kinds of numbers that one sees associatedwith an early stage of going into a recession. Furthermore, we havehad a big decline in interest rates. I think this economy is going tobe very responsive to that. We haven't had enough time yet to assessthe impact the interest rate decline that has already taken place willhave. We see one sign in the increase in new home sales and anothersign in the strength of the stock market. Another sign is[unintelligible]. But I think we haven't yet seen the full effect onthe real economic activity of the rate declines that have alreadytaken place. So, I find the pessimism that I have heard around thetable from many sources hard to understand. And I don't think this11/7/84comes from the fact that I am living in a state that has anunemployment rate of 3.7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I am living in a state which hasdouble that rate of unemployment and yet I share your view, Frank. Idon't quite understand the level of concern that I hear other thanthat it is the inherent nature of central bankers always to look atthe gloomy side. And I think the sense of balance would be not amajor shift of policy as Ted Roberts is saying, but some modest thoughlimited easing. I won't repeat the reasons why I think the staffforecast for next year is on balance probably as reasonable as one canexpect. In our view it might be somewhat weaker in the fourth quarterbecause of inventory adjustment. But the general feeling in myDistrict--what I hear from business leaders and from members of ourboard--is that there will be good Christmas retail sales and thatmanufacturing is not showing the earlier growth but is not showing anysignificant softening either. I also share Henry Wallich's view--Idon't always agree with Henry, but I must say I do this time--that thebusiness cycle is still with us and we should not be excessivelyalarmed about some tapering off and moderation. And even though 3percent isn't high, Chuck, it seems to me that that is a veryappropriate level--if that is what we actually get next year.MR. PARTEE. Well, we could easily afford more.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I tend to assume that thedollar is going to come off more and I assume there will beinflationary pressures that will result from that--although they won'tshow up too immediately, I suppose. And I would be concerned aboutmuch more than a 3 percent growth rate. I think our capacity isgrowing around 3 percent and it may very well be that the structure ofthe economy and our comparative advantage has changed in the world andthat we cannot expect to go back to a level of unemployment as low aswe had in previous recoveries. Also, in those previous recoveries wegot to double-digit inflation so we then tended to overreact the otherway. It seems to me that a steadier, more prudent, balanced, calmerpolicy would be in the direction of easing which does not reflect asmuch concern about the economy as I heard around the table.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we hear from Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any more or less technicalquestions or comments?MR. BOEHNE. I have a technical question. As you try to sortout what is behind the weakness in M1 and whether it's from the demandside or from the supply side, if you look at reserves over the lastcouple of months--which is on the supply side and can be viewed insome rough way as a [base] for creating money--reserve growth, as youpointed out, has been quite weak. I wonder, as we go into Novemberand December and try to guard against the continuation of thisweakness, if there's any value in looking through the nonborrowedtarget more to reserve growth to try to reduce the odds of continuedslow growth. Now, that presumes that part of the problem comes from-19-11/7/84the supply side. I just wondered technically if you have anyreactions to that.MR. AXILROD. Well, President Boehne, say the Committeewanted to achieve something like the alternative B path or, say, 7percent growth in total reserves in November. [While] it'stechnically not impossible to conduct operations in an effort toachieve that if the Committee wanted it, it is impossible to tell youwith any certainty, other than the way we do it in the Bluebook, whatis likely to happen to the level of member bank borrowing. If thedemand for those reserves doesn't happen to be there, we would have tokeep throwing nonborrowed reserves out there until we force the demandon them--force the banks to create the required reserves. And thatcould take a very substantial drop in interest rates if the demanddoesn't happen to be there. Our best guess, as is in the Bluebookimplicitly, is that it would not take a substantial drop in interestrates, though I would [modulate] that a bit if the latest money supplyfigures I have seen hold up after a day or so.MR. BOEHNE. I guess I am just getting at this supply/demanddivision that you mentioned. Does that give you any reading as towhether more of the problem lies with the supply side or the demandside?MR. AXILROD. No, I think you have to look at therelationship between interest rates and velocity. Obviously, therewould be more money out there, if we put in more reserves and therewould be less money, vice versa. The way I would look at it would beto try to explain velocity. That is what I was trying to do. Doesthe fourth-quarter rise in velocity indicate that people didn't reallywant the money and that they are quite happy? Or does it indicatethat people simply didn't get the money they really wanted and we hada temporary --in effect, arithmetic--rise in velocity and we're goingto see that reflected later in income as they have to adjust to thefact that they don't have as much money as they want? I don't thinkjust looking at the reserve-to-money relationship can tell you muchabout that.MR. MARTIN. Steve, you commented on the possible impact ofthe MMDA alternative to less interest [on] transaction balances. Itake it you were referring to the surprise in October?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. MARTIN. But why wouldn't that kind of impact occur whenthe rates first dropped?MR. AXILROD. MMDAs were rising in the first four months ofthe year at a slightly faster rate than they were rising in October.And then they stopped rising as market rates went up and banks didn'tfollow them all the way up. Then, with this recent very sharp drop inshort rates, banks have lagged in the extent to which their MMDA rateshave dropped. And, according to the figures we have for MMDAs, afterdeclining for several months they started rising. At the same time weare observing in the figures--although we have problems with seasonaladjustments because we don't have them seasonally adjusted--a drop inNOW accounts and in the very recent figures also a drop in Super NOWaccounts.-20-11/7/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How big are Super NOW accounts?MR. AXILROD. The level? The level of NOW accounts is $140billion approximately.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Super NOWs are what level?MR. ROBERTS. $43 billion.MR. AXILROD. I think I have that number. They're about $45billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that included in that $140 billion?MR. AXILROD. That's included; so there is $100 and some oddbillion--MR. ROBERTS. Steve, are you saying that as the differentialbetween NOW accounts and MMDAs declines, there's a percentage thatshifts [to MMDAs] instead of the contrary?MR. AXILROD. Well, [we were] reaching for hypotheses toexplain this back in the second half of 1982 when interest ratesdropped sharply and there was a sharp rise in NOW accounts. At thattime there were no MMDAs. MMDAs have a lower reserve requirement thanNOW accounts by a lot.MR. ROBERTS. But that's an interesting thesis: that someonewho accepts a lower-than-market rate gets more interested in changingto the market rate as the spread declines instead of as it widens.MR. AXILROD. Well, I was thinking of these as monies thatare in the market now that shift back into bank deposits as rates godown. And what bank deposits do they shift back into?MR. ROBERTS. Not from NOWs to MMDAs but from the market toMMDAs.MR. AXILROD. And instead of going back into NOWs, as weexperienced in 1982--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why would that make NOW accounts go down?MR. AXILROD. Well, there are other things going on at thesame time, obviously. But I was thinking mainly of shifts from themarket and not using NOW accounts.MR. PARTEE. It keeps them from going up. I see the point.MR. MARTIN. But my question is: Why wouldn't that haveoccurred earlier than October? I am trying to figure out October andI can't.MR. AXILROD. Well, that I really can't give an answer to.The banks' MMDA figures were running negative between 5 and 6 percentand then minus 1 percent in September. Then they rose to an 8.8percent rate of growth in October.11/7/84MR. ROBERTS. For a while the money market funds were moreattractive than the bank funds and that spread has declined morerecently.MR. AXILROD. But why banks have chosen to lag their rates atthis point is hard to answer.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey, did you have a question?MR. GUFFEY. Yes. With respect to the October number--and Iknow this won't make a great difference--do I remember correctly thatlast year when we did the seasonal adjustment those figures for thefourth quarter, including October, were revised up substantially?Would you not expect a similar event this year?MR. AXILROD. What I have readily in mind is that for thesecond half of last year the rate of growth of M1 was raised 1-3/4percentage points at an annual rate, of which 1 percentage point wasseasonal and .7 was benchmark figures. This year, we've run throughit assuming that money grew 7 percent in November and December andthat changes the configuration somewhat in that the slowdown occursmore gradually over the course of the year. But you still would get,of course, a much slower growth in the latter months of the year thanin the first several months of the year. But it will raise July,August, and September and make October less negative, say, by 4percentage points depending on November-December. There's no doubtabout that; it goes in that direction.MR. GUFFEY. That's making a substantial--MR. PARTEE. What if November-December were less than 7percent? If, say, November and December were at 4 percent rather than7 percent, would that have changed the seasonal distribution and inwhich direction?MR. AXILROD. I assume it would. I assume a lower growthrate would tilt a little more of the growth into the second half. ButI didn't run it for that.MR. GRAMLEY. I have a question about the contention that theincrease in velocity in the fourth quarter might be explained by asupply side phenomenon rather than a demand side phenomenon. I knowthere are differences in speeds of adjustments, depending on themodels, but if you had a stable money demand function and arestriction of supply and the short-run elasticities of demand withrespect to interest rates were a lot less, what you would have is aphenomenon in which interest rates rose much more than they would haveto to equate money demand to money supply. Well, that's not theproblem we are looking at now. Interest rates are going down, not up.It seems to me you have to argue that if we have not had a downwardshift in money demand either we don't really understand the factorsaffecting money demand, which is possible, or that our estimatednominal GNP figure for the fourth quarter is way too high.MR. AXILROD. The only thing I would add to that, GovernorGramley, is that apart from the fact that the model [unintelligible]relationships, one could also argue that interest rates are higher-22-11/7/84than they otherwise would have been, obviously, if you had reallyforced in the money now. That's pretty much what I had in mind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have something to say, Mr.Sternlight?MR. STERNLIGHT. I was going to add a comment on the questionSteve was raising earlier about why the banks have lagged in bringingdown their rates on MMDA accounts. I think one reason might be thatthey see that as a rather easy way to get in some more retail moneyand lessen their dependence on day-to-day liability managed funds. Ithink some of them are conscious of the problems the big banks havehad and wanted to strengthen their deposit base that way. That couldhave been a factor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I'd just like to ask Steve a question about theuse of his phrase "searching for hypotheses" here in view of theunexpected and unwelcomed decline in M1 in October, which seems to begetting worse. If there had not been a downward shift in moneydemand, are there alternative plausible explanations such as that wedidn't provide enough reserves?MR. AXILROD. Well, that's what I was trying to deal with.Reserves did drop somewhere around 15 to 18 percent.MR. WALLICH. Then interest rates would have had to rise.MR. AXILROD. Or drop a lot more to get the money in.MR. WALLICH. I mean if you didn't supply enough money anddemand was constant.MR. AXILROD. The other hypothesis that I tried to [test] wasthat if the demand was weakening in any event and if you supplied moremoney, interest rates would go down even more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had enough hypotheses. We will goand drink some coffee.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me express a few thoughts afterlistening to this conversation this morning, which I thought had quitea different tone than a month ago. The big surge theory seems to havedisappeared or has strongly dissipated at least. Similarly, theeconomy has not been expanding very rapidly in recent months. We hadthat very large--and confusing to me--figure on employment in October.I would emphasize one point that a lot of people have emphasizedalready: The impact of imports on the manufacturing sector of theeconomy is pervasive. I won't go on at great lengths because it wasexplored earlier. But there are signs that what was happening earlierwas that the expansion in demand was so great you could knock off 2percent of it for imports and nobody felt the difference. Now, whendomestic demand goes down, it makes a big difference. And I guess theimports actually have surged. You do get a sense of spreading layoffsamong some pretty big areas in manufacturing industries right in the-23-11/7/84middle of this expansion. You mentioned textiles, shoes, lumber, andsome others. And I think that affects the manufacturers' moodsanyway--not just in terms of the current competition but I think theyare looking at some of their investment plans. Some shoe businessesare going out of business, for instance.MR. PARTEE. Textiles too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it is leading to some moderationthere. But enough was said about that. As I look at the businesspicture, I think we have a rapid rate of inventory accumulation. Thatdidn't look so bad when the economy was rising rapidly, but as soon asthe economy stops rising so rapidly that rate of inventoryaccumulation has to come down. One senses that that's whatbusinessmen feel. And I think the short-run question we have is: Howwill that happen? If retail sales are strong in the next few months,we can get a declining rate of inventory accumulation in a very smoothway and have a good setting for business next year. If retail salesdon't pick up in the next few months, I think we have a quitedifferent kind of problem. The GNP figure for the fourth quarter maynot be a bit different in total but it's going to include moreinventories and less sales, and that has quite different implicationsfor next year. And I don't think we know. Everybody reports ontalking to retailers who seem to change their minds every two weeksabout their feelings about sales--for good reason, I suspect, becausethere is some instability in them. I surely don't know, but if I hadto guess I'd say the retail sales figure in October is probably goingto be weak because autos presumably were down. The explanation thatthere are not enough cars [in dealer inventories] is beginning to weara little thin on me. Maybe it's all true; there is something curiousin that industry. I don't think the industry wants to produce manymore cars. I am beginning to think they get a nice profit marginwhere they are. The dealers like it, manufacturers like it, and solong as they have the Japanese shut off why take on another workerwith all the pension obligations and everything else? Although we'llget some expansion in production there, I guess it will not be verymuch. We are in a period of great uncertainty, particularly aboutwhat retail sales are going to do. I think plant and equipment[spending] is holding up fairly well. I feel more comfortable abouthousing than I did a while ago simply because interest rates are goingdown. I would comment that I don't have any particular quarrel withthe forecast, but I think we ought to put a good deal of uncertaintyaround any forecast. I would point out that the forecast level hasbeen successively lowered in recent meetings at the same time thatinterest rates have been declining fairly precipitously. We have alower forecast now for economic activity for the next year than we hadin August or in previous meetings, with interest rates 2 percentagepoints lower.MR. GRAMLEY. Is that right? I thought the level of real GNPat the end of 1985 was almost exactly what it was in the previousforecast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I don't know what the previous--MR. KICHLINE. It was, but the near term--24-11/7/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But two forecasts ago we had a 5 percentincrease in the third-quarter GNP and we're now going to have 1-1/2 to2 percent. That's a difference of almost 1 percent [in level terms]in the estimate of one quarter's change. I think it was still higherin an earlier estimate.MR. PARTEE. Then it has been coming down?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been coming down by whatever theright amount is. In a perverse kind of way, maybe compared to thecomments that I heard from a lot of people earlier, I feel morecomfortable about the forecast this month than I did last month,partly because interest rates are down and I think the housingforecast is better based. We have the exchange rate at least movingin the other direction; we are not under the same pressure. We havehad some--it is so brief it is hard to tell--firming of commodityprices in recent weeks which is quite in contrast to the trend we hadfor several months prior to that. And we do have that surprisinglygood employment figure in services and retail trade in October, whichI don't understand.Last month I saw no danger, frankly, that we could overeasewithin the practical scope of whatever we were going to do. This timeI am not so sure. Beginning at the level of interest rates that wehave and given the feeling I have about the economy, I could conceivethat we would get overly enthusiastic in terms of easing, whereas Ididn't think that was possible last month. In terms of generallyposturing ourselves, I think we are in a far better position for avariety of reasons, given all the risks that exist, to not be too farbehind the curve in easing if that is the way things develop. That'spartly because we have the risks of the dollar; I would hate to haveto do a lot of aggressive easing in a situation where the dollar isalready declining more than one would like to see. I would rather bein a position where, if anything, we have the easing done and are in aposition to tighten up a little if the dollar does get in real troubleat some point. But in terms of our general posture, it's partly--andthe point has been made--that there is room, obviously, for theeconomy to grow more than 3 percent next year. I am talking about theprobabilities.The inflation picture looks under enough control so that Idon't think we have to worry about an explosion on that side apartfrom anything that would develop on the exchange rate end itself. Itis not a current concern but could be a concern almost at any timelooking to the future depending upon how things develop. And giventhe experience we have had, I don't feel any great sense of inabilityto prevent the economy from bursting out on the up side in theforeseeable future. If we had to tighten some down the road, so beit. I don't have the feeling that it would be an impossible job tokeep the economy from an unfortunate and overextended surge ofactivity if we faced that possibility rather than the opposite one ofcumulating excessive weakness in the economy, given all the risks anduncertainties that I see. And one factor I might mention in thatconnection is that in the rest of the world I still do not see manysigns of ebullient economic activity, to say the least. The Europeaneconomy still seems to me to be in a very sluggish phase. I guess thelatest information from Japan is not so bad, but it's on the slowerside rather than on the stronger side. And that has been the one-25-11/7/84economy that has been showing a pretty good rate of advance. Theproblems in the developing world are obvious enough.Where that all leaves us, I don't quite know. But I think wemay have room for a little more formal easing here if that's what youwant to do. But I don't know that we want to go overboard about it.I might say that in view of the monetary developments, I think theonly question in the past few weeks was whether we should have beeneasier and put in more reserves and reduced the borrowing level. Thereason that was not done was simply because I judged that the tone ofthe discussion and the instructions last time clearly reflected someconcern if interest rates--and the federal funds rate in particular--were to go down around the 10 percent level or below and other rateswere declining rapidly. There wasn't much eagerness for being veryaggressive, so we weren't very aggressive. In fact, interest ratesobviously did get to those levels and in those conditions it didn'tseem all that urgent. But I don't know that I personally had thefeeling that the interest rate developments were disastrously rapid interms of lower rates, given all the conditions. And I am not sure Iwould want to conduct a policy that I thought would actively back themup again as a deliberate matter of policy. But with that muchdiscussion, let us proceed.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would like to propose that we moveto an area between alternatives A and B. I think we get halfway thereif we only bring the borrowing level down to $600 million. If the fedfunds rate is running now at, say, 9-7/8 percent on average and wereduce the borrowing level by $100 million, the rate is likely to comedown to 9-1/2 percent or a shade above. I think the markets then willexpect a discount rate cut at some point following that; and if thatwere a 1/2 point reduction, that would bring [the funds rate] down to9 percent. It seems to me that to go all the way to alternative Bwould be a great mistake. Therefore, borrowing somewhere in the areaof $600 million makes the most sense. We probably ought to adjust thefed funds range. I forget what it is now--8 to 12 percent? Maybe weought to make that 7 to 11 percent. For the monetary target figures Iwould probably take numbers halfway between the [A and Balternatives]. I don't have a clear view on M1; it seems to me lessreliable than it has at other times. But the target figure is there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By going halfway in between you are makinga final judgment of 1/2 percentage point on a figure that we may comewithin 5 percentage points of if we are lucky.MR. PARTEE. We did this past time; it was within 5.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay.MR. MARTIN. Within 10!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I am pretty limited by 10.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's all I have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You mentioned something about reducing thediscount rate; I have a comment on that. That may be a market-26-11/7/84expectation, but I don't think there is anything technical that wouldraise the question of a decline in the discount rate if the funds ratewere 9-1/4 or 9-3/4 percent or so. We can do it if we want to, but Idon't see any dynamic in the situation that forces that decision.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if the Board were to take themove and cut it by 1/2 point--I'm not saying that it would--the fedfunds rate would go down by 1/2 point with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might mention: Somebody tells me thatCitibank reduced the prime rate by 1/4 point--a small move on the downside, considering.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're trying to influence thesedeliberations here!MR. CORRIGAN. They'll [unintelligible] one way or the otherhere.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I don't want to put too muchemphasis in our discussion on M1 in a single month, despite themagnitude of that surprise decline of 7 or 7-1/2 percent--I thinkthat's what I heard Steve say--in October. If it carries over intothis month, though, I think it deserves some weight given that thereare so many uncertainties from the real economy that we've all beensharing with one another here. It's so difficult to forecast not onlythe fourth quarter but the first and second quarters of next year whenI think there is a high probability of some difficulties. Yes, eventhe third quarter is still [uncertain].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a word about that M1number. If I understand it, given the fragmentary information we nowhave for the beginning of the month, we would have to get a bigincrease in the second week of the month--MR. MARTIN. I realize that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will make an empirical comment that bigincreases don't ordinarily come in the second week of a month.MR. AXILROD. Even before these figures, we had beenforecasting a fairly big increase in the second week of the month.But that is an unusual time for that to occur.MR. PARTEE. You have a 7 percent projection for November?MR. AXILROD. That's what we had before the very latestfigures. I feel confident it will be lower now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. A figure that pulls down growth forthe month of October at the end of the month by 1 percentage pointmeans that November is starting appreciably lower than what they wereassuming.MR. AXILROD. Yes, the level is roughly $3-1/2 [billion]lower than we were assuming.-27-11/7/84MR. MARTIN. So the 7 percent for November in alternative A--MR. PARTEE. It's not going to happen.MR. MARTIN. Of course, it is now way out on the curvesomewhere. I take it so is the 7 percent in alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is harder to get those figures inNovember. I don't think there is any question about it. Of course,if we get some momentum, it's not hard to get a big one-month figure.December could be anything. But it's going to be hard to get a bigfigure in November.MR. MARTIN. If it were a perfect world--which it isn't, ofcourse--the ideal targeting would be something around the midpoint forM1 and M2. We're getting somewhat different information from M2.Maybe it is a relief in that we are not getting quite the same messageas from M1. But [the midpoint] obviously is not a potential in eitherof the alternatives as regards what could be done the rest of the yearand beginning in the first quarter in terms of getting levels up to apoint that would be consonant with a reasonable rate of real growth inthe economy. There is no point in belaboring the lessons from thereal side of the economy. And you are tired of hearing me talk aboutrisks in the financial system--in thrift institutions, agriculturalbanks, and all the rest. I won't make my usual [comments] and take upyour time--all this overhead sitting around the room--with that. Butstill, it seems to me that we can pay some more attention valuably tothe aggregates, particularly M1 and M2, now. I am not clear withregard to M3. The risk of a growth recession is greatly enhanced ifM1 is allowed to decelerate sharply for the whole fourth quarter. Andeven if we were to set an operating procedure and some short-termtargets in which we overshot the midpoint, I don't see under thesecircumstances--with inflation being under control, the low M1 figurewe have had, and the uncertainties in the economy--that that's asubstantial risk.So, I come down for alternative A. Given what Steve and theChairman have just discussed with regard to the growth of M1 and M2for the fourth quarter, those are not modest figures but they're along way from getting us to the midpoint [of our long-run targets].As I understand it, very temporarily--hopefully very temporarily--theM1 figure is almost at the bottom of the range; it is within $400 to$600 million of the bottom. So, it seems to me that alternative Adoesn't produce any kind of configuration vis-a-vis the midpoint ofeither of those two ranges to have any implication of overstimulationor the revival of inflation. Given what Steve and his colleagues havelaid out here in terms of borrowing getting down considerably belowTony's number, it seems to me it would be well to go for the $400 to$500 million level. If that results in a fed funds rate rate below 9percent or in the 9 to 9-1/2 percent range, that doesn't seem to me aproblem. It was well said that we don't know what the implicationsare of the decline in interest rates that has already occurred. Iagree with that. We also don't know the implications of 4 or maybe 5months of decline in the growth of M1 particularly and to a lesserdegree of M2. We don't know what the aggregates track will turn outto be going into the first quarter, so it seems to me that we are in aposition of being able to change our targeting in an accommodativedirection without any substantial risk of reigniting inflationary-28-11/7/84factors. I say again, at the risk of turning you all off, that if afiscal policy question is going to confront the nation early nextyear, I would hate to see that confrontation with 1 percent realgrowth and unemployment heading for 8 percent or something of thatsort. I vote for "A," Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. I would like to reinforce what Governor Martinsaid. I think we are testing our luck by having had no growth in M1for five months. And based on our inability to meet our past targetsfor M1 growth, I have no confidence that the projected November andDecember increases will occur unless we refocus our policy on reservegrowth instead of interest rates, which is what I think we should havedone. I think the reason M1 has not expanded is that we have beenwilling through our policy of targeting borrowing to resist thenatural market declines in interest rates that otherwise would haveoccurred. I noticed that the growth in total reserves and M1 from thefourth quarter [of 1983] to October are essentially the same, forexample. But in recent times we have had this precipitous drop inreserves. So my view would be that this is a time to effect asignificant easing and to accomplish a growth in reserves that willresult in a growth in money--without concern about the level of marketrates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a comment onour operating procedure. It seems to me that the events of thissummer uncovered a significant defect in our current operatingprocedure in that, as a consequence of the Continental situation, thebanks' borrowing behavior was very much different than we had assumedat the time of our meeting. They had a propensity to bid up thefederal funds rate rather than come into the discount window and as aconsequence we had a higher level of interest rates, which also fedinto long-term bond yields, than the Committee had expected at thetime of the meeting. If we have an excessively--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What meeting are you talking about?MR. MORRIS. Well, it was the July meeting [or perhaps] twomeetings ago. You recall we were not contemplating a federal fundsrate that would go up to the 11-1/2 to 11-3/4 percent area. I don'tthink anyone around the table was talking about that high a level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My memory is that that happened beforethat meeting or very close to it.MR. MORRIS. I would have to look back and find out whichmeeting it was. But I think it is clear that there was a meeting inwhich as a consequence of this change in behavior we got a tighterfederal funds market than any member of the Committee had talkedabout. And it seems to me that if we have a slower economy than wewant now, perhaps part of it at least could have been produced by thathigher level of interest rates than we contemplated. It seems to methat is the fact, and there may be a recurrence of this kind ofsituation in times to come. I just wonder whether we shouldn't takethat into account in how we structure the directive. Since the-29-11/7/84borrowing [level] is not a key factor in the implementation ofmonetary policy, if that borrowing [level] produces unexpected resultsin interest rates, it seems to me that perhaps we ought to have theCommittee take a look at the situation by conference call rather thanjust staying with it and accepting whatever rate comes out of it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Frank, one of the problems was thatnobody could be sure how long that unpredictable behavior was going tocontinue. We didn't know how long that reluctance to borrow wouldcontinue and we certainly didn't want to take care of it in thedirective because then we would have ended up [targeting] the fedfunds rate more narrowly than I think--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After hearing the discussion last month, Iwas almost tempted to raise the question on the agenda: Do you wantto target the federal funds rate? That is what most people seemed towant to do last meeting. I wouldn't recommend it, but that's--MR. MORRIS. I recognize that there are a lot of hazards intargeting the federal funds rate. I think the question is whether weought to have a procedure under which, if the borrowing level isproducing a significantly different level of rates than the Committeeexpected, the Committee should at least take a look at it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're misreading this history abit, if I may say so. There is no doubt that the funds rate gothigher than was anticipated, given any particular level of borrowings.But this happened over a period of 4 or 5 months; we had severalmeetings when the interest rate was higher than we expected it to beand there was a deliberate decision not to do anything about it. Whenit first happened, the money supply was rising very rapidly in May andJune and the economy was going along very rapidly and we had quiteebullient forecasts that people weren't objecting to as to the rate ofeconomic growth. So, under those conditions people sat there andsaid, rightly or wrongly: "The interest rate is higher than weexpected it to be but it looks all right."MR. MORRIS. Sure. That's precisely the point. If it'scoming from a strong economy and is expected, that's one thing. Ifit's coming from a deviant behavior on the part of the banks, that'sanother thing. It seems to me that our procedures ought to be able todifferentiate these.MR. PARTEE. If we can distinguish.MR. WALLICH. Well, the economy was visibly strong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you have a particularproposal.MR. MORRIS. I have a proposal that we ask the staff to takea look at this problem--if you agree that it is one--and to design aproposal for dealing with it in the future.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is not operative for today's meeting?MR. MORRIS. No, I'm not talking about today's meeting.-30-11/7/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, perhaps we can return to that point.MR. MORRIS. Beyond that, in line with my previous comments,I would prefer to stand back at the moment with alternative B until weget further information. I would be perfectly willing to support amove to a still further lowering of interest rates if the incomingevidence suggests continued weakening in the economy. But it seems tome that we ought to stop and take a reading with respect to whatimpact the rate declines we have already seen will have on the economybefore we go further.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How long a time period are you talkingabout?MR. MORRIS. A few weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What information are we going to get inthe next few weeks? We know roughly what industrial production isgoing to be. The big information we're going to get is retail salesfigures; there's nothing else of any significance.MR. KICHLINE. Next Wednesday we will get the retail sales.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anything else? When are durablegoods orders? Is there anything else big coming out?MR. KICHLINE. No. We have personal income on November 19th;housing starts on the 20th; revised GNP figures on the 20th; anddurable goods orders on the 21st, which will be the following week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we get retail sales and durable goodsorders two weeks from now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We are pretty sure that retail saleswill be somewhat on the weak side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think the retail sales figure isgoing to tell us much unless it is quite strong. If it is, I wouldthink it significant. Myself, I think it is likely to be weak.MR. PARTEE. And the GNP revision is likely to be downward.So the first possible good-size plus number we could get would be ondurable goods. That's hanging an awful lot on durable goods orders.MR. MARTIN. And if the purchasing agents are right, we'renot going to get a plus number.MR. MORRIS. [Unintelligible] initial claims, basic commodityprices--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We get commodity prices and initialclaims, yes. Are you finished?MR. MORRIS. Yes sir.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.-31-11/7/84MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think it is important that we tryto get M1 back on a moderate growth path as quickly as we can. Unlesssomeone is prepared to make pretty heroic assumptions [about] shiftsin demands for money, then it strikes me that a zero rate of growthover a four-month period is just about the maximum that we ought totolerate. But I think we have to be very careful here and inparticular take account of these lagged relationships thattraditionally have existed between short-term rates and M1. We havepushed short-term rates down some 200 basis points, and in the pastsuch a move usually has led to a very sharp spurt in money growth. Itcould be that this lagged response to the rate reductions we havealready had will produce a fairly good pickup in M1 in November andDecember. I think it would be very desirable if we could finish withM1 close to the 6 percent midpoint at the end of the year. But at thesame time, we have to keep in mind that the actions we take now affectreserve pressures over the next few weeks and are going to affect M1in the early part of next year. I can see a danger that an overlydetermined effort to try to get near that midpoint could start us offin 1985 with an unacceptably rapid rate of money growth. But if youlook at the quarterly rates of growth in M1 or the other aggregatesfor 1984 and see how much M1 in particular has decelerated, a fairlyrapid growth in the first quarter of next year would not look all thatbad to me. The bottom line is that I think our reactions should berather cautious and measured.I prefer the aggregate outcomes anticipated by "A," but atthe same time I am not at all sure that it's necessary to push theborrowing target immediately down to $400 million with whateverreduction in the federal funds rate that might imply. I would feelmore comfortable if we moved somewhat more slowly with a higherborrowing target initially for the next couple of weeks or so; if itbecomes clear at that point that M1 is still below path, then I wouldbe prepared to reduce the borrowing target accordingly. I would favor[the language in the Bluebook under] alternative Roman numeral II withcertain changes in the second sentence for the wording of that and Istrongly endorse Frank Morris' suggestion that it really is time forus to look at our procedures. I think everybody wants to get themoney supply growing again, but we have no earthly idea how much wewill have to reduce the borrowing target or how much the federal fundsrate will have to come down to accomplish that. And I think thatmeans that our procedures are pretty faulty. I doubt that I would endup with the same recommendation as Frank but I certainly do endorsehis idea. In view of all these unexpected things that have happenedthis year, our control mechanism leaves a lot to be desired and Ithink we can improve it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. From my perspective what we have seen hereover the past several weeks, and indeed months, has been somethingthat I would consider an orderly adjustment in policy and interestrates and so on. There was at least a fleeting moment when I thoughtit might become a little messy but that did not materialize. In thebroad context of the situation that we are looking at, I would not betroubled if interest rates went down a bit more in a context notunlike what Tony spoke about earlier. But let me turn to that in aminute. My view of the economy is a little different from manyothers. That is a factor in my thinking. But I would also caution11/7/84against too much of a reaction to M1. We have been through M1problems and we are going to go through them again. It seems to methat all of these fine arguments that Mr. Axilrod and others makeabout M1 really come down to the question of how many angels can danceon the head of a pin. I don't know how many. I do know that seasonaladjustment factors alone can make a big difference. We have looked atthese data using a seasonal adjustment technique that's veryrespectable--I don't think it's any better than any others but it'svery respectable--and it produces almost a $7 billion increase in themoney supply from the first week of June to the second week of Octoberrather than a decline.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Better use that seasonal, Mr. Axilrod!MR. PARTEE. We need to have several seasonals and we can usethe one that fits best!MR. AXILROD. 50 seasonals!MR. CORRIGAN. The point isn't that any one is better thanany other. The point is that this series is notoriously noisy and wedon't really understand it in the short run, and I think to pretendthat we do is a mistake. The only thing we can be sure about in termsof M1 is that if it's surprising us on the down side right now, it'sgoing to be surprising us on the up side at some point in the not toodistant future. So, while I recognize the very special psychologicalif not political significance of M1, I must say I would be verycautious about going too far too fast in response to it even in thecontext of everything else that is going on. My thoughts on specificswould be somewhere between "A" and "B." I have no great concern aboutthe money specifications themselves. Borrowing of $550 to $600million wouldn't bother me. I would prefer, at least for now, toleave the federal funds range at 8 to 12 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, no one can take first place away from mein recognizing the volatility of the M1 numbers. And I agree, Jerry,that the best thing to expect when we get a decline is a rise in thenext month. But we have been sitting here looking at surprisinglyweak numbers for quite a while and I think there is a cumulativeeffect that most people do feel has a significance. I think enough ofM1 as an indicator that I am inclined to be considerably impressed bythat or I presume that I am going to be impressed by it unless someonegives me very good evidence as to why I shouldn't be. As I review it,M1 has been surprisingly weak over a period of time and probablyerratically weak in October. I just don't see how we could have suchan economy that would produce a 7-1/2 percent decline in money as anindication of the future. But when you put it all together, it doesamount to quite a bit. Because of that and the great damage thatthat's going to do us, as well as what I said earlier about theeconomy falling short and having room for further growth, I would notbe opposed to alternative A as the way to go. I think it's time for afairly pronounced further adjustment. And it won't hurt us; I agreewith Paul that if it turns out to be wrong, we can tighten up a littlelater on.-33-11/7/84But right now it seems to me that the risks are such that weought to be guided to a degree by this weakness in the M1 numbers.One advantage of a Wednesday meeting--maybe it isn't an advantage--isthat at least we get the most recent figures that way. And I wouldpoint out that Steve has indicated that with these most recent figuresit seems very improbable that we could get the M1 specs of alternativeA. So, we ought to use something like the specs of alternative Bsince we already have fallen well short of what was put in theBluebook for us last Friday. I also think that means we have to go toa different kind of description of our policy than just a repetitionof the past one--focusing on what we would hope to see and would beprepared to tolerate in November-December following the surprisingOctober weakness. I guess the Roman numeral II [draft] directive is areasonable thing to be talking about. I would reduce the federalfunds rate range from 8 to 12 percent to 7 to 11 percent, as Tonysuggested; and I would regard the midpoint of that range, 9 percent,as entirely acceptable for the funds rate. [On borrowing], $400million seems a rather marked change in operational targeting. Iwould put it at $500 million but I would not be prepared to accept afigure as high as $600 million, as I think Tony suggested. It is timefor a little "oomph" to get into monetary policy. One final point:If in fact it is true that it is becoming the very general view outthere that the inflation rate is going to be much calmer than waspreviously expected, that, of course means that nominal rates have todrop at least as much as the expected inflation rate--maybe a littlemore--in order to offset the deflating effect of that change inexpectations. So, I don't know that we have gone too far at all interms of the indicative real rates that would be associated with thedeclines we have had in nominal rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, given what I said earlierthis morning, it's probably not difficult to predict where I come out.Of course, this behavior of M1 throws up some red flags and doessuggest a cautionary attitude. But there are a couple of mitigatingfactors that I would like to put on the table. One, the debt numberis still relatively high and that ameliorates my concern about the M1decline a bit. Secondly, I really don't think that M1 is yet showingthe influence of the lower rates that we've had in the past severalweeks. Indeed, M1 might still be reacting to the higher rates that wehad during the summer. So, given those lags and my view of theeconomy--which is that it's basically coming down to a sustainablelevel and we're going to get some pickup in the fourth quarter andinto 1985 as suggested by the staff--I think we just ought to pause,rest on our oars, and let the easing that has occurred filter throughto the economy and the money supply. M2 and M3 are behaving quiterespectably and I am not at all uncomfortable with adopting a policythat would allow M1 to be in the lower end of the range for thebalance of 1984. I would be very cautious about continuing to easetoo much or pushing too hard in the direction of ease at this point.With respect to the directive, I would prefer alternative B,which as I interpret it is a status quo, wait-and-see alternative; andI would keep borrowing at $700 million with the funds range where itis. As for the directive [language] I would prefer the secondalternative in the Bluebook, although in the second sentence of thatalternative there is reference to M1 being in the lower end of the-34-11/7/84range and I'm not sure that it's necessary to flag that for the publicgenerally. The bottom line for me, Mr. Chairman, is that I think wehave time and I would stay where we are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Bob has given my speech; I am with him.I would like to suggest that there is a case that we could look at,Chuck, where the money numbers were giving us the same kind ofmisinformation they are now and that was in the late spring and earlysummer of 1980. Now, the situation was quite different. But we werelooking at very, very large declines in real GNP and so we wereexperiencing weak growth of money because we were moving down themoney demand function. And at the same time the money demand functionwas dropping a ton. Signs that the economy was going to come out ofrecession were beginning to emerge but that was very uncertain. Sowhat we did--and I have to say that I participated in this--is that wekept pushing the interest rates down far enough so that finally we gotthe money growth that we had been contemplating; but when we got it wefound that the economy was roaring upward. So money growth began totake place at horrendous rates and we pushed interest rates way, wayup again and got involved in a situation of volatility of money growthand of interest rates which I think was neither necessary nordesirable. Now, this is a totally different situation than that.MR. PARTEE. You can get whipsawed. There's no questionabout that.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, and that's my point. I am optimistic thatthe economy is going to turn around; the signs of emerging strengthare there. I am not certain, but I am reasonably confident thatthat's going to take place. I would not, therefore, want to seeinterest rates drop much further from where they are now. In thisconnection I would note that the staff forecast implies a federalfunds rate for the end of 1985 in the 10-1/4 percent plus range and ifwe let the rate drop too much further, we are going to be looking atthe need for a significant increase in interest rates to keep both theeconomy and money growth under reasonable control. One point I wantto make is a more or less technical one: The staff has been tellingus that seasonal borrowing is a very, very large part of the totaladjustment plus seasonal borrowing. I think the number for theseasonal component is $300 to $350 million. If we adopted a borrowingtarget of $400 million, we are talking about $50 to $100 million ofpure adjustment borrowing. I don't know where the federal funds rateis going to go but it could go down a lot further than to the 9percent number that the staff is talking about.MR. PARTEE. I would assume that we are dealing with a timewhen seasonal borrowing would drop.MR. AXILROD. Well, my thought would be that some of it woulddrop. Seasonal borrowing is running well ahead of where it runs witheven much more total borrowing. We don't know for sure how much of itis going to stay because it is seasonal or distress borrowing and howmuch really represents the response to the rate. I think it will endup a little higher than one would normally think in any event.-35-11/7/84MR. ROBERTS. A good part of the seasonal is arbitraging thediscount rate. That was certainly true in my District. People justtook advantage of the opportunity and they will stop doing it.MR. AXILROD. That [borrowing] will drop.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The conduct of monetary policy wouldbe better, I think, with a mix of a partial movement in the fed fundsrate and a cut in the discount rate in order not to get the borrowinglevels too low. If the borrowing level gets too low, I think thereare complications.MR. PARTEE. I interrupted Lyle. I really was just thinkingthat we are at the time of the year when we ought to get a drop in theseasonal. That is all.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, that could happen. I think the problemswith the agricultural banks make it less clear that most of them havebeen playing the rate spread and that what we're likely to see is thenormal seasonal decline. In any event, I would stick with alternativeB. If we wanted to shave the borrowing level down to $650 million orso, that would be fine. I would want the federal funds rate to stickin the range of 9-1/2 percent plus or minus a little and wait and seewhat happens.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. As has been pointed out several times here, we'veseen a good deal of easing since the last meeting. As a matter offact, the easing is just about the amount that I had hoped for at thelast meeting, so what has been taking place in the easing of policy isgetting very close to my comfort level. I think it is important notto allow short-term interest rates to fall too far too fast. In thissense, I share Bob Black's feeling of the need for some caution in therate at which we ease policy. Having said that, I think we have to dobetter than alternative B. I would hope for something between "A" and"B" and I am not uncomfortable as we move toward "A." I would be veryhappy to go along with Tony Solomon's recommendation of borrowing at$600 million and adjusting the fed funds rate range down to 7 to 11percent and hope that the aggregates show some improvement.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. In view of what I perceive to be the weak spotsin business that could be spreading rather than about to improve, andgiven the sustained undershoot in M1 since the middle of the year, Iam getting quite concerned about that problem. The well knownvolatility of M1 on a monthly basis begins to wash out when it has hada weak performance for four months. I take no comfort in the factthat M2 has been rising steadily because it did so preceding the lastmajor recession that we had. I would be ready to err on the side ofease for a while and if that proves to be too much, we can alwayscorrect it later. By and large the one alternative that to me atleast would be unwise is alternative B, since that anticipates aborrowing level of $700 million and an expected federal funds rate of10 percent. In sum, I would be happy to see alternative A or possiblyhalfway between "A" and "B." And if we were to go for "A," I would bea little cautious in going down to a borrowing level as low as $400-36-11/7/84million right away; I would prefer to start at about $500 million formuch the same reasons Governor Partee has already set forth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. On cyclical grounds, I really find it very hardto make an argument for any kind of easing. I see the risks of makingthe same old mistake of easing in the latter stages of an expansion.But the discussion of M1 may provide a justification for how I canperhaps get myself off the hook of being--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't know we had that problem ofeasing too late in an expansion.MR. WALLICH. I think that has been what has often happened.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We always got accused of the opposite.MR. WALLICH. Cyclically, I see--maybe it's inadequatetightening. But your remark, Mr. Chairman, that if we overshoot onthe down side we could catch it again and tighten, does encourage me alittle in a different interpretation of the situation. We obviouslyhave very high real interest rates. As Chuck said, each timeinflation expectations come down real interest rates go up. Over timewe have to bring these down. The main way of bringing them down is toreduce the budget deficit. But I think it also has something to dowith monetary policy in the sense that there isn't enough money in theeconomy to allow interest rates to be lower. Now, the difficulty isgetting that money into the economy without going to a very highgrowth rate of the aggregates--which looks terrible, sends the wrongsignal, and may never be caught up with and never be stopped. Whenyou have a temporary reduction in demand for M1, or maybe a permanentreduction, that does provide an opportunity without seeming to gun theaggregates to increase the amount of money in the economy in a limitedway and thereby put pressure on real rates. So, with that analysis, Icould go somewhere between "A" and "B." I think $600 million would bethe maximum, given the danger that borrowing could become too low andthe funds rate might be destabilized.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [You mean] $600 million would be theminimum.MR. PARTEE. That's as far as you would go?MR. WALLICH. That would be as far as I would want to go.And for the funds rate range, if this is an effort to bring rates downby increasing the stock of money and not the rate of growth of moneyin the economy, 7 to 11 percent would be acceptable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Although there is some uncertainty as to wherethe economy is going, from the earlier comments it does seem to methat on balance the tone has changed very substantially from our pastmeeting and that we are in an environment where some easing is areasonable expectation. I wouldn't make too much of the M1 number forone month but, as has been pointed out, this [weakness] has beenpersisting for some period of time now and just maybe it's telling us-37-11/7/84something. I would not in turn overreact, but as I look at the dotson the charts it seems to me that neither alternative A noralternative B is an overreaction. Rather, I would think we ought tobe aiming toward the middle of the range over a longer period of timeas we look into the next year. And that leads me to alternative A. Iwould reduce the federal funds range to recognize a reduction that hastaken place in the market--not so much because I think that 7 percentwould be an operative rate. But if the federal funds rate were to getback into the 11 percent area with any persistence, I certainly thinkthat would be an opportunity for a telephone call. With regard to theborrowings, I think going down to the level suggested in the Bluebookunder alternative A is pretty severe; therefore, I would think aborrowing level of, say, $500 to $550 million would be appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I am voting for alternative A for two basicreasons. One, of course, is what I see as the slowing in the economyand the sobering of the moods out there in the business world.Secondly, although I am not obsessed with what happens to M1, I amdepressed with what has happened to M1 growth in the four months fromJuly to October. In fact, what is shown even under alternative A forthe final quarter this year does not look like red hot growth. Also,looking at M2, whose expected growth in the fourth quarter is 7-1/2percent, which would be the midpoint of the long-term range, thatdoesn't seem excessive either. And then getting to where this wouldput us at year-end, we would be below the midpoint though within thelong-term ranges for both M1 and M2. So, this doesn't strike me aseasing irresponsibly. Also, when I look at the reserve figures, I amnot surprised that monetary growth was as slow as it was in October.I guess I am surprised it wasn't slower when I see the dive innonborrowed reserves and total reserves. So, I would vote foralternative A. In terms of the directive, I would use the number IIalternative. I don't feel that the relationship between borrowing andthe fed funds rate is clear enough to me to know what kind ofborrowing numbers would come through. It seems to me this is somewhatof a crap shoot; there is obviously a number out there some place thatis the right one, whatever that is, and it will give us fed funds inthe range of 7 to 11 percent and would satisfy me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. In my opinion the pause in the economy and severalmonths of flatness in the money supply argue for active support ofgrowth in the money supply. Both "A" and "B" accept a shortfall inmoney, which I favor, but of the two I would favor moving towardalternative A. I would like to see that kind of growth rate inNovember and December. I think we ought to move carefully toward that.I wouldn't want to jump to a $400 million borrowing level. And as wetest borrowing levels below $700 million, I would like to see a 9percent plus federal funds rate and something around 9 percenttriggering a call. I am assuming something quite far towardalternative A. In that assumption I assume no change in the discountrate. I am sympathetic with the people who have said that we havecome a long way with regard to interest rates; they are downconsiderably and we ought to wait and see [the impact of] what we havealready done. In addition, I still believe that the long-termunderlying problem in the economy, and our top priority, is inflation.-38-11/7/84So, if we adopt something toward alternative A, we may have to reverseour actions if the recovery comes on as strongly as I think it mightor if the growth in money resumes. But I prefer to take the risk ofthe reversal to the risk of waiting. That's where I come out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to thedifference between alternatives A and B, given the money numbers thatwe have looked at, clearly a move to alternative A would suggest somefurther easing immediately after this meeting. We don't have a lot ofhope, judging from the comments around the table and from the staff,that we will reach the level of money growth that is incorporated inalternative B; therefore, if we move to alternative A, we are going tobe easing more aggressively immediately after this meeting. Thesecond point is that in accordance with the staff's projection,alternative B suggests a federal funds rate in the neighborhood of 10percent with a $700 million borrowing level. I think there is fairlygood evidence that there has been some shift in the demand forborrowing and, therefore, the relationship between the borrowing leveland the federal funds rate is perhaps less precise than in the past.Let me just make two points in that regard. One is that, clearly, theunwillingness of large banks to borrow following the Continentalsituation has reversed itself. They don't seem to be experiencingthat unwillingness and as a result have come back to the discountwindow. The second and more important thing is what Lyle Gramley hasspoken of and that is the relationship of the borrowing level to thefederal funds rate when you incorporate seasonal borrowing into thatborrowing level. Traditionally, seasonal borrowing has commencedgrowing around the first of the year, grows through August, and thendeclines to almost zero by the end of the year. This particular yearthat pattern did hold, but at a much higher level. Seasonal borrowinghas been much higher than in the past. And there has been little orno decline from August forward, as we would have experienced in thepast. We're now in the $300 to $325 million range for seasonalborrowing; if you consider that that has become less sensitive tointerest rates, there is very little room. If you take that away fromthe total borrowing level of $700 million, we are at a frictionallevel, it seems to me; adjustment borrowing would be virtuallynonexistent if we go to the $400 million level and at the frictionallevel if we remain at the [current] level.The conclusion that I would draw from all of this is that Iwould opt for alternative B because we don't know what relationshipswill come to pass as the result of the interest rate drops that havealready taken place. I would consider those fairly aggressive--1-1/2to 2 percentage points over the last five weeks. Secondly, I wouldalso anticipate that if we adopted "B" as specified in the Bluebookwith a $700 million level of borrowing, we would see some furthereasing in interest rate levels, maybe to the 9, 9-1/4 or 9-1/2 percentarea. It would seem quite appropriate to me that we get to that 9 to9-1/2 percent area, but I think we can achieve it with a $700 millionborrowing level.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why do you say that, Roger?MR. GUFFEY. Simply because a good part of the seasonal isinelastic now or unresponsive to interest rate levels, which I think-39-11/7/84the record would reflect. Then you're really operating on a borrowingfunction of something in the neighborhood of $400 million and that iscloser to a 9 percent federal funds rate than a 9-1/2 percent rate, assuggested by the Bluebook. Alternative A would get you there with a$400 million borrowing level.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I agree with you on the $400million. I am just a little surprised that you said to continue the$700 million level would bring fed funds down to about 9-1/2 percent.MR. GUFFEY. I think fed funds right now are probably at the9-1/2 percent level or thereabouts. If we don't do anything, I thinkwe will see them come on down to that level. The last point I want tomake is that if I were running policy by my own prescription, I wouldrather take "B" and a $700 million borrowing level for the reasons Ihave just expressed--expecting fed funds to come down to the 9-1/2percent area. Then, if we saw a need for further easing, I would doit with a discount rate decrease rather than letting the fed fundsrate run down to 9 percent or maybe even below 9 percent and thenmaking a 1/4 or 1/2 point cut in the discount rate, which could push[rates] down to a level that I would not want to see occur.MR. PARTEE. May I just ask Roger a question?MR. GUFFEY. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Roger, I've never looked all that closely atthese seasonal borrowing arrangements. Do they have a terminal date?MR. GUFFEY. Yes, there should be a terminal date on seasonalborrowing; it can run out as far as 11 months, Chuck.MR. PARTEE. And you said it started in April?MR. GUFFEY. Historically, such borrowings start at the firstof the year. Just to give you the figures from '81 to '83: Onaverage, they would go up to a $250 million peak level in July andthen decline back down to about $60 million in December. The patternthis year was that they started out at about $80 million in January,progressed up to a $350 million peak in August and are currently inthe $310 to $325 million range; we don't see that falloff in the lasthalf of the year.MR. PARTEE. That was why I asked that question. I justwondered whether there would come a point where you would want toclean up and call them off and say the year is over.MR. GUFFEY. If you consider that it is inelastic and thatthere has been a shift in demand for borrowing, then those banks thatrun out of their seasonal privilege are going to come back in foradjustment credit or they are going to be illiquid.MR. PARTEE. Then it will be adjustment credit at that point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I came into this meeting with a lot ofuncertainty about the economy and the outlook and, as it draws to a-40-11/7/84close, I really don't feel as though I have been overwhelmed by anabundance of clear vision.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The clearest vision we may have is thatwe're uncertain.MR. BOEHNE. I think we are all pretty much in the same boatof uncertainty. It really comes down, then, to how you postureyourself when you aren't sure and where you have more room for error.I think there is considerably more room for error on the expansionside than on the slowdown side. So, for all the reasons that havebeen given in support of that position, I come down on the side ofalternative A. I think it is easier to undo a mistake on thestimulative side at this point than to undo a mistake of not beingstimulative enough. I do think $400 million on borrowing is a littlelow; $500 million makes sense to me. Initially, my main concern isthat it is a long time between now and the next meeting. If we tackon to the four months or so of slow growth in the economy and slowgrowth of the money supply, we could end up with six months of thewrong kinds of numbers. I am not a great fan of money but I think itdoes tell us something when it begins to cumulate like this. So, Ithink we ought to be awfully careful as we go through the intermeetingperiod. And if it turns out that the incoming figures on the economyare weaker and money continues to be weak and we don't have any reallygood reasons to explain it other than a weak economy, then I think wemay have to become increasingly aggressive as we head toward the endof the year. I don't have strong feelings on the directive language;I have a slight preference for alternative I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, as I indicated a little earlier,my view of the economic outlook is not quite as pessimistic as some.I find myself in a dilemma because I find myself agreeing with thelast speaker regardless of what he has said! Intuitively, theuncertainty that we all share, which is obvious, tells me that weshouldn't do very much that is different from what we are doing atthis point. I really agreed with Karen Horn's description of thesituation except that I come to a different conclusion about what todo about it. I would remain where we are, alternative B asprescribed, and then as events unfold move to a little more ease ifnecessary as opposed to going the other way to a bit more ease now inthe recognition that we could move policy back. I would not go thatway. On the borrowing assumption, however, I would not feel asstrongly that it has to remain at $700 million. I rather agree withRoger: Alternative B as prescribed but with an initial borrowingassumption of $600 million would be all right with me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since I have not looked at thesedirectives very closely, the first one is just like last time, right?We would have to put in different numbers.MR. PARTEE. We are going to have to put in a lower Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I ordinarily have a strong bias toward notchanging these directives in mid-quarter, but this time we are so faroff on M1 that maybe it would be better to change the whole thing thanto put in a funny number, which leads me to alternative II. A number-41-11/7/84of people, but not everybody, mentioned II. Let me ask whether weshould work from II. I am not saying every dot and tittle of it, butthe difference is that it involves saying something special about M1.That's the substance of it.MR. WALLICH. I see a case for alternative I because I don'tthink we want to show a very high rate of money growth. If we do easesome, we would be doing enough. I don't think one would want tosignal on top of that that something is being done that is reallyirrelevant [to our decisions], which is the sense [of the difference]between alternative I and alternative II.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I am a little concerned also aboutthe market speculating as to why we gave two-month instead of three-month growth rates. A lot of [market observers] will presume thereare reasons; and if so, I wonder if they're worthy ones. If thenumbers add up to what they add up to, then I don't see why we shouldput ourselves in the position of treating M1 specially in order tocome up with a higher-sounding number when anybody who really is a Fedwatcher is going to know exactly what it will mean and that it willsay the same thing for the quarter as a whole. I have a mildpreference for alternative I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have not really examined this closelybut the thought just occurred to me: Suppose we combine alternative Iand II and avoid the two-month number. It may be a bad precedentsince we haven't the vaguest idea whether we are going to come closeto it for two months and part of the two months is already over. Butsuppose we said something like: "This action is expected to beconsistent with growth of M2 and M3" at whatever [rates we decide].Those rates are not changed in substance or even not changed at all.Maybe we could even say "as indicated last month." However, then we'dput in a special sentence about M1. "In view of the shortfall in M1in October it is anticipated that the quarterly figure would be"--whatever. And then maybe we should pick up this part "More rapidgrowth would be acceptable in M1 in view of the substantial decline ofM1 in October which brought that aggregate in the bottom half of itslong-term range." Or we could leave that last part off. Maybe that'sthe way to do it: Just put in a quarterly figure and a sentence on M1and then say, just as you say here, that more rapid growth would beacceptable in view of the substantial decline. Make that the thirdsentence of alternative I.MR. PARTEE. My objection to leaving it the way it is isthis: It seems to me that either we make a mockery of having hadtargets or we have to ease an awfully lot more to get growth up to 6percent. How can you reduce it from 6 percent to 2-1/2 percent justbecause you have had a bad month? Paul's way of dealing with that atleast makes it understandable, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At least we are admitting--MR. MARTIN. That's right.MR. GUFFEY. But the number that we will put in there withthat change will be something in the neighborhood of 1-1/2 to 2percent for M1 growth in the fourth quarter.-42-11/7/84MR. PARTEE. It will be pretty small.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it is going to changewhatever we put in anyway.MR. GUFFEY. That is the reason I would opt for alternativeII, so we don't have to deal with it in mid-quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presumed we were going to put in 2-1/2to 3-1/2 percent or compromise between them and put in 3 percent.MR. AXILROD. Well, alternative II is only focused on the twomonths for M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know, but I presume that's the same assome quarterly figure.MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's 2-1/2 or 3-1/2 percent, depending on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's going to take 1/2 percentbigger growth for the two months because we are one percent lower inOctober than we thought we were.MR. PARTEE. So we can't really put in more than 3 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three is a nice round number and thatimplies a little over seven percent, I take it, for November-December.I don't even know what you have. What are you intending to put inhere on the two alternatives? You said 7 percent for "B." What wasit for "A"?MR. AXILROD. "A" had 8-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.] So, it is 8 or 8-1/2percent, I guess. For "B" you had 7 percent and for "A" you had 8-1/2percent and it is starting out a little low so that adds another 1/2percent. So you would have 7-1/2 [and] 9 percent for those twomonths. If we put in 3 percent--if I'm doing this arithmetic right--that implies 8 to 8-1/2 percent for--MR. GUFFEY. Something more--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 3-1/2 percent presumably implies 9percent. If my arithmetic is right, it comes out about 8-1/4 percent.MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's about 8-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's right; you need 8-1/4 percent forNovember-December to get 3 percent for the three months.MR. AXILROD. Well, our numbers are 3-1/2 percent forSeptember to December and 8-1/2 percent for October to December.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With the new October figure?MR. AXILROD. No, I am sorry. That's with the old October[unintelligible].-43-11/7/84MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, if you haven't written offalternative II altogether, I think you can do essentially that samething fairly easily if you change the second sentence right after thesemi-colon and say something like "which would partly offset theunanticipated decline in October."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There isn't that much difference betweenthese two [alternatives]. The only difference is that one sentencereally. It's a question of whether we state it as a quarterly figureor as a two-month figure.MR. BLACK. That's exactly right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The rest of this is all open.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, not only have we used quarterlyfigures but, as I said before, Fed watchers are going to come out withthe same arithmetic. Thirdly, if we do fall short of this 8 to 9percent growth in November and December--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how you got that figure.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. --it clearly makes it even fairlyobvious to non-Fed watchers and casual Fed watchers that there wasthis enormous shortfall. I just don't see why we want to play aroundwith moving away from the quarterly numbers. The minute we do thatthey are really going to take out their pencils and do all thearithmetic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the only issue here, which is nota substantive issue but a cosmetic issue, is precisely that: whetherwe want to cite a two-month number--whether that's a good policy onbalance or not. I have some sympathy for saying it's not. We'vepretty consistently used quarterly numbers.MR. MARTIN. We don't have any real reason for the shortfallsand how to read them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I am saying that we might as wellstick with the quarterly figure. In either event, I would make aspecial sentence about M1 and say whatever we want to say about ashortfall in it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask a minor question, Steve.If my recall is correct, and it probably isn't, didn't we always usethe word "reduce" rather than "decrease" existing pressures on reservepositions?MR. AXILROD. Oh heavens, I don't remember.MR. GRAMLEY. You think there's a difference?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. People are going to wonder why.MR. AXILROD. I can't imagine that they will.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But am I correct that we always used"reduce"?-44-11/7/84MR. AXILROD. I don't know. I can check.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to resolve the problem wehave here and then we can come back and try to write something.Again, I don't think there is a substantive difference. After "Thisaction is expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3" whydon't we put in the same figures we had before. We're within a halfpercent of them, aren't we?MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's say "growth of M2 and M3 at annualrates of 7-1/2 and 9 percent." All right?MR. AXILROD. That is, we are projecting to be within that;we are not actually--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you mean?MR. AXILROD. Well, the October figures are quite different:6 percent for M2 and 10 percent or so for M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's still a reasonable target, right?MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shall we stick a phrase at the end of thatsuch as "as indicated at the last meeting" or something like that?Then go with another sentence on M1? Well, maybe we don't need that"as indicated at the last meeting."MR. AXILROD. You could say "continue to be consistent."MR. PARTEE. Except we're changing the specifications,though. So, "continue to be consistent"--MR. GRAMLEY. No matter what we do, they are going to grow atthose rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "M1 is expected to grow over the periodby" whatever. Let's say 3 percent tentatively, which is halfwaybetween and a round number. We could just put a semi-colon and thensay "more rapid growth would be acceptable in view of the substantialdecline of M1 in October." Or we could say "M1 is expected to growover the period by 3 percent, less than anticipated earlier in view ofthe shortfall in October."MR. AXILROD. That's better.MR. GUFFEY. What period are we speaking of?MR. AXILROD. From September.MR. GUFFEY. Oh, September to December.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And then we could go on to say "In thelight of that shortfall, more rapid growth in that aggregate would beacceptable."-45-11/7/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you want to say "In view of thenegative number in October" rather than "the shortfall"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think "decline in October" is all right.Then we're going to say more generally "Lesser restraint on reservepositions would be acceptable in the event of significantly slowergrowth in the monetary aggregates." I sure don't know whether we needthat greater restraint sentence.MR. PARTEE. The whole thing starts out with "decreasesomewhat." I wonder whether we want the "somewhat."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's get to that point. Is that generalframework of the directive--just in terms of the language--all right?SPEAKER(?). Mind over matter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me take the funds rate first; thatseems to be easier. Most people have said 7 to 11 percent, whichmakes sense to me. It's more centered and we raised it not so longago. I think after all this period of time it might be appropriate tohave some gesture toward reducing it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's a lucky number.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Generally, we are at 7 to 11 percent?MR. MARTIN. Yes.SPEAKER(?). I guess so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The critical figure will be the borrowingassumption. There we are dealing with a great deal of uncertainty. Ithink all these comments about the seasonal borrowing are relevant butalso I suppose it's possible that the seasonal borrowing will decreasenow that market rates are so low. We had an experience recently witha big bank waltzing in for a large amount of borrowing for no apparentreason. And if one or two big banks waltz in during a reserve period,that uses up all our borrowing here and we're left in a peculiarposition. We have a full range of proposals here--from $400 or closeto it to $700 million, which averages to $550 million.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You may have two groups of dissentingvotes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do think there is some danger in easingtoo aggressively here. I don't think that analogy in '80 is aterribly good one to give because we had those credit controls andother factors that were driving down M1. But we have had a prettygood decline in interest rates. I personally feel a little morecomfortable about the outlook simply because interest rates havedeclined. I think we have to show some motion here and that seems tobe the prevailing sentiment. What anything means I don't know. As apractical matter, I take it nobody would be very happy at this stage,contrary to a few weeks ago, to see the rates backing up appreciablyin the market; the bill rate can go up a little from where it is todayand so forth. But I don't know what borrowing level providesassurance against that.-46-11/7/84VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm afraid that at $700 million theremight very well be some backing up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that. We don't know that,but I would agree that the odds are substantial in that case. Itcould happen with $600 million but that is less likely, depending uponwhere you think it is now. Driving it down to $500 million seems tome a bigger step than is appropriate at the moment. Maybe it will beappropriate in a few weeks. My view is that that could put the fundsrate at 8-1/2 percent, given--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we have a volatile--MR. PARTEE. I thought we had a staff projection that $400million would be consistent with 9 percent.MR. RICE. Yes, that $400 million would be 9 percent.MR. AXILROD. We think that borrowing of $400 million willkeep the funds rate slightly above the discount rate. And it might gobelow that; I don't think it will. A lot depends on how we manageoperations and the signals given. In general, that's probably right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But, if the markets think that we'regoing to be easing aggressively, they will go even further, Chuck.MR. PARTEE. They probably won't cut it much below thediscount rate.MR. AXILROD. Well, I ought to add a caveat, Governor Partee.With this two-week reserve period what President Solomon mentioned isperfectly right. If we have to push reserves in aggressively to getthe borrowings down or if some big bank comes in early and creates alot of excess reserves and the funds rate tends to go down,anticipations of a discount rate decrease will come into play and theactual funds rate may actually fall below the present discount rate.Now, I can't imagine that the borrowing will be particularly high inthose circumstances, but there is some give there.MR. PARTEE. It would be pretty eccentric to have the fundsrate much below the discount rate.MR. AXILROD. Yes, not for any sustained period. But it hasbeen for a few days; it was on Monday and Tuesday.MR. PARTEE. Maybe we just ought to provide some reserves andforget about this borrowing number.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could do that, but we're going to getthe--MR. PARTEE. We don't know what will happen then.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the money supply is weak, we are goingto drive [the funds rate] way down and then you get into the '80s[situation]. That's what we did in 1980--MR. PARTEE. Yes.11/7/84CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --until we finally stopped and the fundsrate got way below the discount rate. Maybe that's what we want to doat the next step but I am not sure we want to do it right now. Giventhe way this market has been acting, my gut feeling is that we oughtto be in the $550 to $600 million range. And if the rate shows signsof backing up at that level--unless we get some really good businessnumbers--we ought to let borrowing go down further pretty promptly butdo it over [a few weeks]. We have one two-week reserve period andthen we have another two-week reserve period. I'd do it by the nextreserve period maybe, but not all at once. Are we in the first weekof a reserve period? No, we're just ending a reserve period.SPEAKER(?). It starts on Thursday.MR. AXILROD. The reserve period starts tomorrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, by the beginning of the next reserveperiod we will have the retail sales and the durable goods ordersfigures and some more data on unemployment claims, won't we?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We will have more flexibility andmore options to move or not to move on the discount rate if we go downto the $600 million, or possibly the $550 million, level. I think the$600 million level is better, because otherwise we are going to havereal problems with what may be a psychological situation in themarkets where the expectations are so heavy for a discount rate cutand so affecting behavior that we may feel that that's what we want todo if conditions indicate further easing.MR. PARTEE. That second reserve period, if I am reading itcorrectly from the calendar, starts with Thanksgiving. Is that aproblem?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We serve pressed turkey here!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a thing for pressed turkey.MR. MARTIN. We don't want to end up being the turkey!MR. PARTEE. That second period may be eccentric because ofthe holiday.MR. STERNLIGHT. There might be reserve problems because ofthe holiday then, but I don't think it presents any problem for edgingthe borrowing down.MR. PARTEE. Yes, particularly--MR. CORRIGAN. --particularly at the beginning of the period.It could at the end of the period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to be too arithmetic aboutit, but the great majority of the Committee is within $50 million of$550.MR. PARTEE. I could accept $550 million as a first step.MR. MARTIN. What would the second step be?-48-11/7/84MR. PARTEE. Well, it would depend on whether we had to gofurther. We would have to go down toward $400.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the money supply is weak and theeconomy is weak and so forth--MR. PARTEE. If everything is still weak, probably.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or a discount rate cut rather than gocompletely down to $400 million in the second step.MR. PARTEE. Maybe both.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that would be a half-point cut.MR. GUFFEY. I would just remind you that the borrowing levelwas just reduced from $750 to $700 million this week. And federalfunds today--although to be sure it's Wednesday--are trading below thediscount rate. I don't know what all of that means and the funds rateshouldn't remain there, obviously, but we've already taken one cutfrom $750 to $700 million that the market doesn't know about. Nowyou're suggesting cutting it another $150 million.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But at the conference call, youremember, there were some people who wanted to ease aggressively andsome of us--and I was in the other group--wanted to ease only to apoint where we avoided going down to 9-1/2 percent [on the fundsrate]. We thought that the Chairman and the Open Market Desk might goas low as $650 million on the borrowing assumption. Some of us hopedthe rate would not go much below 10 percent. I think they stayed veryfaithfully within the spirit of the consultation by bringing borrowingdown only to $700 million. And the average fed funds rate recentlyhas been a shade under 10 percent. So I think it was a perfectlyappropriate move; I was a little surprised it didn't come earlierbecause the market situation was very strange. In a sense, that'spast history almost, Roger, and I think--MR. GUFFEY. Let me be sure to be understood. I am notcritical of having moved to $700 million. I am just noting the factthat we very recently moved to the $700 million level and to talkabout taking it to $550 million seems to me to be a rather largechange in policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a pretty good microscope if youcan tell the difference between $750 and $700 million.MR. GUFFEY. Well, to be sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was a feeble gesture to--MR. GUFFEY. I cannot tell the difference, but the fact ofthe matter is that there has been an overt move and we don't know whatthe result is.MR. CORRIGAN. I personally think that whatever we do themarket is at a point where it is likely to try to run beyond it, whichis another reason I would favor a more conservative approach. I thinkthe market psychology is a big factor here.-49-11/7/84MR. ROBERTS. There is the possibility, of course, that themarket, having already discounted a discount rate decrease and a move[by this Committee], might react adversely if we didn't move enough.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they did, then we ought to move more; Idon't think anybody is talking about a backup.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I still feel that $600 million givesus the maximum flexibility to respond to any changing circumstanceseither in the market psychology or in the real economy or--well, Idon't think we'll see much change in the money numbers in the next fewweeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Frankly, the difference between $550 and$600 million is not going to be visible in anything we do. It'swithin the range of error that we hit anyway.MR. CORRIGAN. [It's not] the difference between $550 and$600 million. I think the only thing that matters is the extent towhich there is an implicit automatic assumption that you'd go downfurther to $500 or even $400 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think the assumption is that wewould automatically go down; the assumption is we would go down if themoney numbers come in weaker than anticipated and if the business andgeneral news is biased on the less strong side rather than the strongside. If we come up with a positive retail sales figure in Octoberand a strong new orders figure and the money supply is up $3 billionin the week of the 15th and another $2 billion in the following week,the 22nd, I don't think there's any assumption that we'd do anything.MR. MARTIN. Would it be at $550 million then?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we start at $550 million, it would.MR. PARTEE. We also ought to take a look at this seasonalquestion. I don't know whether we'll get all that much detail but Ihave a feeling that we may get the decline mainly from the seasonaldropping off. I'd forgotten about it until it came up today that thisseasonal borrowing must be running toward the end of its period andthat, therefore, there will be a drop in seasonal borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why won't they just renew it for thefollowing year?MR. PARTEE. Oh, I don't think they can; it's not really donethat way. They have to have a time when they're out of debt, Ibelieve.MR. AXILROD. It may be a big factor this year. Normallyit's not a big factor because the variations in the other borrowingand the errors in their relationship swamp it. But we're getting soclose to it now that it may very well be a factor and we wouldcertainly want to look carefully.MR. CORRIGAN. It has been a factor, hasn't it, Steve?-50-11/7/84MR. AXILROD. Well, it's a factor technically in theintercept, not necessarily in the slope of the relationship.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why don't we compromise by saying theinitial borrowing assumption is in a range of $550 to $600 million andleave it [to you] as you feel your way over the next couple of days?MR. PARTEE. How about $500 to $550 million?MR. GUFFEY. $600 to $700 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're getting pretty narrow. From mystandpoint, if you want to make it $550 to $600 million, it's finewith me. I'll make it whichever I feel like.SPEAKER(?). That's the actual state of the art, I guess!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think everybody is saying we play this alittle [flexibly]; we've been playing it this way anyway. It dependsupon what happens in the market. If the market gets way ahead of it,we go slower; if it doesn't, we go faster.MR. MARTIN. I'd just like to see you have the flexibility togo to $400 million if the market conditions and the economy dictate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is within this anyway. Youcan have an argument as to whether the market conditions and theeconomy dictate it but it's certainly within the range of where we cango as I understand it.MR. PARTEE. I would like to think that we're doing thiswithin the context of alternative A, but we're--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what alternative Ameans. That's just a question of the number to put in, isn't it?MR. PARTEE. I just say that to give a sense of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Frankly, the number that I thought ofputting in there--but it's not going to make any difference to me--isthe round number that is halfway between "A" and "B." If we do it ona quarterly basis, I'd put in 3.MR. PARTEE. I have no problem with 3.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's a danger in the sense thatthe market is so bullish that they are going to seize on almostanything. We're getting a very significant bond market rally; I don'tknow that we've seen evidence of it in the stock market. Whatever wedo they're going to do more, if they think there's more to come.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To some extent that doesn't bother mebecause I don't think the general business picture is very risky onthe up side. And if it gets moderately risky on the up side, we cantighten up. I don't want to get the money supply [expanding sorapidly] in the next few months that we've got a problem, but--51-11/7/84MR. PARTEE. It gives you one more chance to adjust theportfolio if you're an FCA or something like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Steve], did you write down the languagethat we had? I'll fill in some numbers as you go along.MR. AXILROD. Maybe Normand has been writing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In sentence number one, I don't carewhether it says "reduce" or "decrease." We'll take a vote on that."In the implementation of policy in the short run, the Committeeseeks..." "To reduce" is a better Anglo-Saxon term; no they're bothLatin, aren't they?MR. AXILROD. The staff sees no difference, but--.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Reduce" sounds better to me. "...seeksto reduce somewhat existing pressures on reserve positions. Thisaction is expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 at annualrates of around 7-1/2 and 9 percent during the period from Septemberto December." We're putting in there the same figures we had before;we're not very far away. Now I don't remember what I said before.MR. BERNARD. "M1 is expected to grow over the period at arate of around 3 percent...."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3 percent semi-colon.MR. BERNARD. Or [comma] "less than anticipated earlier inview of the decline in October."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The unexplained decline.MR. BERNARD. And you thought about possibly putting in there"In light of that decline, more rapid growth would be acceptable."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In light of that decline more rapid growthof Ml would be acceptable.MR. PARTEE. And then "More generally..."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and then it would go on to say "Moregenerally lesser restraint..." Instead of "acceptable"--we just usedthe word "acceptable"--let's say "Lesser restraint on reservepositions would be sought in the event of significantly slower growthin the monetary aggregates, evaluated..." etc.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if you go that far and use theword "sought"--which is all right with me--then I think we ought toleave in the counterbalance sentence. Otherwise, if we leave that outtoo, then it's really going to look silly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's all right with me. The othersentence says "acceptable," which is weaker than this other one. Ifthat sounds generally all right, we're still left with what level ofborrowing we're starting off with. I am perfectly happy with anunderstanding of $550 to $600 million that would be played in thefirst week depending upon how the market conditions look. We'll stay-52-11/7/84there if things are very equable. If things come out on the strongside, well, we'd stay for a while; if things come out on the weakside, we'd make another step downward.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And if you have to make a verysubstantial step downward, we could have a consultation unless youdecide to do it through a discount rate.MR. PARTEE. I think the second step is to go down to $400million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might well want a consultation stayingwithin this, but we will have to see how obvious or clear it is. Isthat reasonable? Let's see whether we've got the votes.MR. MARTIN. 7 to 11?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And 7 to 11 percent on the funds rate.MR. KEEHN. Not to stir the soup but--SPEAKER(?). But it will.MR. KEEHN. On this M3 number of 9 percent, I'd ask what thebasis for that is. Neither alternative A nor B would suggest that.MR. CORRIGAN. It's the one we had the last time.MR. KEEHN. The fact that we had it the last time I don'tfind necessarily compelling.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're quite right, neither "A" nor "B"has that, but they are within 1/2 point of it and I think that's--MR. KEEHN. Just to carry over the language doesn't seem tobe a clean way of developing a directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've typically done that, or tried to,when it's very close.MR. AXILROD. Looking back, the Committee has accepted prettymuch staying there when the expectation was within a percentage point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, M3 is running a little high andM2 is running a little low. But gosh, we should be so close on thesethings ordinarily!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we end up with interest rates[down] much further with your second or third step, there's going tobe absolutely no incentive in the Congress to do anything about thatdeficit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It works the other way if the economy isslowing down so much.MR. MARTIN. That's the problem.-53-11/7/84MR. BOYKIN. Governor Partee's comment that this would bedone in the context of alternative A disturbs me a bit. I canprobably agree to what you're saying in the context of alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what "in the context of"means and I don't think I understand Governor Partee's comment.MR. PARTEE. I'll retract it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's in the context of what we're talkingabout, which is a figure of 3 percent for M1 and 7-1/2 and 9 percentfor M2 and M3 and these general borrowing numbers. It is talkingabout going to, say, $400 million, without making a great deal of it,if there is a succession of weak economic or monetary numbers.MR. BOYKIN. I just could not let his comment go withoutadditional comment.MR. BLACK. You just have a short-term attitude ever sinceyou got through--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If no one has a better proposal at themoment, I think we ought to vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley NoPresident Horn YesGovernor Martin YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Seger YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are finished.END OF MEETING-54-