Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 5-6, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., starting on Monday, October 5, 1981, at 4:30 p.m. andcontinuing on Tuesday, October 6, 1981, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. KeehnMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Ford, Timlen, and Winn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris and Roos, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General Counsel 1/Mr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 1/Mr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns, R. Davis, Ettin, Keir, Mullineaux, Prell,Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists1/ Attended Tuesday session only.10/5-6/81Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of Inter-national Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey 2/, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Simpson, Chief, Banking Section, Division of ResearchAnd Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck 1/, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. Monhollon, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of RichmondMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Keran, Koch, andParthemos, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveReserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City,San Francisco, Atlanta, and Richmond, respectivelyMessrs. Fieleke and Syron 1/, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Bank of BostonMr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank ofMinneapolis1/ Attended Tuesday session only.2/ Attended Monday session only.-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 5-6, 1981October 5, 1981--Afternoon SessionMR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments or questions? Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Just one question: To what extent did the Libyanpull-out [of funds] from this country affect the rate movement?MR. CROSS. The impact on the rate movement?MR. WINN. Yes. If I understand, there was a big withdrawalof Libyan funds from this country.MR. CROSS. There was a large withdrawal--well, not awithdrawal, but a--MR. WINN. Transfer.MR. CROSS. There was a run-off of securities--Treasury billsand notes that the Libyans held here--of a fairly substantial amount.But I don't think and have not heard that it was an important factorin the exchange rate situation. But as Treasury bills and notesmatured, the Libyans have drawn down their holdings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Do you find that the closeness of contact andquality of information with European central banks and with the marketin general is being maintained at present?MR. CROSS. Well, we're certainly doing everything we can tomaintain it. It's always a little easier if we're more involved inthe operations, I think. But we're trying to do what we can, ofcourse, to keep in close contact and to get all the information wecan. There had been some talk by one or two of the lower level peoplein some of the European central banks that if the United States isn'tgoing to be in the game, so to speak, perhaps we should notparticipate to the extent we have in the exchange of information. Atthis point, it has not been anything other than a statement by one ortwo officials, and I don't see any reason at this point that theywould not continue [to exchange information].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise one thing informally andI'll ask for your comment, if you have any, tomorrow morning so youcan think about it a little. We have had an informal inquiry from onecentral bank not in the swap network to be placed in the swap network.It is a small countryMR. CORRIGAN.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We turned down10/5-6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have been given no particularencouragement, but I told them I would raise it for a generalreaction, not for a decision. I told them I thought there was acertain reluctance to extend these arrangements, partly because of theinquiries that would trigger from still others. I think it's fair tosay, Mr. Truman, that theThey are on their own, so to speak. [Participation in the swapnetwork] would be of some assistance to them in their reservemanagement and, I would suspect--although this weighing is mine andnot theirs--even more assistance in terms of their prestigeand as a member of the in good standing.Weren't those about all the considerations they raised, Ted? They'veraised this from time to time in the past. I will not ask for yourcomment this minute, but apart from Mr. Corrigan's let youreflect on it for a very brief period [and ask] tomorrow for anycomments you want to make.MR. SCHULTZ. I'll make a bet that it tooklonger to ask for it than you just outlined it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Their numbers are smaller, they arean Article IV country or whatever it is, and they are in the EMS.Article VIII is what we're looking for, isn't it? Article IV is thoseother guys. So, it depends upon one's attitudes toward this kind ofthing. Domestic open market operations, Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much did the bond market go up today?MR. STERNLIGHT. By the end of the day 1/2 to 3/4 of a point.It had been up more than that earlier, but [the gain] got trimmedback.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was this a rally that hasn't beenaccompanied by any lightening of spirits?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think attitudes are still mostly cautious.They're not really seeing extensive investor buying [though] there hasbeen some. Until they see more of that, it has more of thecharacteristics of a technical rebound with short covering and not alifting of spirits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any further comment?MR. WINN. I'd just raise a question about the margin and thevaluation [for System repurchase agreements]. What is the marginrequirement?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there's a whole scale of valuationswhen we value securities for repurchase agreements. And it's asliding scale; it depends on the maturity of the issues. For example,with Treasury bills over one month [in maturity] we went from 10 to 2510/5-6/81basis points. That is where we would value the securities against thecurrent quoted market. In very rough terms it was about a doubling ofthe margins.MR. CORRIGAN. Is that commonplace in the market now, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. A lot of lenders have been raising theirmargins, and I'd say our margins are in line with those of the moreconservative lenders. I wouldn't say everybody is up there. Somelenders still rely primarily on whom they're lending to rather thanlooking to the margin itself for protection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I just wanted to get Peter's thoughts, if he hasany, on what happened to M-1B shift adjusted in the last two weeks, inthat it suddenly fell out of bed and gave us an unexpected, at leastto me, 4 percent decline. Earlier in [September] it looked as if itwould be coming in close to 2 or 3 percent.MR. STERNLIGHT. Right. Well, I don't know. Steve mighthave a comment on it. I have given up trying to explain short-termvariations in the money supply.MR. MORRIS. A shift in the demand for money.MR. PARTEE. Of course!MR. GRAMLEY(?). We're possibly moving along--MR. BALLES. Well, maybe I should ask Steve.MR. AXILROD. We don't have any very obvious explanation.There is nothing special that we can see. Just as a word of caution,I would hold my breath a little until October 7th. We're notprojecting a large increase in that week; we're projecting somethingon the order of $2 or $3 billion, but it's not impossible that itcould come in quite a bit larger and could begin to make up for thatdecline. So far as the economics of it go, it could indicate someweakening in real GNP, which is quite consistent with the nonfinancialdata that are coming in. But again, that's somewhat speculative.MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Kaufman is projecting a large increase [forthe week of] October 7th.MR. STERNLIGHT. A lot of market people expect it becauseit's one of those weeks in which we have the Social Security paymentson Friday in the first week of the month. Often in the past that hasbeen accompanied by large increases.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't know what [last] week's figuresare much less the figures for the 7th. These preliminary figures havegotten very [unreliable]. One of the strange things is that currencyis so weak. Does anybody know why currency is so weak?MR. MORRIS. Maybe the drug business is slowing down. We'reabout to publish an article that indicates that a large part of the10/5-6/81net increase in currency is not related to any normal economicactivity, but is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M1 has really been lower, drug adjusted!MR. MORRIS. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments or questions? If not,we shall adjourn. But first we have to ratify the transactions.SPEAKER(?). So move.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we'll ratify thetransactions and adjourn until 9:00 a.m. tomorrow.[Meeting recessed.]10/5-6/81 -5-October 6, 1981--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, gentlemen--lady and gentlemen--wecan resume and spend just a few minutes on any reactions or commentsor feelings you have about swaps, with particular reference tonot necessarily confined to that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, let me make a point. Theargument that and, therefore, shouldhave a swap line, has some weaknesses in it becausebecoming a member.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Their answer to that is is notbecoming a member but also--. Are they an Article VIII country?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, they are.MR. TRUMAN. No, they are not an Article VIII country; theyare not part of the consultation in the EMS and they're not part ofthe VIII group. So that's their distinctive--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But they are Article VIII?MR. TRUMAN. They're not Article VIII.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're not Article VIII?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're not Article VIII? I thoughtArticle VIII meant simply that a currency is convertible.MR. TRUMAN. That's right. And is not aconvertible currency in that sense.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I see. You mean there are certaintypes of formal exchange--MR. TRUMAN. Well, they haven't given up the right to have[exchange controls].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I see, even though in practicethere are no exchange controls on at the moment. Still, I don't thinkthat ought to be the main reason for giving a swap line toHave they presented a reason other than prestige why they should havea swap line--a substantive reason?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the argument is that we turned themdown ten years ago or thereabouts apparently on the basis that theywere members of the sterling area and that they ought to look toLondon for assistance. They are no longer members of the sterlingarea so that reason is no longer valid for turning them down. They dohave independent reserve management, and it would be of at leastmodest help to them in reserve management to know they have thisbackstop.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, if we went ahead withcame in again, would this change your attitude about givingone to10/5-6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Clearly, a major problem with this is theprecedent we create for others. It's not ; we also getasked by countries.MR. TRUMAN. Some of which are [now] Article VIII countries,like whom we turned down in '67 solely onthat ground. There are also who mightthink that they were on the right side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Turned them down solely on what ground?MR. TRUMAN. Primarily on the Article VIII grounds of 1967;but subsequently they've become part of our [unintelligible] article.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, they've become a member.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My [view] would be that unlessthere's a substantive reason, we open up more problems by agreeing toit. I think we ought to be in a posture that unless it's one of thecountries that we deal with [and is] important to the [effectivefunctioning of the international] monetary system, the extension of aswap line ought to have a substantive reason behind it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments?MR. PARTEE. I agree with Tony. I think it opens up a can ofworms. I don't know how we could turn down thecountries that are bigger trading partners and bigger countries andeverything else-- --if we let inMR. WALLICH. I would think we could perhaps [say no] on thebasis that this is not the right time. I don't want to preclude thisfor all eternity.MR. PARTEE. They could get a closer tie with sterling andthen have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They could take it up in 1990.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That is possibly the correct--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't detect any enthusiasm. Theyhave already been told that a major problem is the precedentialcharacter of it. Well, we can proceed to the staff reports on theeconomic situation.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we should just pause here and getreactions on the business scene as such. You made the comment thatyou don't see any precipitous drop likely. That's one question that Isuppose arises. Comments on that or other points about the businessscene are in order at this point. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think the economy does have a downward tilt toit. I doubt that we're in for a precipitous drop but I do think thatfinancial conditions have worsened. The small business situation--the-6-10/5-6/81stretch-out of accounts payable--has put considerable strain on thesecompanies and I'm hearing more and more cries of complaint from them.MR. SCHULTZ. From whom? Where are you getting that? I keeptrying to get a feel for this--I've talked to bankers all over thecountry--and it's hard. In general, when I talk to big bankers, theysay things don't look so bad; they look pretty good. Even the onesthat have special divisions that lend to small businesses say theyhave checked and the people they have loaned to are under a lot ofpressure but none seems about to break. Then when I talk to thelittle bankers, they say the cataclysm has arrived.MR. BOEHNE. I'm getting this not from the biggest banks inour District but from, say, the $1-1/2 billion size ones who tend tospecialize in lending to small and medium size businesses. Theircries of concern are getting louder. I'm also hearing this directlyfrom the small and medium size businesses. I've talked to a number ofthem; I had a luncheon last week with people from small and mediumsize firms in manufacturing, services, and consulting type businesses,and they're talking about accounts receivable that are going out 120days and higher. The worst offender appears to be the federalgovernment, which is very slow in paying its bills. The kind ofcomment I heard at the luncheon was: "I'm just hanging by the tips ofmy fingers over the edge of the cliff; I can see the edge of thecliff." We had a go-around and almost to a person they mentioned thiscash flow problem as being very, very serious. It was in variousdegrees depending on who was talking. But the tone of "Am I going tosurvive or not?" was clearly there. That was a real question.MR. SCHULTZ. Just to be specific about your District, I hadlunch with who has a very good program forsmall business lending. He said the small businesses are all underpressure but he didn't see any that are going [under]. That's theproblem that I have. The [small businesses] all are saying thatthey're in really difficult condition but if you ask the banker whohas lent to them, he says he thinks they're going to make it okay.MR. BOEHNE. I've tried to keep in touch with this and myreading is that the seriousness of the slippage in financialconditions is significantly greater now than it was a couple of monthsago.MR. PARTEE. Would this affect their inventory attitude,though?MR. BOEHNE. Some of them mentioned that even if the [demand]were there, they wouldn't be stocked up to take care of it becausethey can't handle the inventory.MR. PARTEE. The reason I asked is that Jim had theconclusion that inventories weren't a sensitive sector. But it doesseem to me that if a firm's cash flow is poor and if the costs ofcarry are very high, it could liquidate inventory. We have differentcircumstances than in the past for judging these stock/sales ratiosand so forth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anyone else?-7-10/5-6/81MR. MORRIS. I can confirm Ed's finding. I've talked to anumber of small and medium size bankers who have reported that justrecently, in the last few weeks, for the first time this year they'relooking at some loans that are turning sour. It's a very recentdevelopment. Bankers not only in Massachusetts but in New Hampshireand Maine have said the same thing. But they've mostly been the smalland medium size banks, not the big ones.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know how much this adds orhow much light it throws on it. I had a meeting with about a dozenbusiness leaders in New York City and, even though they tend to belarger size businesses, many of them have companies or product linesthat have been very adversely affected by current conditions. Thecurious thing I noticed was that even the ones who said they were ingreat difficulty in regard to those particular product lines all saidthat there were other product lines that displayed some strength, asproof of the fact that they didn't feel they were near any cliff.These are not huge companies; they are what I guess we call mediumsize companies; some have sales as small as $200 or $300 million. Butto a man all of them--even the ones who said that were [hurting]--saidthey hoped the Fed would continue its tight monetary policy. Theysaid they thought it would eventually work. As I say, it probablydoesn't throw any light on this, but it's the only contact [of thiskind that] I've had.MR. WALLICH. We have some data on bankruptcies and failureswhich throw some light, don't they, on the degree of strain? Myimpression is that they are up significantly, about 40 percent, butthat this is also influenced by the new bankruptcy law. Certainly[that affects] the bankruptcies; less so perhaps the failures. Do youhave any more data? Is 40 percent unique historically?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your people had some data yesterday, Jim,relating to failures--I forget whether the term used was failures ornot--per 10,000 firms. It wasn't all that much, was it?MR. KICHLINE. Right, it was failures--Dunn and Bradstreet'sfailure index, which tries to adjust for the size of businesspopulation. That was up substantially; I don't have in mind thepercent. It's still below the peak in that series, which occurred in1960-61.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was high, but it didn't look so highhistorically.MR. KICHLINE. There are other indicators, such as adversedividend actions or ratings changes. They are looking more adversenow compared with a year ago, but they're all well below what happenedin 1974-75, which obviously was extraordinary. Nevertheless, theyhave been creeping up in recent months, and one gets a sense that thecorporate sector is experiencing some deterioration. But it's notdramatic at this point.MR. SCHULTZ. The bankruptcy rate is up 41.5 percent overlast year. But one has to remember that the new bankruptcy law hasthis new Chapter 13, which is very attractive for these smaller-8-10/5-6/81businesses who can go into that and keep running under theirmanagement. It's a different kind of animal than they've ever had towork with before.MR. PARTEE. Of course, that was in effect last year, too.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, only in the latter part of last year.MR. PARTEE. No, it [became effective] in late '79.MR. SCHULTZ. That's right; it was late '79.MS. TEETERS. I think I read someplace that 30 states haveoverridden it.MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, that's right.MR. GRAMLEY. One wants to remember also that historicallynumbers of failures have not been procyclical; they werecountercyclical for many, many years. The reason was that whenbusiness activity speeded up, the rate of business formationaccelerated and there were so many new firms coming out that theretended to be more failures. But when there is a prolonged period inwhich the rate of net business formation is low and there's a verysharp acceleration in failures, I think it is an indication of growingdifficulty. The other thing that ought to be said is that one knowsjust from raw logic about interest rates that small businesses willhave difficulty when they are paying 20 percent for credit and arelooking at a rate of increase of basic industrial and service pricesof between 8 and 9 percent. You can talk all you want about how theinterest cost is less taking taxes into account; but as a firm getscloser and closer to the edge, the less relevant this tax calculationbecomes and the more the firm is going to be staring at the need topay 20 percent for credit. So, just abstracting, the problem has togrow and grow and grow as time goes on. It's not surprising that Edis finding more and more signs of this.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And now you can sell your tax credit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. We had a group of people from about 20 medium andlarge size businesses in last week and the reaction we had was verysimilar to what Fred reported. In some specific fields and areasthere are relatively serious problems, but by and large we got thefeeling that there is an underpinning of strength. And there wasunanimous sentiment--as has been the case in the past--that if the Fedwere to do a flip-flop and become really expansive, it wouldn't solvetheir problems. In other words, their message to me was: Forheaven's sakes hang in there. And we didn't sense any danger of aprecipitous decline. Of course this is a diversified Midwestern area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. We're getting the same picture. In terms ofspecifics, the optimistic points I found are the high-tech companiesin the Southeast, such as andso on, which I visited in the last few weeks. They are all super10/5-6/81optimistic about the way things are going. Their earnings are growingin the 20 to 30 percent range or higher. The technical serviceindustries of that type are doing very well. The weaknesses that wefind are in the areas that one would expect. We're seeing more andmore classified loans to developers. We also have in our section ofthe country--in Atlanta, for example--a very high office vacancy ratethat is beginning to approach the problems we had in the mid-1970s interms of percent of vacant floor space and things like that. So,we're finding significant signs of weakness both in commercial andresidential construction and in the lending institutions other thanbanks, i.e. the thrifts. I find these days that just about every S&Lexecutive carries around in his pocket a schedule of weeks to go ormonths to go in terms of how long the S&L's equity will last based onits current earnings. There's a lot of worry in that industry. Thetourist industry in southeast Florida is way off. The state had itsslowest [tourist] season in the last ten years in the southern part ofFlorida and that also affected related industries. The lumberindustry, which is big in our area, is also in dire straits because ofthe housing situation; the carpet industry in Georgia, where we havethe capital of the world's carpet business, is beginning to come undersome stress. Putting all of this together, my feeling is that overallwe have a mixed picture. The economy is moving sideways. Some of theindustries are prospering and the ones we would expect to be hurt arebeing hurt.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that among the bankers I havetalked with there's a growing sense of concern about small and mediumsize businesses. Several of the bankers have commented that there arebankruptcies that are in [train]--that at this point, nothing can bedone to defer them and they're just plain going to happen. Despitethat, just to echo Tony's comments, I haven't talked to anybody Iwould regard as a responsible individual who would suggest that weought to change what we're doing. [They think] the course iscertainly the right one.I just want to comment a bit on bankruptcies. Though that isa statistic that is available and is followed, there are also a lot ofpeople who are just quietly going out of business at this point, andthat is not a statistic that we can follow very easily. And there area lot of people who feel that some of these small and medium sizecompanies are simply getting what they can out of the business beforethey actually have to go into bankruptcy. So, this is having anadverse impact on that group.Let me ask Jim Kichline something on what he said aboutconstruction. My impression is that major construction is holding uppretty well in terms of orders and that kind of thing. Is that right?MR. KICHLINE. You mean nonresidential?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, big construction.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, the orders in the last couple of monthshave bounced up. On average they had been about flat from last winterthrough much of the summer. But in the last couple of months we'vehad two really big increases; it's a very volatile series. I'd saythe longer-term trend is rather flat in real terms.-10-10/5-6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me a little surprising not tosee some weakness there, in the orders anyway. I understand there's alot in the pipeline. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. I'll say a couple of things. One is that many ofthe small businesses are holding on and as such they're delaying or[canceling] any orders for new equipment and delaying expansion, sowe're going to get some secondary effect from this curtailment. Manyof them have worked out financing arrangements at under prime so theyget a little relief on that score, and the banks have been cooperatingwith them on that to hold them together. They complain about thelarge companies not paying their bills more than [about] one another;they say the large [companies are] carrying themselves through theimpact on some of the smaller companies. And this is a source ofcomplaint. Strangely enough, none of them that I've heard really[favors] a change in Fed policy. They realize it's tough, but theywant us to hang with it still. Another point is that if we look atlarge capital investments and that sort of thing, it's interesting tosee the changes that are taking place in the debt/equity ratios. Itused to be that a firm financed a building [entirely with] debt and noequity and now the ratio is up to about 50/50, which is an interestingturnaround in terms of the financing arrangements in our area. Myconcern is largely that the crunch is going to come with some of thefinancial institutions, not with some of the business firms, and thatthe unexpected fallout or the repercussions may send shock wavesthrough the system. They talk about months until the end of the line.MR. PARTEE. You're talking about thrifts?MR. WINN. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Not banks.MR. WINN. No, there are a few banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a large other subject, but onecan get a bit concerned about what one sees going on in the bankingsystem: companies being held alive by not very good lending and loansto foreign countries being rescheduled with loans on top of loans.MR. WINN. That's right. That is the thing I think is thereal [unintelligible] side of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. We also see evidence that soft spots arespreading, and it's not necessarily limited to small business. In thePacific Northwest, of course, there has been a long period now whereall kinds of small lumber mills have either closed their doorspermanently or have gone on indefinite furlough, but things arespreading now even to the commercial side in the aerospace business.Employment is down noticeably from where it had been at its peakearlier in the year. Big aluminum companies are cutting back. Theseare suppliers for housing, automobiles, and so forth. Even some ofthe bigger companies are reporting capital spending cutbacks.Agricultural prices--and agriculture is one of the big industries inCalifornia--have been dropping partly due to a slippage in overseasdemand because of the strength of the dollar. We get fairly-11-10/5-6/81widespread reports from our directors about further slowdowns inretail sales. This pretty much confirms the prospect that we've beenlooking at for some time now of a soggy economy. I'm not sure it addsup to a cumulative serious downward spiral, but it's enough to givesome cause for concern.MS. TEETERS. John, I noticed that 3 or 4 small banks inOregon are on the troubled bank list. Is Oregon particularly hard hitat this point?MR. BALLES. It really is. I think with one exception all ofour so-called problem banks are in the state of Oregon. And that's adirect feedback from the very high unemployment rates, the closings ofthese lumber mills, and so forth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't think there's any doubt that in thelast month or two or so the signs of the long awaited credit qualityproblems have begun to emerge in ways that bankers and other peoplecan see them. Frankly, I run into that point of view from virtuallyall the bankers that I have had an opportunity to talk to. Indeed,one prominent banker told me not too long ago that any banker who sayshe's not seeing that either isn't looking or is lying. Be that as itmay, the one somewhat qualitative thing that I would add is that, in anumber of cases where people are willing to talk about these problems,they tend to tell me that these were semi-marginal to marginal creditsto begin with. Maybe they shouldn't have extended to begin with; andif they were having trouble at 10 or 12 percent, certainly they'regoing to have trouble at 18 or 20 percent. I run into that kind ofattitude with some regularity, the point being that it's not just thequestion of, say, housing or wood products or farmers, it's also aquestion of the well-run business versus the not-so-well-run businessalmost regardless of the nature of the business. But I don't thinkthere's any question that the problem is increasing.Two other quick comments: One I find very curious, and thatis that throughout all of this I begin to sense a little backing away,if I can put it that way, in terms of people's outlook for inflationover the next months, which I can't attribute to anything except thatsome of the euphoria of those really good consumer price index numbersearlier in the year has worn off and people are now starting to getback to reality. Those wage rates are there and those medical pricesare there, and the view is that, indeed, the next step on the road isgoing to be a damn tough one. I perceive that now that we've gottento the point where businesses are starting to look hard at thequestion of "Where do we go from here?" They are coming back toreality, as it were, in terms of what still lies ahead with regard totheir own pricing decisions in an environment in which they obviouslyall are looking for every opportunity they can find to pass throughcosts to try to regenerate cash flow and profit margins. And I thinkthat is a curious thing to find at this point--the reevaluation of howfar we can really expect to go in the near term on inflation, givenall the forces that they see pushing on them in terms of their ownwage and price decisions.On the economy, I would certainly agree that it's movingdownward. I don't see at the moment any evidence of a pervasive or-12-10/5-6/81precipitous decline, but I would align myself with Willis Winn insuggesting that the potential for that is clearly there. The biggestsingle vulnerability in my judgment would be not so much thatsomething will happen to the thrift industry--I think that's all beendiscounted--but that some other sizable financial shock may be loomingout there and none of us seems to know quite where it is or where itsugly head might pop up. I think that risk is there. And if that kindof thing were to happen, that might well change my view as to whetheror not there is some potential on the down side beyond what one wouldfind just by looking at the numbers in front of us today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You touched upon the wage picture. I mustsay I get a little discouraged sometimes when I look at wageattitudes. The gentleman on my left is very optimistic on this score.We had some big bankers in here a month or so ago who are all planningto increase clerical salaries in a range of 11 to 15 percent next yearand who I understand believe this is typical of industry generally. Isuspect it is. How that is consistent with getting inflation down, ifthis generalizes very far, I don't know. Not many people havecommented on that. If there are any additional comments to lendinsight as to how business or labor are reacting in this situation interms of prospective wage settlements, that's an interesting variable.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, you said I was optimistic; I amoptimistic. I'm optimistic because of just what Jerry Corrigan said.I have never felt that there was any way to get inflation down withoutputting pressure on business and labor. Put pressure on business andthey have to find a way to cut those costs because they don't have[available] the path of least resistance of raising prices. And ifyou put pressure on business, labor begins to get the point that ifthey get too much in wages they won't have a business to work for. Ithink that really is beginning to happen now and that's why I'm moreoptimistic. Every business I know of out there is doing everything itcan to cut costs. When the Teamsters open the master contract becausethey see some of their truckers going under, when the UAW talks aboutjob security instead of wage increases, and when Pan Am workers arewilling to take 10 percent cuts because the airlines are in trouble, Ithink those are signs that we're at the point where something canreally start to happen. So, that's why I tend to be optimistic on thesubject.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question that there are somescattered signs. I won't prejudice [the discussion]. The question ishow widespread they are.MR. PARTEE. Scattered here and there.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I tend to feel the way Fred feels.At that same lunch of business leaders I raised this question: Whatkind of wage increases do you expect to pay next year? And much to mysurprise a lot of them who had factories that were in very depressedconditions said they had already quietly begun to renegotiate and werecoming in with very low settlements. For those who had factories thatwere doing much better, it was a different story. But there was arather selective approach; they were implying that if it was keptquiet, they were getting trade union cooperation in the area.-13-10/5-6/81MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of my own remarks, I didn't want toleave [the impression] that all of it was on the wrong side of things.In one sense I was trying to suggest that it was on the right side ofthings because people were aggressively thinking about what to do.And that in itself says something, because heretofore I think thedecision was almost automatic when the corporate business plan cameup. They just filled in the numbers and didn't even think about it.So, I was trying to suggest that it's not all bad.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, [unintelligible] the typical bigbusinessman up until recently--he may be changing his mind--was readyto give a 10, 11, 12 percent wage increase like falling off a log. Hethought that was a normal thing to do. That may be changing, but I--MR. WINN. Some of our large national companies have quietlyrenegotiated the COLA contracts out of their labor agreements. Ithink that's a very positive step.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sounds to me--MR. WALLICH. Well, it has to be seen in the light of thefact that there's a big tax cut in 1982. Nobody seems to take that asa reason for having a lower wage increase. There would be more of areal income increase than one would otherwise expect.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're right; nobody relates a wageincrease to the fact that taxes are coming down.MR. PARTEE. It comes from different parts.MR. CORRIGAN. In most years that would get us in a lot oftrouble.MR. WINN. Does anybody have a feel for what federalgovernment policy is going to be on this score?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the federal wage increase is set at4.8 percent or something like that. Oh, you mean in the private[unintelligible]. I meant in the government itself. They broke thecomparability link, so it moves in that direction. Of course, I thinkthe attitudes on the controllers' strike have had some bearing on thisclimate in general, accidentally or otherwise. Mr. Boykin. We havethe good news coming up!MR. BOYKIN. I'm a little embarrassed; I was trying to holdoff for a while. It's obvious from our comments in the Redbook thatthe Eleventh District economy continues to be a bit of an outlier. Wehaven't really seen any major change in economic activity down our wayin recent months. It's still pretty strong. The drilling boom foroil and gas just seems to keep right on going. We don't see any signsof weakening there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have so many holes in Texas that aftera while, it's going to--!MS. TEETERS. You're talking about Texas [unintelligible]?MR. BOYKIN. No, it's the [unintelligible].-14-10/5-6/81MS. TEETERS. It's far and wide; it's headquartered out ofHouston is what it is.MR. BOYKIN. Yes.MR. SCHULTZ. There have been more oil wells drilled in thecontinental United States than in the rest of the world put together.MR. BOYKIN. The unfortunate thing is that they don't always[succeed]. I know of one plot that was a dry hole.Nonresidential construction continues very strong. And thereare a number of local government construction projects under way.Just as an example, in Dallas at the end of last year we had a littleover 41 million square feet of office space. We are projecting anadditional 29 million in the next four years. Most of that is underconstruction or firmly announced, so we'll be up to 70 million squarefeet. Houston, of course, is now as strong as Dallas or evenstronger. It's going on in San Antonio [and] even out in Midland,Texas, in the western part of Texas; a lot [is related to] oilactivity. On the [unintelligible] they're putting up a 40-storybuilding; I just hope it will stand up when a sand storm comes. Asfor manufacturing strength, it's just concentrated in those industriessupplying the energy and nonresidential construction sectors. On thefinancial side, I've not heard what Ed has heard. I will say, asopposed to questions of immediate concern, that I do sense that peopleare beginning to wonder a bit about what the next few months are goingto hold down our way. But, as far as any specifics, we don't haveany. I was talking to one small businessman in the franchisingbusiness and he said they've slowed down a bit because they're tryingto franchise nationwide and it's a little slow in other parts of thecountry but in Texas they're still opening new stores.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You need a McDonald's by every 70-storyoffice building!MR. SCHULTZ. You mean an oil well by every 70-storybuilding!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I'd just like to follow Bob to say that one halfof our District--the western part comprised of two or three statesplus Oklahoma--would fall in the category that he has just described,and it's largely related to energy and energy development. Theycontinue to put down holes, successfully finding gas and oil inWyoming, Colorado, and in Oklahoma. There is a commercial buildingboom in Denver, as Bob has described in Dallas and Houston, whereasthe rest of our District--and I'm speaking largely of Kansas City andthe Omaha area--does not share in that particular activity. On theother hand, in the agricultural sector we've enjoyed one of the bestcrop seasons that the District as a whole has experienced in manyyears. The cattle and hog industries, although marginally profitable,appear to have a somewhat brighter outlook. However, the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think the cattle is marginallyprofitable?-15-10/5-6/81MR. GUFFEY. Yes, marginally profitable at the moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. I had a bunch of cattlemen inhere on Friday and they weren't very happy.MR. GUFFEY. Well, some of them say they're losing from $30to $100 a head, but they continue to lose that every year and remainin business and drive Cadillacs. It's a rather strange operation.But the fact of the matter is that the outlook for the profitabilityof the red meat industry [in] the high plains area is much brighterthan it was, say, a year ago. By the same token there just does notappear to be any evidence of additional upward pressure on food pricesstemming from the cattle/hog meat prices that may result from the[somewhat brighter outlook].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you see going on in land prices--Iwas asking those fellows on Friday about that--and in house pricestoo? These cattlemen who were very upset conceded that land pricesweren't going down and might still be going up a little because of allthe outsiders coming in and buying land.MR. GUFFEY. The latest information we have is that farmprices have gone up but only marginally. They have been essentiallyflat recently, with some increases in prices but not nearly to theextent that they rose over the last 3 or 4 years. The rise has slowedconsiderably. And residential prices are flat or actually decreasing,at least in the eastern part of the District. In the western part ofthe District, they can't build houses fast enough to accommodate thegrowth, particularly in the Denver area. So, prices have not subsidedthere.MR. PARTEE. They're still building houses in Denver, Roger?MR. GUFFEY. Yes. As a matter of fact, within the last 30days there was an announcement of one of the largest developments inthe Denver area--the project is over $1 billion--to be undertaken.It's well financed, no question about it being--MS. TEETERS. You have some boom towns, don't you? Up in theWyoming and Montana areas, don't you have some towns that are startingfrom scratch and--MR. GUFFEY. Perhaps not from scratch, but some of the areasare [unintelligible]. In the coal or other energy-related industries,both oil and gas, we have some camp cities where people are housedessentially in temporary housing simply because they are in boomcommunities. That's particularly true in Wyoming and on parts of thewestern slope of Colorado. One thing that I would like to mention isthat I have met with the homebuilders in our District and probably therest of the presidents at least and perhaps the Board members willhave an opportunity to meet with homebuilders also. I hear twocurious comments. One is that they're about to go out of business andthey need some relief. By the same token, and almost in the samebreath, they say that they believe Federal Reserve policy to be thecorrect policy and thus they feel uneasy about even coming to talkwith us. They recognize that the relief they need is legislativerelief rather than an easing of interest rates through monetarypolicy. It seems to me a rather curious turn. I understand that-16-10/5-6/81today is the day they're going to present keys to everybody. I metwith them last week and their message is for the Federal Reserve tohold tight but that they need relief.MR. SCHULTZ. That's the [view] nationwide. It's everywhere.It's really remarkable. I have been meeting a lot with homebuilders;I went up to Boston to talk to the board of directors of the NationalAssociation of Homebuilders. Would you believe that their board ofdirectors is 1800 people? That was exactly the [sentiment]: I'mdying, what are you doing to me? But you have to hang in there andget rid of inflation.MR. GUFFEY. As a matter of fact, I know that you were upthere. Our homebuilders spoke of your speech to the board ofdirectors.MR. BOEHNE. They talk about the federal deficit. I've metwith some of them and they talk about how the deficit ought to beshrunk. They realize that's not the Fed's problem but they just wantus to listen. I found the same thing, actually. They were remarkablyunderstanding; there was a commitment to what the Fed is doing [along]with these same cries that something has to be done. But when youtalk to them they tend to push the blame off on Congress or whereverand not so much on the Fed. In their more emotional moments, they--MR. CORRIGAN. You have to understand, though, that when theytalk to Congress, they turn the whole thing around.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't kid yourself. I think withoutquestion there's a lot of support now. There's a lot of concern aboutthe budget deficit and a lot of understanding among business leadersand association leaders in many areas. But there's a lot of angergrowing out there. It tends to be: The Federal Reserve controlsinterest rates and the Federal Reserve ought to do something aboutthem. It's not exactly below the surface. And when it will eruptlike Mt. Vesuvius, I don't know.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the reaction in the Congresssince they came back is exaggerated in terms of business opinion forthe reasons that have been talked about. The Congress is frustratedand is receiving an enormous amount of criticism, much of it having todo with the budget deficit. And when members of Congress talk to youand other members of the Board here in Washington I think they arereflecting not a focused criticism of the Fed but a general criticismof conditions by their constituents. I'm not saying that the Fed isexempt, not by any means, but I wouldn't interpret the Congressionalcomplaints regarding how their constituents feel about the Fed andconditions as being focused on us. That is the way it comes out ofCongressional mouths. I have talked to a few Congressmen up in theNew York area and we got into this shading--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you have to make adistinction. A lot of [the criticism] has been focused on the budgetdeficit, fortunately, which is where it should be. On the other hand,for both political and real reasons, I'm very skeptical of how muchprogress is going to be made on the spending side. The Democratsdon't have much incentive; they're fairly happy. The Republicans areworried; they feel they've cut spending. It's going to be very hard-17-10/5-6/81to make the next cuts. There will be some but how much relative tothe size of the problem is very questionable. I think you've talkedto fairly sophisticated people; I'm talking about the people who are alittle less sophisticated perhaps. And they're just getting angry.MS. TEETERS. It's compounded by the fact that the originalrounds of cuts are just being felt. Most of them just started themiddle of last week so that the reactions, particularly by state andlocal governments and recipients of transfer payments, are just nowbeing felt.MR. BOEHNE. I had 8 or 9 people in for lunch a couple weeksago and I asked them how many of their Congressmen who voted for thetax and budget cuts last time would vote for them this time. I foundabout eight Congressmen represented and the group thought that twowould not support another round of budget cuts. It wasn't a very bigmargin at the beginning, so two out of eight represents--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I want to make just one additional comment aboutthe agricultural sector because it's a change from what I havereported at previous meetings. I have commented in the past thatrates have had a negative impact, but within the last few weeks therehas been a growing wave of pessimism. I'm really now talking aboutthe grain side as opposed to the meat side. Production figures keepgoing up and, therefore, prices keep coming down. And net cash incomefor the farmers in our area is being reduced rather continually. Itnow looks as if income for this year will be lower than in any yearsince 1977. And that's unadjusted for inflation. If you adjust forinflation, you have to go back a long, long way to have a year that isgoing to be like this year. About 40 percent of the farms are debtfree and are not impacted by [high interest rates]; 60 percent havesome debt and, therefore, this is a very significant problem for them.Here again, the lenders are beginning to get very uneasy about theiragricultural credits. They're worried about debt coverage ratios, theleverage, etc. So, the farm industry in our area is getting veryconcerned.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've exhausted this subject. Wecan turn to Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The subtleties of Mr. Axilrod's analysismay not be fully grasped by the Chairman in all respects, but we canperhaps clarify [them in] the discussion. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Steve, would you repeat the part near the end ofyour statement where you spoke of an increased demand for M-1B havingsome effect on the necessity of trying to get M-1B up to the lower endof the range? I was lost.MR. AXILROD. I was just thinking that in the last 3 monthsof the year it's possible that there may be some rebound from thisvery low growth that we have had in M-1B. The rebound in itself couldtend to increase M2 because I was assuming that it wouldn't-18-10/5-6/81necessarily mean that people were taking deposits out of othercomponents of M2 and putting them in M-1B but simply were putting moremoney in M-1B in general that they would have put other places becausethey realized their cash was low relative to what they normally wouldexpect it to be in relation to income.MR. ROOS. In terms of positioning ourselves, Mr. Chairman,it seems to me that we have to think of our vulnerability from apublic opinion point of view if the economy remains soft, as itprobably will, to the end of the year. If we visibly fail to bringM-1B into its range, won't people who are exaggerating the effect ofso-called tight policy by the Fed have something to hang us with whenthey actually see that M-1B has come in below [its range]? I don'tknow whether that's a greater danger than the possibility of somemisinterpretation of [the growth that] would be necessary to bring itinto the range. It seems to me, if we are thinking of public opinion--and maybe we shouldn't be--that the question is whether the heat ofcoming in below the range and being accused of precipitating arecession is greater or less than the possible misinterpretation of adegree of temporary expansiveness to bring M-1B into the range. Thoseare two fundamental issues [that bear on] public response. But maybewe shouldn't be concerned about that aspect of our policy.MR. PARTEE. Steve, didn't you say 12 percent growth fromSeptember to December does not get us back to the range? That is,December is back to the track, but people will still be able to readthe fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter growth even then, as I read theBluebook, as 3 percent rather than 3-1/2 percent.MR. AXILROD. That's right, given the patterns of the monthswithin the quarter. If it so happened that October was a very strongmonth instead of November and December, you might hit [the lower limitof the range]. We were assuming October will be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This arithmetic gets rather drasticallychanged by the estimates of the money supply for the past two weeks,of which one week is still doubtful. And the first week in Octobermay also be doubtful; we don't know very much about it. Let me askone purely statistical question, Mr. Axilrod, so we know what we aretalking about here. It may be covered in the Bluebook. Even inalternative C, let's say, which is 9-1/2 percent for M2, we are abovethe range. That half percent is your estimate of a somewhatextraordinary impact of all savers certificates or something?MR. AXILROD. Well, the best we could come up with is thatthe range of impact would probably be on the order of 1/4 to 3/4 of apercentage point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is some assumption that [money]comes into all savers out of what would otherwise be in M2. Where isthat from and what evidence would you have for it when it happens?MR. AXILROD. We have virtually no evidence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You haven't any evidence; you wouldn'thave the evidence now because you don't know the statistics. Butwhere would you find that evidence?-19-10/5-6/81MR. AXILROD. Well, we are going to ask questions in theMichigan survey of an admittedly small sample. We are going to askthose who have all savers certificates, what was the immediate sourceof those funds. That would be the only direct evidence we would have;otherwise it would be a matter of analyzing the data that we haveavailable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably, you would look where:for individual holdings of Treasury securities or something?MR. AXILROD. We would want to look for unusual behavior oftime and savings deposits and money market funds. If they began tobehave unexpectedly relative to what--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but they are all in M2, let's say.MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. But if we could account foreverything that happens to all savers certificates from that, thatdoesn't leave much residual for [funds coming from] elsewhere.Essentially in this assumption we have assumed that in the fourthquarter only about $3 to $5 billion comes out of non-M2 assets otherthan retail RPs, and we have assumed that two-thirds of the retailRPs--$10 billion out of $15 billion of RPs--goes into all saverscertificates. The reason that I am uncertain between the 1/4 and the3/4 of a percentage point is that we have to make a further assumptionregarding how much of those retail RPs would have come out of M2 tobegin with or how much would have come out of non-M2 type assets. Wehave essentially assumed very little, really, coming out of non-M2assets. It's practically negligible if you eliminate the retail RPsand they were in M2 in any event.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Will you assume those are in M2? And yousay apart from that you are only estimating $5 billion or so.MR. AXILROD. Yes, $3 to $5 billion. About a 1/4--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That only makes 1/4.MR. AXILROD. That only makes 1/4 added to this.MS. TEETERS. Is that an addition to this 9-1/2 percent[growth for the year] in alternative C or is that [included]?MR. AXILROD. No, [M2 growth for the year] would be 9-1/4percent, abstracting from that.MR. RICE. Steve, did I hear you say that if we tried toincrease M-1B so that it moves back toward the lower end of the targetrange from where it is now, given the demand for M-1B, that would ineffect be inflationary because we would be giving people more moneypresumably than they want to hold? Is that correct?MR. AXILROD. Well, what I said was there's a degree to whichit would be; we think it would entail a sharp drop in short-terminterest rates over the next 2 or 3 months.MR. RICE. Any increase in M-1B?-20-10/5-6/81MR. AXILROD. No, [raising its growth] to that 12 percent,which would be needed to get it back [into the range]. And if youhappen to think that there's a sizable pent-up demand for goods andservices, as some of us on the staff think--some may not--then wecould have a very sharp rebound in spending and a sharp rebound ininterest rates later in order to keep money under control. And ifthat large money growth sets off a sharp rebound in spending, I thinkthe progress made in curbing inflationary expectations would be lost.That's one analysis that one could make. If you think the economy isextremely weak in any event and no one is going to do much when shortrates go very low, then you might not come to that conclusion. That'swhat I was saying at the end of my statement.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, does it make sense to continuedoing the adjustment for the shifts into NOW accounts?MR. AXILROD. Well, I think it made a lot of sense earlier,obviously. It has been making a degree of less sense, but I think weneed to have a shift adjusted series to evaluate the year properly.Therefore, it has been our thought that we might as well continue atleast until year-end, just because that is what we have done for thelast several months, and at that point change over. We would have tokeep presenting a shift adjusted series even if we didn't shift adjusteach month. If we said the shift adjustment was now in effect zero,we would still need a shift adjusted series for the year. So it justseems simpler to continue on to year-end; the differences are smallnow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have currently any direct evidenceof what the basis for this shift adjustment is?MR. AXILROD. Very little. We are getting less frequent dataon the shifts and we have not changed our assumption. One piece ofevidence is that we do have data that new NOW accounts are still beingopened at a sizable pace. But we can't tell what is happening to thedeposits in the NOW accounts that were opened earlier this year. Thatmoney could be going out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you have evidence that new NOWaccounts are still being opened and that some significant proportionis coming from outside of demand deposits?MR. AXILROD. Well, we have stuck with our past assumptions;we only get survey data on that about every three months now insteadof every month, so I'm not exactly up to date on it.MR. CORRIGAN. Steve, I have a technical question on adifferent subject. I can't quite understand the recent relationshipbetween the reserve numbers and the money numbers. One of your tablesshows, for example, that you estimate that total required reserves inSeptember grew by 17.9 percent. I know we have all these shifts goingon in terms of reserves phasing up and down and across and all therest, but when I look at the components across the board, it's veryhard for me to see where one can find anything that would account forthat much of an increase in required reserves.MR. AXILROD. Well, in September, in terms of amounts--thisis under a lagged accounting regime--we have a $592 million dollar-21-10/5-6/81increase in required reserves, which is the 17.9 percent at an annualrate that you referred to. Of that amount, $319 million is in savingsand time deposits, which is mainly large CDs in that period. [Mostof] the rest of it is in transactions deposits, which include OCDs,demand deposits, U.S. government deposits, net interbank deposits, andtelephone transfers. And the remaining $4 million--I had to do thisaccounting--was in nonmember commercial banks and others and can beaccounted for, with the large bulk of the increase coming from itemsthat are not in M-1B. If you pretend that the accounting wascontemporaneous--MR. CORRIGAN. Oh, that's right; you're picking up that bigAugust jump.MR. AXILROD. That's right. It would be a quite smallerincrease.MR. PARTEE. But in September M-1B went up not at all.MR. AXILROD. That's right; it's only the last two weeks ofAugust and the first two weeks of September that get into this. Ifyou pretend that it's contemporaneous, then the transactions depositspart is in September and instead of being [an increase of] $269million it's only $49 million. Don't forget that currency was quitenegative. So, if the rate of growth in total reserves in September ona contemporaneous basis, so to speak, is 7 percent, [growth in] totalrequired reserves is 7 percent. Total reserve [growth] on a laggedbasis is much higher.MR. CORRIGAN. Those large CDs are still at what--3 percent?MR. AXILROD. They're phasing down to where they're 5/8ths ofwhatever they were originally, which was, I keep forgetting--maybe 6percent.MR. PARTEE. I think it was 6.MR. AXILROD. 5/8ths of 6.MR. CORRIGAN. Oh, that's right.MR. AXILROD. They're down now. Starting in September theyare 5/8ths of 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is it 5/8ths of 6 or 5/8ths of thedifference between 3 and 6?.MR. AXILROD. It's 5/8ths of the difference between 3 and 6--that's where we are--slipping to zero.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You may be interested--this sounds like alittle more reliable report--that Mr. Sadat clearly was hit, but theysay no vital organs were hit and he's being operated on and said to benot critical.The observation was just made--it's a peculiarity and I don'tknow if anybody has a logical explanation--that the weakness in M1-22-10/5-6/81partly reflects an extraordinary weakness in currency in terms ofgeneral trends. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I want to compliment Mr. Axilrod on hisstatement this morning. I've heard him and his predecessors make manystatements over the years, but I don't think I've heard a more weightyor meaty set of comments given to this Committee. I particularlyliked his comments about the need to look at what is going on in thereal economy to make some ultimate judgment.MR. PARTEE. We do tend to forget that.MR. GRAMLEY. That's particularly apropos when these monetaryaggregates are so slippery and so difficult to interpret. I think wehave ended up with an economy that has had more restraint on it duringthe course of this year than we had expected earlier. And, frankly,we have had more restraint than I personally would have wanted in thesense that I think our objectives over the long run are not likely tobe maximized by permitting the economy to slip into a couple quartersof negative growth like this. If we could somehow fine-tune--and I'mnot suggesting we try--and keep the economy growing at zero or aslightly positive rate, I think we would be better off. The pressuresto do something to turn it around are going to intensify if wecontinue to have negative growth. The structural damage that is beingcreated is also growing, and I strongly agree with Ed Boehne that wehave a real problem there.[Steve's] comments about M2--as to why M2 can be a veryslippery guide--I thought were particularly interesting. When wewatch M2 and try to limit it, we induce innovations that in turn tendto make M2 continue to grow. As a consequence, interest rates go upand that weakens the economy. So, if we slow the growth of M-1B evenmore--. I look back at the past couple of months and I wish I hadlistened to my colleague, Governor Partee, about why we need to paymore attention to M-1B in a period like this. I think one of thethings we need to do in our decisions today is to make sure we don'tdo what in effect we have done in the past couple of months, which isliterally to ignore M-1B. We have given almost entire weight to M2,the way the period worked out. That wasn't what we intended, butthat's the way it happened. I don't think we can adopt a policy todaythat is designed to make M-1B get back up in the target range by thefourth quarter or by December. That would just induce a collapse ofinterest rates. We would have the economy growing like gangbusters inthe first half of next year and then we would be in real trouble. Butwhat we do have to do, I think, is to make sure we pay more attentionto M-1B than we have in the recent past.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just pick up on one point you made.I have no doubt about the enormous weight of Mr. Axilrod'spresentation. But the point about M2 I must confess went right overmy head.MR. GRAMLEY. Maybe we ought to have him repeat it. It was agood point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He can repeat it, but he's going to haveto repeat it in different words so far as I am concerned.-23-10/5-6/81MR. AXILROD. All I had in mind, Mr. Chairman, was that M2 isincreasingly becoming like that because it has money market funds,money market certificates, and small savers certificates in it. Ifthe System is holding back on reserves, let's say, in a period ofstrong money demand, interest rates go up. If the return on theseinstruments that are in money deposits doesn't go up, then you'll getrestraint on money relatively easily, in effect, because people willshift out of deposits into something else.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'll get restraint on M2 relativelyeasily.MR. AXILROD. If the money definition covers only things thathave market interest rates on them, then as we hold back on reservesin the face of [strong] money demand, market rates tend to go up. Thebanks and other financial institutions raise their offering rates onthese deposits so that the gap between the market rates and thedeposit rates, in effect, doesn't change very much. People stilldemand those things because that gap hasn't changed. We have to holdback on reserves even further; that forces rates up more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand all that; M2 doesn't declinethe way it used to when we would run into deposit ceilings.MR. AXILROD. Well, no, I didn't mean that. What I meant wasthat interest rates move more rapidly than they used to.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And interest rates may move more rapidlyas a result of that. I don't understand that it follows that M2 is insome sense artificially swelled by this and gives you a--MR. AXILROD. No, I didn't say that. I said thenontransactions component will rise relative to M-1B in this presentenvironment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That I agree with. It rises relative toM-1B. But I don't understand that it follows that M2 is in some senseartificially--MR. AXILROD. No, no.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Artificially isn't the word. I don'tunderstand that the expansion in M-1B is giving a false signal as tothe credit growth in the economy or the monetary growth in theeconomy.MR. AXILROD. No, my only point was that given this behaviorof the assets in M2, if there was increasing need in the context toconstrain M2, it would follow that M-1B would be weaker than one mighthave "expected." I also think short rates might have been somewhathigher than the staff was predicting all along. They probably are abit higher. And my only evidence that this was real restraint is thatthe short rates in real terms were quite high. They are not onlynominally high short rates; they are also high, in quotes, "real"short rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I don't see the conclusion fromwhat has happened that in some sense we were tighter than we intended-24-10/5-6/81to be. Also, if I may just make a point here, I don't think it isaccurate to say we haven't been following M-1B. The borrowings havegone way down, particularly with the sinking spell at the end ofSeptember. M-1B obviously isn't as high as we intended, but I thinkthat is why borrowings have gone down. We didn't make somediscretionary adjustments we could have made. But, certainly, thefact that pressures on reserve positions have eased as much as theyhave is because we were looking at M-1B.MR. AXILROD. No, what I was saying is that to the degree theCommittee gives more weight to an aggregate that has market rates asoffering rates, you get a prompter response in interest rates, Ithink, than you would if you give weight to something that doesn'thave such rates. And in the limit--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I [don't] know if it's prompter; youcertainly get a larger one.MR. AXILROD. That's right. And, in the limit, if you had anaggregate that only had market rates in it, I would see almost no wayto control it except through control of the economy itself. If youconceive of something where rates kept going up, finally you'd get GNPso weak that the transactions demand for that aggregate or the savingsdemand--. But, obviously, we are not at that stage.MR. ROOS. What is the rationale that if short-term interestrates decline that might result in stimulus to the economy beginningnext year? And what were the negative consequences of that? I don'tknow whether it was Lyle or someone else who said that.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I can tell you what I would regard as thenegative consequences, and that is that I agree with Governor Schultzthat we have the potential for a big breakthrough on union wages nextyear. Union wages have gotten way, way out of line with non-unionwages. You close that gap in one or two ways: Either non-union wagescatch up or union wage growth slows down. We need a very sluggisheconomy in 1982 to make reasonably certain that that gap is going tobe closed by a slowdown in union wages. But I don't want an economythat's sluggish by having it nosedive and then come roaring backagain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have all kinds of problems. Youmentioned one kind of perceptual problem, Larry. I guess Lyle andothers are worried about both perceptual and real problems in otherconnections more related to interest rates. Let me tell you just froma public relations standpoint that there is great restiveness andanger, as I said before, growing out there. That would be relieved,obviously, by some decline in interest rates. But in some way theworst thing that could happen to us is to have a great sense of relieffor a month or two or three that interest rates are coming down--I'mnow talking public reaction and not policy--and then have them racingup again. I think the public patience for climbing up the hill veryrapidly again may be extremely limited.MS. TEETERS. Public patience for staying on top of the hillwon't last.-25-10/5-6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hence, public patience is getting limitedin all directions. It's a question of--MR. PARTEE. A technical point on M2 that I would make, Paul,is that we have to remember that we are factoring in new elements ofmarket-related rates as time goes on. That can give a firstdifference in M2 that we are coming to a steady state.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, to the extent funds come in fromoutside M2.MR. PARTEE. They tend to because we have more [components ofM2] that are at a market rate, and the staff didn't take that intoaccount when they gave us their ranges at the beginning of the year.And, by the way, the Committee didn't take those ranges; we reducedthe ranges, as Nancy often points out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a simple common sense analysis that Ihave used on many occasions. There are some institutional changesthat have depressed M1 and increased M2. It must be the case sincethere is a discrepancy between them. We didn't have to operate onboth of them, I suppose, but certainly the discrepancy is bigger thanexpected. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I'd like to saythat I agree with a lot of what Governor Gramley said the first time.I'm not sure about his second statement.MR. GRAMLEY. Why not all?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What he said the second time he saidthe first time, too.MR. RICE. No, not quite. I think the staff forecast isabout right. I agree with their view that there's no solid evidenceat present that the economy is in the process of a sharp downturn,despite the softening tendencies that we see. But it seems to methere is a danger that the weakening that we see in progress will gainmomentum and could possibly become cumulative. That is just apossibility. I don't see it, but it's possible. And much of whatI've heard this morning increases my anxiety that there may be morefinancial strain out there than we recognize at the moment. Onepossible result of that is that a downturn could gather momentum. Inthe circumstances, I think our policy should seek to avoid encouragingany process of a cumulative downturn. It would not do that, Ibelieve, if we accepted a much lower rate of growth in M-1B than wastargeted. On the other hand, I think policy should avoid any attemptto achieve a precipitous easing of money and credit at this time.What we should do is to aim at maintaining current conditions whilegradually trying to nudge M-1B back in the direction of the lower endof its target. It may well require some slight reduction in interestrates to maintain current conditions, but I think that would bedesirable at the present time. This suggests to me that alternative Bwould make the most sense in the current situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just suggest that we can breakpretty soon for coffee but that anybody who wants to make some generalcomments of the sort that have been made do so. I think that is-26-10/5-6/81useful. Let's dispose of that before asking everybody to make a[specific policy] comment. If the spirit doesn't move anyone, we'llgo and have some coffee and come back and get more specific.MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems to me we're seeing again what isthe nature of a stable money supply target. It leads to very wideswings in interest rates. That in turn leads to possibly wide swingsand very quick swings in the economy, with a ceiling placed overexpansion and a floor probably placed under any contraction, butunfortunately with a great deal of damage being done to the machinerywhile these gyrations proceed. So, I'm concerned about a move to getback on track with M-1B. I think we're better off considering that asprogress against inflation and money in the bank and not trying toundo it. I think we're in danger of repeating 1980. And back in 1980I said that we were in danger of repeating 1971-79. We didn't dothat; we did much worse. [I'd] preclude any risk on this score here.I do have to say, contrary to the implication of what I've said sofar, that if I understand Steve correctly about M2, it sounds asthough he is saying it's perversely interest elastic. That is, thehigher interest rates go, the faster it grows. For that there is aprecedent in the British experiment with sterling M3. They made thattheir number one target and it kept growing very fast. Theimplication seems to be that it attracted funds from outside themonetary aggregates, out of non-monetary assets, and so it grew fasterthe higher interest rates went and, therefore, substantially misledthem. Evidently the aggregate they should have looked at was morenearly M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure I heard Steve sayingthat.MR. AXILROD. No, I was saying--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought I might have heard him say thatthe first time around; the second time around, I don't think so.MR. AXILROD. No, I was saying that there would be a tendencyfor that to occur because the depository institutions would raise therates pari passu with market rates. And to the extent to which theCommittee was determined to hit M2--and it probably could--that meantthat rates would have to move up even faster, at the limit to thepoint where income was so affected that there wasn't enough savings toput in M2.MR. WALLICH. Well, that's exactly what happened in England.Income was affected so much by high rates that M2, which after all islargely a function of income, slowed down as they achieved theirsterling M3 [objective]. They got it under control but precisely bythe route you described.MR. PARTEE. Which was a big recession.MR. WALLICH. It was a big recession. Now, on the otherhand, I see M-1B--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure that's saying anything butthat that's the way monetary policy works whatever M you use.-27-10/5-6/81MR. WALLICH. No, it worked excessively. In other words, hadthey been guided by M1, they probably would not have been as tight asthey were in pursuit of an ever rising sterling M3.MR. PARTEE. I think that's right.MR. WALLICH. Well, I have the same doubts about M-1B.However, I think it is underspecified, whether you call that a verystrong demand shift, high velocity growth, or whether you say thatsome part of money market mutual funds or other [liquid assets] oughtto be included as transactions balances. In any event, it seems to methat it is potentially misleading to take it at face value and,therefore, some undershooting of M-1B as now specified doesn't seem tome to be as important as it would otherwise. That gets one back, ofcourse, to looking at the real economy and looking at interest rates.Now, as I see the real economy, I recognize that we've had a very poorgrowth performance. But we've not had that bad a performance inunemployment; 7.5 percent is bad but it isn't as bad as one might havethought we would get from this degree of restraint; presumably,productivity is the main cause. So, I think we have to resignourselves to low and occasionally negative growth for a while.Interest rates presumably will come down somewhat. I think if thepublic perceived that as an easing action, we would throw offaltogether the wrong signal; we would get people saying that we'vestopped fighting inflation and are starting to fight recession. And,I think the businessmen and bankers who say "We're hurting, but hangon" are precisely conscious of that. Then we would get another roundand face the same problems at higher rates of inflation and,therefore, higher rates of interest. It's better to sit it out thistime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I want to take off from a comment thatMr. Roos made on the subject of credibility. That's an issue that allof us have wondered about and thought about, particularly in view ofthe fact that there is a lot of pressure on this institution. We'vehad a lot of bills introduced in the Congress to restructure theFederal Reserve or to do away with it or, perhaps the one that makesthe most sense, to impeach all members of the Open Market Committee!At any rate, it strikes me that our credibility is not at issue whenit comes to whether we hit the bottom of the target on M-1B or not.Our credibility is really at issue in the more basic question ofwhether we are going to do the job that I think we were in essencecreated to do. It seems to me that the basic function of a centralbank is to avoid deflation on one hand and inflation on the other.And I'm not terribly sure how successful we can be fine-tuning inbetween. My feeling is that maybe we shouldn't call this the momentof truth because it's going to be a lot longer than that. It's goingto be a period of truth. I don't fear all of these bills that are inthe Congress to change the Federal Reserve if we do our basic job offinally getting inflation under control. If we don't do that job,then what the heck is our reason for being? How do we justify ourexistence under those circumstances? It seems to me our basic raisond'etre would be gone. So, I think that's where the credibility issueis: whether we are in fact going to do the job that we were createdto do. We've been criticized in the past, and I think a lot of thatcriticism is proper. But now we're at the point where we have to-28-10/5-6/81carry through and get the job done. I'm certainly not attempting tosay that we ought to crush the economy but we just can't lose sight ofthe basic fact that what we're trying to do is to keep that steadypressure on--we have some luck here in food and fuel prices--and if wekeep the pressure on, we can get some movement in the wage-pricestructure and begin to get this spiral going in the other direction.So, I for one think alternative C is the one that makes thedifference. I agree that M-1B has problems and that M2 has problems,so it seems to me sensible to look at both of them and in some way toincorporate both of them in the directive. I would get terriblyworried about going much faster than [alternative C] on M-1B becausewhat happens, then, when we get to January? Not only do we run therisk of stimulating these latent demands--. Mr. Roos asked whatdifference interest rates make. Well, it strikes me that we've beenkeeping the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy under a greatdeal of pressure. And if interest rates do go down, that has astimulative effect on those sectors of the economy. And then what dowe do when we get to January if we're not going to pick targets thatare lower than what we have here? If we're going to go to 6 percentor even faster [M-1B growth at this point], what happens then? Do wethen tighten the screws and get the up and down effect again? So,anything that's faster than "C" would worry me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'll just make a generalcomment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pardon me? We're just making generalcomments.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I understand. The conventionalWall Street view that you can't get inflation down without asignificant recession is still heard in the financial community, butthey all admit that if it's a typical short, sharp recession--six tonine months of downswing--it probably won't do much for inflationaryexpectations. People in the financial community and in the businesscommunity would expect that when the economy recovers the inflationlevel would then be back again at somewhere near the earlier level. Ifeel very strongly--I think many of us do, and I think Lyle and Henrywere both saying this although in slightly different sounding ways--that we really need a sustained period of zero or very low real growthto change inflationary expectations. And, politically, in terms ofthe tolerance for our monetary policy, it also is somewhat better thanthe roller coaster. In addition, this time, given our presenttechniques, if we have a roller coaster in the real economy, we'relikely to see the Henry Kaufman thesis prove true: That if we have asustained upswing next year, interest rates will go to levels evenhigher than they did in the earlier peak.From all that, I conclude that we should try to follow apolicy that focuses on what interest rate levels [we need] over thenext few months and what path we should take to give us an economythat is neither in significant recession--or not even in technicalrecession if possible--and yet avoids the kinds of conditions thatwill lay a basis for an explosion later on. There is an enormousamount of pent-up demand. I find [staggering] the amount of bond-29-10/5-6/81issues that corporate executives passing through my office talk aboutbeing ready to start placing if interest rates come down just 2 or 3points. Now, obviously, some of that will recede when interest ratesdo come down, if they do, 2 or 3 points in the long end of the market;some of them will want to wait for another 1- or 2-point drop. Evenso, there will be an enormous volume of activity in the bond marketand activity in the economy if we have too big a decline, if we repeatthe 1980 pattern. So, given the confusion in the aggregates--giventhe fact that we're undershooting one and overshooting the other andall these changes that have been talked about--it seems to me that weought to be a little more sensitive to the implications of interestrate movements in terms of their impact on the real economy in orderto achieve, hopefully, the zero or slightly positive real growth thatwe've been talking about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I would mention the fact that thefiscal outlook has changed rather substantially since our lastmeeting, and that's going to have an expectational effect that willprobably put us to a much greater degree at the friction point here interms of our struggle. I don't think we should ignore that aspect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I just have a quick comment. I agree withTony that what we have to do is run our strategy for the long pullbecause it's going to take the long pull to get inflation down. Ithink it would be a very serious indictment of the Federal Reserve ifit encourages a recession of size in this environment. I read thehistory of the Federal Reserve as indicating it was set up to providean elastic currency, not that it was set up to stop inflation and payno attention to the economy, Fred. Indeed, I think that's the thrustof the whole first 50 years of the System and its origins. What wehave to do is to avoid seeming to add to a strong recessionary thrust,because I think we will lose the ball game if we do that. Now, Ibelieve that serious protracted shortfalls from the lower end of ourtargets will give us exactly that image. I would not be so worried ifM-1B in the next three months goes up 7 or 8 percent. That would beall right; we'll be below the target, but that's all right. What I'mworried about is that we'll have another 5-point shortfall from whatwe expect in the fourth quarter as we did in the third. And I thinkwe have to guard greatly against that problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody else is thrusting their handupward or whatever, we'll go have a coffee break.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [In response to your question about Mr.Sadat,] he's either dead or alive, and that's all we know.MS. TEETERS. Has there been a market reaction?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The dollar was up some, but not all thatmuch. The gold price is up pretty far. Our intervention policy isn'tassociated with it.-30-10/5-6/81Well, I think we can proceed with somewhat more precisecomments at this point. I don't know right now if I have anything inparticular to add. I don't have much faith in any of theseprojections, I must say, as to the statistical relationships betweenborrowings and the money supply or interest rates or whatever. Ithink we have to assume that those relationships are highly unstable,to say the least. And the probability distribution around theseestimates, if they are perfect as a measure of the central tendency,is enormously wide. I don't think anybody really has the faintestidea what the money supply is going to do on its own in the next monthor three months. And I think we have to take that into account inmaking our decisions. The volatility of interest rates is a problem.The economy is soft; in some sense in the very short run there may besome risk of it getting softer rather than stronger. But there is amajor risk, which a number of people have alluded to, of a yo-yoperformance of the economy. That isn't going to be very helpful interms of our longer-range objectives if it gets up a head of steamagain in a time perspective of 6 months or so. Having said that much,let's proceed. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. Building on the remarks that a number of peoplehave made, including what you just said, I would come down onalternative B. Our feeling in Atlanta, in looking at behavior of theaggregates, is that the alleged undershoot on M-1B is probablyoverrated as a worry. We feel that some adjustment should be made forthe money market funds. Even if we put it at a tiny fraction of themoney market funds, we would say that M-1B has been somewhat strongerthan it appears in the adjusted figures. So I'm not too concernedabout the undershoot, although the direction of the shift would betoward getting us back into the range. Looking at the alternativesthat the staff has prepared, the one that looks most reasonable to meis something like "B" with a side constraint of some sort on M2 sothat we stay around the upper end of M2 while we are at it. The fedfunds range, if we are going to continue with the process, is sort ofcentered on where the fed funds rate has been in the last day or two,so that doesn't look bad to me either. So, I'd pretty much go withthe targets of alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, before we get into myspecific comments on the alternatives, I'd again like to raise thequestion I brought up last month, which has to do with the relativeweighting of M2 and M1. Yesterday I was asking Peter and Stevewhether they had any particular insight about what looks to be asudden very sharp collapse in M-1B. Steve made a very germane comment--I think we've often noticed this before--that these monetaryaggregates may be telling us something about spreading weakness in theeconomy. One never knows that until well after the event. In anycase, I would again like to refer to the way we used to give aboutequal weight in a judgmental sense to both M1 and M2. It seems to methat over the past several months, with the way the proviso clause hasworked, there has been a risk of what I would view as overemphasis onM2, and I would hope to get back to a more equal weighing of those two[aggregates]. If we don't, we may have a real problem--at least in apublic relations sense and possibly in an economic sense--of lettingM1 go down too far.-31-10/5-6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just inject that there is anofficial report here that Mr. Sadat is dead.Did you complete your comments?MR. BALLES. At the moment, yes sir.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would associate my viewsclearly with Governor Schultz. I think alternative C is where weshould be. He did a very fine job expressing the reasons, so I won'tbe repetitious by going through them again. But I'm strongly for "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It seems clear, atleast to me, from the discussion around the table that theinformational value of M-1B particularly--and maybe M2 or all theaggregates--is suspect. As a result, I think we have to refer to whatI believe Governor Gramley first cited, and that is the state of theeconomy. The fact that we are at zero or thereabouts in real growthseems to be exactly the objective we set out to achieve. The risk maybe for a further downturn in the economy; I think it's a risk that wemust take. To back away from it now would be a great mistake for theFederal Reserve. Having said that, my prescription would be forsomething similar to the current money market conditions and, in myview at least, alternative C comes closest to setting forth what we[recently] have been experiencing. Alternative C would be my choice,with the fed funds range that is shown there of 13 to 18 percent. Onthe other hand, I would prefer to have a borrowing level someplace inthe $850 to $900 million range, at least initially, to insure that ifweakness in the aggregates does show up very quickly in October, wewon't precipitously push the funds rate down and, thus, other interestrates down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I would come out for alternative B; I think wehave been too tight. If we go for "C," we might see the funds rate goback up to the top of the range, and I don't want to see the fundsrate go up. I would like to see it in the 14 to 15 percent range. Ithink most of you who have been opting for the tighter alternativesalso had the higher growth rates. I'm not sure that you havereadjusted your perception of how slowly the economy is actuallygrowing to the degree of tightness that has been prevailing over thisyear. So, I would opt for "B" with an average funds rate of about 14percent, and I'm not worried about the $200 to $300 million inborrowing. I think that's about right because they will pay back asthey have the opportunity. If we go with "B," we will get some easingin the long-term rates, which is what we need very badly at thispoint, particularly in the mortgage area and in bond rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that the economy isalready in a recession and that the fourth quarter is likely to beweaker than the staff has projected, which is not a very good climate-32-10/5-6/81for inducing rapid growth in M-1B. But I like the objectives ofalternative B, and if we could come out with a result that showed uswith a small shortfall in M-1B, a slight overrun in M2 and M3, andwith bank credit in the range--and if I'm right about the recessionbank credit should be well within the range--it seems to me that thatpackage should be defensible to Congress and the public.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have more than a slight overrun in M3.MR. MORRIS. What I mean is that if the economy is weakerthan the staff projection, then we will have a run-off of big CDs,which should bend the M3 line down. I would, however, change theFederal funds range to 12 to 17 percent. It seems to me that beforewe go below 12 percent on the funds rate, we ought to have aconference call to discuss the state of the economy. I would agreewith Lyle: I would be very reluctant to see us repeat the mistakes ofthe spring of 1980 and in our monetarist zeal allow interest rates toget to levels that produce the big reactions. That's why I pick 12percent as the floor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I would go with "C." I observe thatthere is no alternative this time that would allow for a tighteningfrom where we are now. It's not offered on the menu and I wouldn'tknow how to go about producing it.MR. PARTEE. Just reduce all those numbers for theaggregates.MR. WALLICH. But 6 percent on M-1B is a slight reductionfrom the 7 percent we were aiming at last time--though, of course, notachieving--and it seems to me fairly safe from being misconstrued. Onthe funds rate, I would note that a survey of 38 market peopleprojects the funds rate by the end of 1981 at 15-1/2 percent, upslightly from where it was when the survey was taken. So, the marketdoesn't seem to be expecting a large decline, and the 13 to 18 percentrange of alternative C, therefore, seems to me quite reasonable. I'malso reassured that these paths are likely to produce reasonablelooking--in fact very tight looking--paths for nonborrowed reservesand total reserves. In retrospect, this 20 percent growth ofnonborrowed reserves for the last three months looks peculiar, eventhough there were reasons why it had to be so in constructing thepath. But a nonborrowed path of 4 percent and a total reserves pathof 3 percent look extremely moderate. I think that's a plus for thisalternative. My inclination for borrowed reserves would be on thehigh side of the $900 million to $1.2 billion range. Thank you, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'm worried about the economy going downdeeper than what the staff has forecast before it comes back again. Idon't disagree with the overall forecast, which goes to 1982, but Ithink we are looking at a prospective weakness that may be of largerdimensions than the staff has put down on paper yet. In adopting adirective this time, I think we've got to give more weight to holdingup the growth of M-1B and focusing less on M2 than we have in the-33-10/5-6/81past. I would do that by going back to a formulation in which weincorporate both M-1B and M2 into the initial stipulation rather thanhaving a proviso clause for M2. We ought to avoid a 1980 kind of dropin interest rates, but I don't think any drop in interest rates isgoing to be damaging to us. Some drop in interest rates in thecontext of a weakening economy and very slow growth in M-1B isessential if we are going to maintain a public posture that it isn'tvery heavy handed inflexibility on the part of the monetaryauthorities that is causing all this damage. So, if we could get toan agreement on directive wording which places some additional weighton M2 [rather than have M2 in a proviso clause], then I could buysomething like halfway between "B" and "C." I think Frank has made agood point: That lower limit on the funds rate in "B" of 11 percentis quite low. I could go with something like a 12 to 17 percentrange.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I feel most comfortable between "B" and "C" andbalancing the need to get some more growth in M1 while avoiding abulge. Also, I'd like to align myself with those who would drop theproviso clause for M2 and put it in the Committee's initialstipulation. I think we have to give M1 and M2 equal weight and Iwould underscore that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Given where we are now, and supporting GovernorSchultz's comments about the possibility of making significant gains[on the wage/price front] next year, if I had to come down on one ofthe alternatives, I would come down on "C." But if there is a growingfeeling that we could have something midway between "B" and "C," Iwould opt for that. I sense that there is enough noise and confusionin M2 that I would put greater emphasis on M-1B and would suggest thatwhen we set the target for that aggregate we really try to achieve it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I've made my general comments. I feelthat the economy is going to be weaker in the fourth quarter than theprojection. I think we are going to have trouble keeping M-1B even atthe level of alternative C. I don't see that alternative as beingvery restrictive, frankly. So, I would come down on alternative C,with initial borrowing at $800 million, an M2 proviso, and a fed fundsrange of 12 to 17 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would preface my remarks bysaying that I still consider myself to be as hawkish in my desires togive top priority to dealing with the problem of inflation as onecould be. On the other hand, as I recall when we set our annualtarget ranges this year, they represented a gradual reduction from theprevious year and they were intended as an anti-inflationary program.By opting for alternative B, which I would prefer, I don't think Iwould in any way be relinquishing my underlying concern aboutinflation. On the other hand, if we are too restrictive--if we go for"C" or more of an undershoot of our targets than that--we are reallydigging our own grave because I think there is a relationship between-34-10/5-6/81the rate of M-1B growth and real output; and if real output continuesto [weaken] significantly, we are going to have in our economy and inour body politic a reaction for strong stimulus next year to getourselves out of a recessionary situation. And that poses a realthreat to our long-term efforts to cope with inflation. So,alternative B is a reasonable middle ground. We will be getting uptoward the lower end of our target, which was an anti-inflationarytarget. We cannot be accused of tolerating a continuing andpersistent undershoot, which in many people's minds would be a factorin causing a further softening of the economy. I think "B" is thebest solution, remembering that it is an anti-inflationary and not anexpansionist alternative.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I am not as disturbed as somemembers of the Committee are by the so-called shortfall in M-1B, eventhough I would concede in the ideal order of things that M-1B isprobably what we should be looking at. When I look at that aggregatethis year, shifts into money market funds, mutual funds, and even thepossibility that all savers money might come out of there leave mequite comfortable with the general pattern of its behavior,particularly in the context of the broader aggregates, and in thecontext of what it would take to get it back near the bottom of therange for this year.Somebody mentioned earlier that we should be conductingpolicy with an eye on the long haul and I certainly agree with that.I very much agree that we must avoid another of the very sharp swingsin interest rates. And the point that Governor Schultz made about thetrajectory for 1982 is rather critically important in that context.In the current setting, obviously, there is a great deal of attentionand sensitivity focused on this Committee. [There is] a particularelement of sensitivity out there to any major signs of some give onthe part of the Fed. That sensitivity is particularly important amongthe group of people who really are important in determining whathappens over the next couple of years: the business leaders who setprices; the union leaders who negotiate wages; and the institutionalmoney managers who have to make decisions whether to buy some long-term paper or not to buy some long-term paper.Given all of that, when I look at alternative B and see thatthe staff says, for what it's worth, that "B" would involve monthlygrowth rates of M-1B shift adjusted of 7-1/2, 10-1/2, and 11-3/4percent out through December, I am very, very troubled by that. Ithink that pattern of monthly behavior, even in the context of theshortfall that we have seen earlier in the year, would run a real riskof compromising what has been achieved to date in this effort to getinflation down. And in the context of that trajectory question, itmight well leave us in the worst of all worlds. In that light, Ithink that we clearly should be taking a very, very go slow attitude.That is reinforced, in my judgment, by the recent behavior of thereserve aggregates. And on a less technical note, it's alsoreinforced by a thought that the law of averages is running against usin some sense. One of these months interest rates and everything elsenotwithstanding, the money supply is going to jump for whateverreasons. And, in terms of the economy itself I draw some consolationfrom the fact that there are very sizable latent demands out there-35-10/5-6/81that will resurface as interest rates come down and will have atendency to surface in any event in the environment of the tax cutsthat are now on board and will be coming on line next year.In the light of all that, I come out rather squarely onalternative C, with some disposition toward initial borrowings ofaround $1 billion or so. As usual, the big question is what do we doif we are not on that track as the period unfolds. There is one othercomment I would like to make, too. We've all been talking about thiscredit problem and financial shakiness or whatever it is out there,and obviously we should be talking about it. When I think about that,the worst of all situations there for me would be for us to findourselves getting blindsided by some development that we have totallymissed in our intelligence gathering and other activities. That, too,could compromise our ability to hang in there. I also would suggestthat there are things that we can do, at least in our intelligencegathering activities, to try to minimize the likelihood of gettingtotally surprised. And I for one would like to see some efforts madein the direction of redoubling that intelligence apparatus to try tosensitize ourselves fully to what may be out there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, I guess we're back to you.MR. BALLES. I didn't express myself on the alternativesearlier, Mr. Chairman. But I do want to allude to what I thought wasvery interesting work that the Board's staff has done on the likelydownward shift that is taking place in money demand. Our staff wastaking a look at that and pretty much concurs. What that says inpractice, to me at least, is that observed M-1B may in fact be aboutwhere we are in terms of the effects of money. That takes some of thesting out of the apparent undershoot in shift adjusted M-1B. Buthaving said that, I would hate to see us fall further behind in thetransactions component. In view of my hunch that there has in factbeen a significant downward shift in money demand, I would be in favorof alternative C to get us up to the lower end of the range for shiftadjusted M-1B by year-end. Again I would urge that in following thosepaths we ought to give equal weighting, as I mentioned earlier, toboth M1 and M2.MR. ROOS. May I add one [comment]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. ROOS. I think it's important that we think ahead to theend of the year into February when we're going to have to set ourtargets for next year. If we opt for "C" and M-1B really comes in asprojected in "C," we'd have average money growth of M-1B for this yearof about 1.9 percent. Then what are we going to do in February whenwe have to set next year's targets? Are we going to indicate at thattime that we've all of a sudden become very expansive and set theranges up to where they would be 1 percent below this year's announcedtargets, or are we going to reduce them further from the 1.9 percentaverage growth this year? In other words, if we don't bite the bulletnow--if we don't get [M-1B] up there in the range--we're going to facethat same concern of public perception of an expansive policy nextFebruary. And it will be even more dramatic when we set annual ratesif we set them from a very low growth rate for this year.-36-10/5-6/81MR. SCHULTZ. Larry, that's not the problem, though. If wedid "B," M-1B would be running at a 12 percent annual rate inDecember. Then we'd go into the new year and let's say we set [themidpoint of the target for M-1B growth] at 4 or 5 or 6 percent orwhatever we want to do for next year. That's a lot of leeway; thenwe'd really have to turn that screw. That's the problem we run into:If [M-1B growth] is going up like that and all of a sudden we havethese lower targets, then we really have to shut down on the economy.And it seems to me that's what we want to avoid. We want thecontinuity of running along from here rather than getting into thekind of box that you're thinking about.MR. ROOS. Well, I think there's a middle course between theexpansionists--I won't use the expression you did--a differencebetween going high and going low. I do see a problem next year. Ifour growth has been very slow this year, we're going to have to raiseit next year, aren't we? Even though it would only be in the lastmonth, we'd have to explain if we took a more expansive approach thatit was merely to get us to or near the lower end of our anti-inflationary targets for the year 1981. I may be off base. Am I?MR. SCHULTZ. I just want to avoid this yo-yo.MR. ROOS. We got ourselves into the problem by permittingourselves to undershoot to the extent that we did, I would guess.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on that point, Larry, I think onehas to average through. We can face the question when we get toFebruary as to what we say. One thing would be to base it on thefourth quarter of 1980 and look at the two years combined if we're wayshort. That would also tend to take care of your problem, Fred. Iagree with Jerry that we're going to have volatility in the moneysupply. I just wish we would have some volatility on the up sidebecause it has been quite a while--April I think was the last monthwhen there was a really strong [M-1B] number--and we're about due.I'm a little concerned that we may not get it because if we are infact moving into a somewhat faster decline in business--I avoid theword "recession"--it seems unlikely that we're going to have strongmoney growth. So, we may in fact be facing this over the next severalmonths. As I said before, I think we have to fall short on the year.We just can't ask for a 12 percent increase in M-1B from September toDecember, and even that won't quite get us there. The public wouldn'tunderstand. It's just too radical. I could accept "B." I couldshade M-1B in "B" to 8 percent, which I think would be a reasonableobjective. I don't think the monthly pattern the staff has in thosenumbers means anything. We could have an 11 percent growth rate forDecember or we could have 3 percent or 18 percent. We don't have anyidea what the month of December is going to bring. But I think thecentral thrust of our policy ought to be to begin to return to thebottom of the M-1B range, and 8 percent seems to me suitably fast toplan for. I'd consider ourselves very lucky if we get that high of anumber in those last three months.I would also agree with several who have suggested that maybethe federal funds rate range ought to be 12 to 17 percent. That's notbecause I don't think rates are going to come in low. Let me pointout to you that the staff projection for the rate of inflation nextyear is 7.1 percent. Now, assume they're wrong. A lot of people-37-10/5-6/81think they're too low. Assume it's 8 percent. Still, these rates aretoo high for that rate of inflation. And in a recession environmentwe can't have much of a real rate and expect to get the stimulus tothe economy that will bring it back. So, we might have a temporaryproblem with borrowers coming into the market because rates are lowerthan they have been. But I don't think it will last if, in fact, therate of inflation does tend to wind down, as most forecasters now areanticipating. So, we really have to get from where we are to a levelof rates, it seems to me, of about 8 to 10 percent. It's a questionof how we manage that reduction in the rate level over a period oftime if we want to have a reasonably bland economy. And I would, ofcourse, change the emphasis, as suggested, away from too much emphasison M2. I think the way that Lyle suggested is a good way of doing it.That $200 million for borrowings is at the end of the period, Ibelieve. Steve has left the room, but I think the idea is thatborrowings might work out to be $200 or $300 million by the end of theperiod. I think the [initial level] ought to be about $800 million orsomething like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I get a little nervous about the42-day gap before our [next] meeting with any of these specifications.I don't know how to assess the Sadat situation. I don't know whetherwe're faced with the problem of increasing retardation in businessactivity or whether this is temporary and the economy will bounceback. I'd hate to see us with any of these limits with a negativerate of growth of M-1B in October. That's not viable in terms of thepolitical side. On the other hand, I don't want a precipitous ratedecline. I'd rather put some sort of limit on the M-1B growth and anarrower funds range and in 20 days consult again as to what theimplications some of these rather dramatic events are going to havefor us. To set up wide specifications for a 42-day period I think isa mistake at this juncture. I'd prefer something between "B" and "C"in terms of the aggregates and I'd like to consult at the 13 percentlevel [on the funds rate]. But I'd sure hate to see that [rate] go upover 16 percent at this time until we have a better feeling as towhich way to turn. By the end of the period we may have to makechanges on both of these.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, following up on what I saidearlier, and I think a lot of other people had the same kinds ofobjectives: If one makes the assumption in this most uncertain ofuncertain worlds that a gradual interest rate decline of a couple ofpoints over the quarter provides the best chance of maintaining aneconomy that avoids recession and yet avoids an upsurge for the nextquarter or so, then I would prefer the objectives of alternative B.But I don't think we will achieve the objectives of alternative B ifthe economy is as weak as I think it is. We have a curious situation.If the economy is as weak as I think it is, we're not likely to geteven the growth that is outlined in alternative C. And, I don't wantto see too big a drop in interest rates. I don't know quite how toreconcile this. It seems to me that we have to start off withsomething that is not a precipitous change in borrowing. So, we haveto start off with something like $800 million. It's perfectly allright to have a target [for M-1B growth] between "B" and "C", say, 7-38-10/5-6/81to 7-1/2 percent. I don't think it's too meaningful. It's moremeaningful if we relax the constraint of M2. I wasn't quite sure howLyle wanted to formulate the relaxation of the M2 constraint. How didyou want to formulate that?MR. GRAMLEY. I'd take it out of the proviso and put it up ona collateral basis with M-1B.MS. TEETERS. Does that include a target?MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, yes. We'd specify reserve aggregatebehavior consistent with growth of M-1B and M2 at such and suchpercentages, respectively, taking into account NOWs and all savers.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But I have a problem therebecause I think M2 is likely to be stronger than the 10 percentindicated here for alternative C. I think it's still likely to beabout 11 percent.MR. PARTEE. That's "B."MR. SCHULTZ. If you did that, would you also put in thislanguage about the all savers?MS. TEETERS. Yes.MR. PARTEE and VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. Your worry that we may have a weaker economy isa real one, Tony, and I share it. And we don't want a precipitousdecline of interest rates. What would happen is that it would triggera consultation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right.MR. GRAMLEY. We would have to ask ourselves at that point ifthe incoming news was sufficiently weak that we ought to lean in thedirection of slightly lower interest rates or not. So, we'd reviseour targets.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's why I would recommend a fairlytough [floor]--in other words, a 13 to 18 percent range--in order tohave a consultation. Even 13 percent represents a drop of about 2-1/2points and I think we ought to have a consultation at that point toavoid just following it blindly all through the quarter if it looks asif it's going to press way below 13 percent. In summary, where Istand is a 7 to 7-1/2 percent target in M-1B, relaxing the M2constraint language somewhat--although I'm not sure that we should putin a numerical target if there's another way of doing it--a 13 to 18percent fed funds rate range, and an initial borrowing level of $800million. I don't think we're going to end up anywhere near thesenumbers if the economy is as weak as most of us, including the staff,think it is.MR. PARTEE. Well, M2 could still be pretty strong, but M-1Bcould fall well short.-39-10/5-6/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, that's right. The reason I'm soconfused is that we've pumped in nonborrowed reserves at the rate of20 percent but we have had an increase of only 1.8 percent in M-1B.And I'm thoroughly confused. I know what I want in the way ofobjectives; I don't see how to have these paths lead us there.MR. PARTEE. Lags kill you every time!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Monhollon.MR. MONHOLLON. I'm encouraged by some of the pricestatistics and the prospect that union settlements next year may besmaller than they have been.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you encouraged by? Tell me.MR. MONHOLLON. Oh, by some lower rates of growth in theconsumer price indexes. And I certainly wouldn't want to do anythingthat would worsen inflationary expectations. But, as has beendiscussed around the table, I think there's some danger that theliquidity bind that a number of businesses are in could produce a waveof bankruptcies that might result in a sharp slump. My concern onthis score is reinforced by the extremely sharp and sustainedreduction we've experienced in shift adjusted M-1B this year. As forM2, the possibility that it will come in over target doesn't disturbme as much as it does some. As has been discussed, there is a greatdeal of noise in the nontransactions component of M2 and it'sdifficult to interpret what it means. In addition, it's difficult tocontrol the nontransactions component of M2. Given the changingcomposition of this component, I wonder if we can be sure whether it'spositively or negatively correlated to the funds rate. In some waythe work that we're doing suggests that it may be positively relatedand that efforts to hold down [M2] may produce the principal result ofkeeping M-1B well below the lower limits of its range. And that wouldbe unfortunate. So, I would concur with the idea that the M2 provisobe dropped from the directive. I think there are some distinct risksin failing to get M-1B growth up fairly close to the lower end of ourtarget range.The issue of credibility has been discussed. I don't know onwhat credibility hinges exactly, but I think there's some risk to ourcredibility in failing to hit the 3-1/2 percent [lower end of the]target range that we announced in July. There's a risk, too, ofcontributing unnecessarily to what appears to be a developingrecession. And there's a risk, as was discussed earlier, that a verylow rate of growth for M-1B in 1981 will complicate our targeting for1982. So, this leads me to suggest that we try to get as much growthin M-1B as we can by the end of the year without unduly upsetting themarkets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's impossible, if I may say.MR. MONHOLLON. We certainly wouldn't want to encouragepeople to think that we've thrown in the towel on the inflation fight.How much we can do, I don't know. But maybe "B" is about the best wecan do, starting off with a borrowed reserve target of around $750million and pushing it down as we find necessary to accelerate thegrowth of M-1B.-40-10/5-6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice, you expressed yourself earlier,I believe, and so did Mr. Guffey.MR. RICE. On M-1B I would go along with raising the lowerend of the federal funds range up to 12 or even 13 percent and I wouldlike to see borrowing fall no lower than, say, $500 to $600 million.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You don't have a very clean-cutalternative.MR. PARTEE. Not that that makes a difference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sorry, I didn't catch all these.MR. RICE. Well, I said I'm for alternative B. I said thatearlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.MR. RICE. But in light of the discussion I would go alongwith raising the lower end of the federal funds range underalternative B from 11 to perhaps as high as 13 percent. And I wouldnot want to see the borrowing fall below $500 million or maybe even$600 million.MR. PARTEE. You mean no matter how weak M-1B is? You'd puta floor on borrowing?MR. RICE. On borrowing I would be inclined to want to dothat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I think we've been through the list.I just want to take care of another matter for about three minutes, ifyou will just excuse me, and we will come back to this.MR. WINN. Maybe we should resolve never to meet on Octoberthe 6th.MR. PARTEE. It is a bad day, isn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a matter of whether we shouldintervene in this market. [The dollar] went up a bit, a percent ormore, on President Sadat's death. Since then it has come back. Idon't see any urgent need at the moment but we will be in contact withthe Bundesbank and make sure that they know we're willing to behelpful if we can be of any help. But at the moment we're doingnothing.MR. WALLICH. It was up to 2.29--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may have to talk to the Bundesbank, soif I get interrupted again, that's what it is.There may be some thread to all of this, for all of theconfusion. The problem is that none of us can rely very well on anyof these statistical projections. Certainly this is a time when wemay have to stay closely in touch because we don't know what is goingto happen. Things will look quite different than they look today. We-41-10/5-6/81had a 7 percent increase in M1 in August, and September looked as ifit would be up until we got some [new] figures, one of which hasn'teven been confirmed yet. And, if we had the pattern that Mr. Corriganis suggesting that was in the paper, I think it would look awful. Ifwe had growth, but because it was a big bulge suddenly in Octoberwhich we didn't have to react to, it would look quite different. Ithink [the money growth numbers] are just plain unpredictable.So far as the threat of recession is concerned--it dependsupon how you define recession--that's not the forecast that has beengiven to us, which people did not take great exception to, but I sharethe feeling that there's a danger in balancing the risks in the veryshort term. There could well be a risk that things will getsignificantly worse rather than better in terms of that forecast. I'djust repeat that in a sense I think those are the risks we have totake. We have a very restrictive policy; I think those risks werethere all along. That doesn't mean we should go out of our way toaggravate it or create a provocation, but I don't think we should besurprised if those risks arise, given the configuration of economicpolicy generally and the kind of problem that we have. Indeed, itwould probably be a miracle if we get through this without arecession--something that goes in the books at least as a mildrecession--because everybody loves to have recessions and they're veryquick about calling things recessions. There is an automaticity inall of our policies in that as this pronounced sluggishness remains,interest rates should tend to go down as short-term rates have beentending to do for a couple of months. And, presumably they wouldcontinue to do so under those circumstances. The big problem, andmaybe the only question there, is that an enormous amount of Treasuryfinancing has to be done. We've had a glorious period of short-termrates going down 2 or 3 percentage points and long-term rates goingup, which is not very helpful in some sense, and there's nothing wecan control just by pumping out money. It may have the oppositeeffects, but we have the hard reality of all that Treasury financingout there.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Aren't they projecting $50 billionfor the next quarter?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're projecting $37 billion, Ithink; it's only about $3 billion a week or something of that kind!Well, I'm including the off-budget finance to the Treasury, but I'mnot including the other. But it's an enormous amount of financing.MR. STERNLIGHT. You're talking about the financing need inthe fourth quarter?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the Treasury looks for something inthe mid-$30 billion area; $35 billion or so is what the marketexpects.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or it just could get higher. In anyevent, frankly, getting M-1B in the range is very much a two-edgedproposition so far as I'm concerned. It has the moderate merit oflooking great when we're testifying, but it doesn't look great evenwhen one is testifying if M2 and all the other aggregates are above-42-10/5-6/81the range. I'd rather have [M-1B] below the range if the others areabove, quite frankly, just in the pure presentational sense. But agreat big increase [in M-1B] is not going to look good to what I willcall the market or to people wondering what we're doing and whetherwe're easing aggressively in the face of sour business news. Also,just in terms of the performance for the year as a whole, while it'svery hard to evaluate the quantitative magnitude, there are reasons tobelieve that M-1B should be lower than we thought when we set thetargets, particularly in light of the effects money market funds,which have only doubled or more this year, have on that particularaggregate. I also recognize that it may have the other kind of effecton the other aggregate. But the interpretation that is going to beput on this and its real effect depend upon whether we have to push orwhether we accept it, and that's what we've been struggling with here.I think there is--if I detect it correctly--some fair reluctance topush M-1B growth too high. It's a matter of judgment what too highmeans. On the other hand, there's quite a willingness to accept ahigh number if it can come without pushing too hard. I don't knowwhether that's possible or not. That's about where I am anyway, and Isuspect that sums up the feeling that a lot of people have. If wetake this backwards, what is your infamous borrowing number at themoment--$875 or $884 million or thereabouts?MR. AXILROD. $880 million is the present implied level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that has come down a lot, of course.As a matter of instinct, although it is alleged to be inconsistentwith alternative C in being too low, it doesn't seem to beinconsistent with interest rates where they are and moving lower if M-1B continues weak, which is the normal repercussion we would have tothat. So, starting out around that level may tempt us to be slightlylower than where we are and it seems to capture the midpoint of whatis proposed anyway. The same thought is reflected in all thesefeelings; [namely], that we should have a consultation if the federalfunds rate gets around 12 percent. I don't have any problem withthat. In some sense, those are the two most operational decisions wewill make here. We'll see what happens with that approach.MR. PARTEE. A beginning [borrowing] level of what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Around $800 million.MR. PARTEE. And a funds rate [lower limit] of 12 or 13?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I've not specified that at themoment. One or the other.MS. TEETERS. Does that give the staff enough information toconstruct the reserve path?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not going to stop there, but I'm justsaying that the operational [decision] that's important would be howwe handle the concern. Just in terms of these various alternatives, Imyself think the weight of the argument is on something like "C" interms of its presentational and other effects. That doesn't mean thatif we got a burst--if October turned out to be the long awaited monthof some bulge in M-1B--we would react. It would imply to me that wewouldn't react to that at all fast or at all, if it's just in October.-43-10/5-6/81If we ended up above the "C" specifications as a result of a bulge inOctober, it's not going to make anybody terribly unhappy. On theother hand, I don't really want a specification that forces us to easeand push so hard that it conflicts with what I think was the tone ofwhat people said--in effect, that they don't want to push that hardsimply to get within a range. And I would attach some importance toM2. Now, whether that's put in the form of a proviso or of equalweighing, which some people have suggested, isn't a crucial issue tome. I think that's what it amounts to anyway.MS. TEETERS. I would prefer the equal weighing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose that would leave me at somethinglike "C," with borrowing of $800 million; and if you want to make itequal weighing of the two aggregates, that doesn't bother me. I don'tknow, but 13 to 17 percent is fine with me as a benchmark to trigger aconsultation, which is what [the bottom of the "C"] range is. I donot have a strong feeling that if money were really weak we would stopat 13 percent. That's not my gut feeling at the moment. But ifthat's an appropriate place for consultation, it's perfectlysatisfactory to me.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, could we have an understanding ofconsulting but at the same time not narrow the fed funds range in thedirective to a 4-point spread? That's going to be interpreted as ourmoving back toward concentrating on controlling interest rates ratherthan what we've really said we're doing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a pretty subtle point, but wehave sometimes had 4-point ranges and sometimes 5-point ranges.MR. ROOS. It's been 5 or 6 most of the time.MR. CORRIGAN(?). [13] to 18 percent?MR. PARTEE. [I prefer] 12 to 17 percent. Do you really wanta target of as low as 10 percent on M2 and 6 percent on M-1B?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [We could] continue last quarter'sintermeeting target of 7 percent. I don't think it's very important,frankly, this time; it's not as important as the other decisions.MR. PARTEE. We could say "7 percent or somewhat more," orsomething like that.MR. BOEHNE. I'd have some preference for that. If we said 7percent last time and say 6 percent this time, I think we're sayingthe wrong thing.MR. PARTEE. After having missed 7 percent so clearly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think one can argue just that.It's what we said before and that [will be announced soon]. It's notgoing to surprise anybody if we say 7 percent again. I'd be a littleconcerned about the "or somewhat more" if that implied that 7 percentwas the minimum to which we were going to push at all cost.MR. WALLICH. It's a very high number anyway.-44-10/5-6/81MR. PARTEE. Well, I was thinking of accepting a highernumber. That's why I asked.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I said, we just cannot predict. If thehigher number came about without our pushing it that hard, that's onething. We'd accept it and say: That's fine, we were low on thetarget; there's no great strain here and we don't have to tighten uppromptly because it's above 7 percent or whatever.MR. GRAMLEY. Does a 10 percent number for M2 mean that wetake out of the actual number whatever we're attributing to all saversin there and the 10 percent means an underlying growth of less thanthat? We'll get, I think, very [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much impact, just on a quarterlybasis, say, are we talking about here?MR. AXILROD. Well, if you took our lower estimate of 1/4 ofa point for the year, it would be 1 percentage point on a quarterlybasis.MR. GRAMLEY. Quarterly average, Steve, or for 3 months?MR. AXILROD. No, that's 3 months.MR. BOEHNE. How about "10 percent or somewhat more" for M2to convey the idea of a less constraining influence of M2 on M1growth.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it's a good idea to putthe numerical target for M2 in the directive. I think we ought torelax the constraint very slightly by saying "at or slightly above,"which gives us some leeway.MR. PARTEE. At or somewhat above the range for the year?That's 9 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, "at or somewhat above therange." So, I'd say we're talking about up to 10 percent. I don'tthink we're going to hit the 6 percent [lower end of the range], soeven though 10 percent is low if we were figuring on reaching 6percent, I doubt we're going to hit the 6 percent with the economy asweak as it is.MR. GRAMLEY. But if we stick that in the proviso clause,then in effect what happens is that the weakness in M-1B has a very,very small influence on what happens at the Desk. I think we have togive more weight to what is going on in M-1B. The danger that youworry about we handle with the consultative process by specifying thefederal funds rate more tightly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that I see little differencebetween numbers and the proviso. They're both there in the directive.MS. TEETERS. Well, does it make a difference in the way theDesk operates as to whether it's in a proviso?-45-10/5-6/81MR. AXILROD. The difference would be only if it reflected adifferent understanding of what the Committee preferred. That's whatit would depend on. It wouldn't be a matter of wording but what theCommittee actually prefers.MR. PARTEE. Well, as I said last time, technically a provisois much more limiting than giving equal weight. A proviso means yougive total weight when the proviso is in effect. Now, that may not bethe understanding that everybody has. But reading the English, that'swhat one would conclude it means.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In fact in this last period, M2 would havebeen significantly--I guess that's the right word--above the provisoexcept for the information we got a week ago. It suddenly reviseddownward in September 10 days ago.MR. PARTEE. But we had decided last time, you remember, thateven though it was a proviso, we were going to regard it as not aproviso.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not accept that language, but in factit was running higher than the top end of the range and we did notcease providing more nonborrowed reserves for that reason[unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why didn't it act as more of aconstraint in August when M2 was growing at 12.1 percent? Why didn'tit result in a change in the nonborrowed reserve path?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was sort of in the range that wasexpected for August at the time of the meeting.MR. AXILROD. The Committee accepted a high M2 in--MR. STERNLIGHT. The path for M2 was something like 14percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'll be back in just a second.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Based on the last quarter, you'resaying that it was running at what, about 9.4 percent? Was that thehighest it reached in August?MR. AXILROD. Yes, over the fourth quarter. It probably wasa little less than that; but if we put retail RPs back in, it would bemore like that.MR. PARTEE. But we don't have any idea how many all saverscertificates have been sold, or where they're coming from. We'rebuying a "pig in a poke" if we constrain ourselves with M2.MR. GRAMLEY. I think the argument was reasonably solid amonth ago--what Governor Partee put forth--but I just didn't go withit. But the argument seems to me overwhelmingly strong now when theM2 number is being affected by something that we simply cannotmeasure. We will have no idea for some months, if then, what the allsavers certificate has done to that number.-46-10/5-6/81MR. BOEHNE. Whatever weight we put on M2 at the lastmeeting, we have to put less on it now, I would think, because of theall savers distortion. And we have less information to guide us on anall savers adjustment than we did with the NOW account adjustment forM1. We really have nothing to go on for all savers. What we could dois publish an adjusted M2.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, adjust it.SPEAKER(?). You want to publish an adjusted M2?MR. AXILROD. No, please.MR. PARTEE. Take out half the all savers.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is there another nonquantitative way,or non-numerical way, of formulating M2 other than with the phrase "ator slightly above" that I suggested earlier? Lyle, can you reach yourobjective without putting in a numerical target?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, if we don't put in anything for M2, thenno one knows definitely how to interpret any words we might use. Ifwe use words and M2 growth goes up to 15 percent, what do we do giventhose words? If it goes to 10 percent, what do we do? We have to beable to specify what specific action will follow upon a particularpattern of growth of M1, otherwise M2 will be totally ignored. If wetotally ignore M2, then what will happen is that M-1B will become theonly target of policy. And then we have the possibility of having atremendous decline in interest rates. So, it seems to me that thereasonable way out of this is to put M1 and M2 on a collateral basisin the directive and specify something about the uncertainty withwhich the M2 number is going to be [viewed].MR. PARTEE. We can say "about" or "around," and fuzz theactual numbers.MR. CORRIGAN. There is another option, which I don't thinkmuch of, but we could do it. And that is to start out the way thatChuck and Lyle are saying but to put in the directive that to theextent M2 departs significantly because of all savers certificates orfor whatever reasons we would have a consultation. So, it would becouched in terms of triggering a consultation rather than triggering ashift in the reserve path.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, if we narrow the fed funds rangesomewhat, that's in effect what happens.MR. CORRIGAN. Not if it's all because of all saverscertificates.MR. AXILROD. We tried to allow for that with the suggestedwording in the directive that says: "It is recognized that thebehavior of M2 must be evaluated in the light of effects of recentregulatory and legislative changes, particularly the public's responseto the availability of the all savers certificate."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever way it goes in there, there oughtto be some sentence to that effect. We have to evaluate that.-47-10/5-6/81MS. TEETERS. Steve, do you have enough of a gap between M1and M2? For the year it looks as if the differential is going to runabout 7 percent and none of these for the fourth quarter is cominganywhere near that much of a difference.MR. AXILROD. Well, we do think there will be some rebound inM-1B relative to M2, which will narrow the gap that has developed thusfar this year. We could well be wrong on that, but that's our view atthe moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just go back. I still don't seeparticularly that it makes any difference how this is worded, frankly.What we did last time was that we didn't react very fast to M2 beinghigh, and the Committee understood it would be high in August. Whatwe did was pretty directly to follow the reserve path for nonborrowedreserves, which left total reserves short. We would have had--if wewere just operating on M-1B--a greater case for making a so-calleddiscretionary judgment to push up nonborrowed reserves even faster.They were going up at a rate of 20 percent a year. For several monthswe did not take that discretionary action, partly with an eye towardthe proviso; but since we thought it was strictly above the annualtarget until 10 days ago, the fact that it was slightly above theannual target didn't stop us from continuing on the full nonborrowedreserve path. This business of a shortfall, if it holds up inSeptember, brings us almost exactly to the top of the annual target.MR. PARTEE. But, as was pointed out, it doesn't includeretail RPs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, and we were aware of that,so--MR. PARTEE. A lot of those are going to go into all savers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the recorded M2 figure undoubtedlyunderstates the functional M2 figure because it just doesn't happen tohave retail RPs defined in it and they should be in it. So, we'rereally running above. And that will be reflected when we talk aboutthe change to the all savers; part of that looks like an artificialjump that's real. It's just catching up to the recorded shortfall onM2 already.MS. TEETERS. Which means we should take a higher number forthe M2 specifications at this time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon whether you're worriedabout M2 running high enough. The fact is that it's running high in areal sense.MR. PARTEE. Well, if there has been a shortfall, Paul, wealready have had it; and therefore if it comes in high, we shouldn'trespond to it. My point is this: Let's say we had $6 billion inretail RPs and we accepted them; now we shouldn't react if the $6billion in retail RPs goes into all savers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I certainly don't think we should react inthat week in which they go in. One can still be worried about M2being a little high.-48-10/5-6/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In addition to saying "at or slightlyabove," could we leave that proviso and then go on to say that theCommittee would tolerate an overrun in M2 due to the movement of fundsfrom RPs into all savers certificates?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think I would say it that way.What we really should be tolerating is the movement into all saverscertificates from funds that aren't and shouldn't be in M2.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, that's right. That's a moreconcrete way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need some sentence to that effect inthere, whichever way we do it. We have to say we will evaluate M2 inthe light of this. I see nothing the matter with the language that[the staff] wrote here. But some language to that effect, whatever itis precisely, should be there; people ought to notice that we may getan artificial bulge in M2 that we are in a sense discounting. I haveno problem with that, whether we put in the numbers for M2 and M1directly or put it in the form of a proviso indicating a range aroundthe annual equivalent or slightly above, if that's what you'resuggesting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm just uneasy about coming up withsome numerical target that we're not going to hit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We won't have any difficulty making anumerical target, presumably, for M2.MS. TEETERS. You're afraid of going over the target for M2?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are much more likely to be close tothis number for M2 than we are for M1, just in terms of the randomnessof the numbers. We can argue about it; I frankly don't think it makesa lot of difference. We can say: "In the short run the Committeeseeks behavior of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of M-1Bfrom September to December at an annual rate of 7 percent afterallowance for the impact of the flows into NOW accounts and growth inM2 around"--I don't know what are we saying.MS. TEETERS. Why don't we take the 11 percent fromalternative B and at least allow some leeway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd rather put in a lower number and say"or slightly higher."MR. PARTEE. Sure, why not say "10 percent or somewhat more"?And then we have a proviso later about taking account of all saverscertificates. That seems all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even 10 percent or somewhat more bothersme a bit. If we are going to say "somewhat more," we can always use alower number.MR. PARTEE. Oh, come on, Paul, you know it's going to be abig number.-49-10/5-6/81MS. TEETERS. You are going to get the relationship betweenthe two growth rates so far off--!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does the 10 percent include the all saversor not? Is that where your--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It isn't clear. This language simplysays that it has to be evaluated. That's why I said "tolerate."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say "10 percent or slightly more,recognizing that the behavior of M2 will be affected by the recentregulatory and legislative changes."MR. BOEHNE. That sounds reasonable.MR. PARTEE. October will probably be a good-sized month, andthen growth may fall off. But October will be a good-sized month--maybe 13, 14, 15 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Recognizing particularly that in October.MR. PARTEE. Yes, and that [unintelligible] forecast ofinterest rates.MR. GRAMLEY. What would go with that, then: an $800 millioninitial borrowing level and a fed funds range of what?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 13 to 18 percent.MR. RICE. 13 to 17 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the Chairman said at one time either 12or 13 percent at the bottom.MR. SCHULTZ. I have some sensitivity to what Mr. Roos saidabout narrowing that range.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I do too.MR. SCHULTZ. I think we really ought to retain a 5-pointrange anyway, and I would have no problems with 12 to 17 percent.MR. FORD(?). Even that seems to me to be restrictive becausefunds are trading at 14 percent today; they were down in the 13percent range yesterday. We don't want to have to call each other uptomorrow with 12 percent.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I think we would want to if it got downthat fast. How precipitous the decline occurs is of some importance,don't you think?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have had trading at 14 percent as thelow but the 14 percent range may be a little artificial today. Wehave too many reserves out. You are selling today, I take it?MR. STERNLIGHT. Right. We are absorbing the excess.-50-10/5-6/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We had excess reserves, Bill, becauseof the move to same-day settlement.MR. FORD. Yes, but we have had a number of days in the lasttwo weeks when it has been down around 13 percent, haven't we?MR. STERNLIGHT. 14 percent.MR. FORD. All I'm saying is: Let's not lock ourselves in sotightly. Let's go in with something like the alternative B range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It wouldn't lock us very tightly anyway.MS. TEETERS. What do you expect the borrowings to do, Steve?If we start at $880 million, do you expect them to drop off?MR. AXILROD. Well, the degree of error around this is vast.We've assumed that that level of borrowing implies a funds rate ofsomething like 14-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent. I don't know if Peter thinksit is exactly in that range. We probably are going to get M-1B growthon the order of 6, 7, or 8 percent; so if that's right, I wouldn'tassume any further drop in borrowing and the funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve, you may be right. I hope you areright in this sense. But what we are probably running into here isthis: If the low money figure for publication this week is confirmedand next week is low, this $800 million that we started with willprobably be lowered pretty promptly. If we get a bulge in the firstweek of October, it won't be. But if the first week in October isanother low number--meaning it might be positive but only $1 billionor so--we'll probably get the borrowings down further.MR. AXILROD. Yes, in constructing this path we have allowedfor an increase on the order of $2-1/2 billion in the first week ofOctober.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the number is. Butlet's say it's distinctly below $2-1/2 billion; we will probablygradually be lowering the borrowing right off. If it's $4 or $5billion, we wouldn't be.MR. SCHULTZ. I'd be very nervous about not consulting if thefunds rate got down to 12 percent in such a short period of time.That could be misinterpreted by the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do what we want to do there.We can put in 12 to 17 percent; there's nothing to stop us fromconsulting before that if we don't like what is happening.MR. PARTEE. Depending on the behavior of the pattern.MS. TEETERS. We could also put in a range for the fourthquarter instead of coming down on [a specific growth rate].MR. PARTEE. For the aggregates?MS. TEETERS. For the aggregates, yes.-51-10/5-6/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That bothers me a little just because ifwe put in a range it sounds as if we are really in trouble on eitherside of that range.MS. TEETERS. I just thought that's about where we are.MR. PARTEE. But the staff has to construct a path, you see.We choose the number and then they construct the path.MS. TEETERS. They can take it out of the center of therange, which apparently is where we're coming down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we put in even a 3-point range, theprobability, at least early in the period, is that it would not occur.And as a result, [I would like to suggest that] we set the initialborrowing at something near the $880 million we have beenexperiencing--say, $850 to $900 million--rather than going to $800million and risking a drop to 14 percent very quickly and having totake some action on the discount rate.MR. AXILROD. I should just give the figures. In the lastthree complete statement weeks the funds rate averaged 16.09, 15.33,and 15 percent. That 15 percent was for the week ending September 30,the quarterly statement date. For this week to date, I don't have thefigure, but it must be over 15 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had borrowings over a billion dollarswith the first figure, right?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, because we had high funds rates.MR. AXILROD. We had a high funds rate early in the week sothe average level of the funds rate hasn't really gotten below 15 to15-1/2 percent, if you take out the exception week.MR. GUFFEY. An exception week being what?MR. AXILROD. September 30th, which might have some funny--MR. STERNLIGHT. The borrowing was higher than the $900million or so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with $850 million.MR. WALLICH. If we do all this, we may get to a positionvery similar to last year where it looks as though we cut the fundsrates in half; other rates won't have moved quite that much, but itwill look like a very big drop.MR. PARTEE. So what?MR. WALLICH. Cutting interest rates in half is just showingthat we are giving up on inflation and are starting to fightrecession; that's very much what it seems to me we are tempted to do.MR. FORD. We're not cutting them in half, Henry. The fundsrate never averaged over what, 20 percent?-52-10/5-6/81MR. WALLICH. It was 21 percent, I think.MR. RICE. The estimate in the Bluebook is that $200 to $300million of borrowing is consistent with a 14 percent funds rate.That's not cutting interest rates in half.MR. WALLICH. We are letting it go to 12 percent before weconsult, which indicates that we are willing to let it go very far.MR. RICE. But if we keep borrowing up at $800 million, weare not going to have to worry about a 12 or 13 percent funds rate.MR. WALLICH. It moves pretty fast.MR. PARTEE. But maybe the 20 percent was way too high. Weshouldn't have let it go to 20 percent. If we're going to controlinterest rates rather than aggregates, maybe we shouldn't have let itgo to 20 percent.MR. WALLICH. No, I'm concerned with the picture that wepresent if interest rates drop sharply. You can say all you likeabout the fact that we are below target on the money supply, but thepublic will perceive this as easing and 90 percent of the commentatorswill say that the Fed has eased very substantially.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the one comment thateverybody agreed on here is that we didn't want a precipitous declinein interest rates. I don't see why we can't have a consultation at 13percent. It's quite a move down from the current 15 or 15-1/4 percentlevel.MR. PARTEE. I would rather post it at 12 to 17 percent andjust agree [on when to consult]. I don't like the idea of narrowingthis range to 4 points. We really are not supposed to be paying thatmuch attention to it, although I know we are.MR. ROOS. Some of us are.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you have a consultation at 13percent even though the range is 12 to 17?MR. PARTEE. Because it would be approaching it--moving downto 12 percent--and before it got there we would have a consultation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. All right, that's a reasonablecompromise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we have to decide that withany precision. If it reached 13 percent in mid-November andeverything is weak, nobody is going to be disturbed about it. If itreached 13 percent two weeks from now, people would be disturbed. Youhave to assume a certain amount of competence, some minimum level, inthe Chairman.MR. SCHULTZ. That's the weak part of the whole thing!-53-10/5-6/81MR. BALLES. Paul, I understood a while ago that you wereleaning toward putting a numerical target in for M2, with cautionarylanguage following it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not leaning either way.MR. BALLES. If that were done, followed by the cautionarylanguage that evaluation of M2 would have to be made in light of allsavers, etc., one way the directive could handle it would be at theend of the last paragraph that calls for consultation when the fundsrate is persistently outside a range to add a phrase "or if M2 growthis substantially higher than currently projected." So, consultationwould be triggered [either] by the departure of the funds rangepersistently from whatever range we end up specifying or by M2 growingfaster than the numerical target, if one is put in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I am suggesting is one version; letme just run this one up the flag pole and see who salutes: "In theshort run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregatesconsistent with growth of M-1B from September to December at an annualrate of 7 percent after allowance for the impact of flows into NOWaccounts and 10 percent or slightly higher for M2, recognizing thatbehavior of M2 will be affected by recent regulatory and legislativechanges, particularly the public's response to the availability of theall savers certificate." I will modify my proposal slightly to sayborrowing at $850 million and a federal funds range of 12 to 17percent. If the funds rate dropped out of bed here and got around 13percent promptly, we would probably have a consultation. We won'tnecessarily have a consultation if that arises at the end of Octoberor the beginning of November when we have a lot of weakness in theaggregates and it's obvious why it is down there.MR. SCHULTZ. I don't mind that. I prefer a little less than7 percent on the growth, but I prefer a little less than $850 on theborrowings, so they balance off.MR. PARTEE. I would prefer 8 percent on the growth, but I'llbuy 7 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. That's quite acceptable to me.MR. BOEHNE. Acceptable to me.MS. TEETERS. I accept it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, unless somebody has a strongpreference for the proviso type language, we will proceed with thislanguage. Call the roll, Mr. Altmann.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Partee Yes-54-10/5-6/81-55-Governor RiceGovernor SchultzGovernor TeetersGovernor WallichYesYesYesNoEleven for, one against.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you. We can proceed to lunch.END OF MEETING