Federal Open Market CommitteeConference CallJune 17, 1981PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford, Timlen, and Winn,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, andSt. Louis, respectivelyMr. Doyle, First vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof ChicagoMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Ettin and Truman, Associate EconomistsMr. Davis, Associate Economist (New York)Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market Account (New York)Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account (New York)Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York (New York)Notes:Mr. Gramley and all participants from Reserve Banks (exceptthose noted from New York) participated on this call at the Kansas CityReserve Bank where they were attending a Conference of Presidents.A complete record of staff attendance at this meeting was notavailable in the Committee's files.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofJune 17, 1981MR. ALTMANN. Hello.MR. GUFFEY. Hello, this is Kansas City with a fullcontingent of Presidents.MR. ALTMANN. This is Murray Altmann. Good morning orafternoon, as the case may be. As usual, for the sake of the record,I would like to call the roll. [Secretary's note: The roll wascalled to determine attendance at the Reserve Banks.] Thank you. Inthe Board Room we have all members of the Board except GovernorsGramley and Wallich, as well as Ed Ettin, Jim Kichline, Ted Truman,and other members of the staff. In New York we have Peter Sternlight,Gretchen Greene, Dick Davis, and Paul Meek.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Gentlemen, I just thought it was a logicaltime to review things. The money supply, M-1B anyway, has been ratherweak. We have reduced the reserve path to some extent, as [M-1Bgrowth] got below whatever number we put in the directive. What wasthat--3 percent for--MR. ETTIN. For April to June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was 3 percent or lower, as you recall.Up until now we've reduced the reserve path somewhat to reflect the"or lower" part of the directive. There is a question of whether weshould continue doing that, given the current situation, and I don'tthink we should. I'm not sure we require any decision on a directivehere in a formal sense--I'm not inclined to think we do--but I thoughtit would be useful to have an exchange of views and a mutual updating.So, why don't we have Mr. Ettin bring us up to date on where theaggregates lie and where interest rates lie and then we'll have Mr.Sternlight comment on the market situation.MR. ETTIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our current estimatefor M-1B shift-adjusted is for a decline of about 4.3 percent in Mayand [growth of] around 1 percent in June. For the April-June period,where the target was 3 percent or less, our current estimate would beabout minus 1-1/2 percent at an annual rate, shift-adjusted. Thatwould mean that for the March-to-June period, growth in shift-adjustedM-1B would be about 3-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As compared to the 5 percent or somewhatless that we specified [in March]?MR. ETTIN. 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less.MR. ETTIN. If that June level held, M-1B would be somewhatbelow the lower end of its longer-run range. Our current estimate forthe 10th of June, which will be published this Friday, will only be acouple hundred million above the large reduction that has already beenpublished for the week of June 3rd. M2 has also weakened, mainlybecause of the reduction in M1. We have a 4-1/4 percent rate ofgrowth in May and are anticipating a 6-1/4 percent rate of growth in6/17/81June. If that June level held, that aggregate, Mr. Chairman, would bejust above the upper end of its longer-run range. M3 has been runningconsiderably stronger, as banks have issued large-denomination CDs inorder to accommodate the credit demands that they have been facing.M3 in May rose at an 8-1/2 percent rate; in June we're expecting it torise at a 10-1/2 percent rate. That aggregate would continue to beconsiderably above the upper end of its range. On the basis of theJune projection, and making various multiplier adjustments, the staffwould anticipate that borrowing would fall to a level of about $1800million. If money weakened further in June, borrowing could fall toas low as perhaps $1700 million. In the intermeeting period to datevirtually every interest rate is below its level at the time of theFOMC meeting and also below the highs for the intermeeting period, ofcourse. Corporate rates, for example, are off about 85 basis pointssince the FOMC meeting and the three-month bill rate is down about2-1/2 percentage points.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, Ed has summarized what has happened toa number of the market rates. That has developed essentially as themarket has taken heart from observing the weakness in the narrow moneysupply. The market is in somewhat of a suspended state of animation,though. They've observed the funds rate hanging at what they regardas a high level--in the 18-1/2 to 19-1/2 percent range--and they'resomewhat puzzled about that. And that tends to temper what might evenbe a stronger positive reaction to the weakness in money supply and tosome of the numbers in the economy that suggest softening as well. Weare winding up this week, because the banks tended to borrow ratherlightly early in the week, with some tightness. Funds were tradingaround 20 percent today after averaging around 18-1/2 percent earlierin the week. I would think that there might be a considerable bulgein borrowing shaping up for today.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline, why don't you review thefeel and tone of the business situation as well as the statistics.MR. KICHLINE. Well, it feels as though there's relativelylittle growth in the current quarter, following the exceptionallyrapid pace of expansion in the first quarter. The principal monthlyindicators of activity rather consistently suggest a sluggish pace ofactivity. Retail sales were revised downward in April and are now ona preliminary basis indicated to have been about flat in nominal termsin May. Auto sales were very weak in April and May, although they'veshown a slight uptick in early June. Nonfarm employment adjusted forstrikes has been unchanged for about the past three months. Andhousing starts for May are reported to have declined. On balance, webelieve that we would not be making much of a change in our projectionof real GNP for the current quarter. On the price side, the numberscoming in continue to point to a rather favorable performance, judgingfrom the PPI and the CPI. A good deal of the more favorable outlookin the recent past has been attributable to developments in energy andfood and, in the CPI, the homeownership component. Other prices havenot shown much movement, although on average they seem to be doingrather well under the circumstances. For the deflator, we wouldprobably be making somewhat of a small downward revision in ourforecast for the current quarter.6/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the overall situation seems to menot entirely unsatisfactory. We're within no target range, if youtake those literally. Some [aggregates] are low; some are high. TheM1 numbers, of course, are somewhat fragile in terms of their meaningwith everything that is going on. M2 is just above the range, M3 isfurther above the range, and bank credit is somewhat around the top ofthe range. We're going to be above the ranges for the second quarter,quite clearly, on all the aggregates except M1 on a quarterly averagebasis. Interest rates have been coming down. The economy seems to besoftening a bit. I don't think that's wholly undesirable in terms ofthe speed of growth we had before and in terms of expectations. And Iguess we're a little more believable than we were earlier in the lightof recent trends in both interest rates and the aggregates. Just inthe normal course what we would do is to follow the path that Edsuggested falls out of the numbers, which means somewhat lowerborrowings for these coming weeks--not too much lower if the moneysupply is not weaker than projected. But if it comes out weaker thanprojected--and I guess this last figure is somewhat on that side--we'dhave borrowings down in the $1-3/4 billion area fairly easily. Thatwould develop, I suppose, in the next week really. And in myjudgment, that doesn't require any change in the directive or anythingelse; that's just what we're following in the normal course of events.Let's just have your reactions to that.MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, this is Sternlight. May Ijust get in a clarification of what Ed Ettin laid out as the borrowingprospect for the next three weeks? We were talking about it earlierand when he said $1.7 or $1.8 billion for borrowing, that was beforethe downward adjustment for the weakness we've been getting in M-1B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. This implies no discretionarydownward adjustment. It says that we're happy with where theaggregates are and we're not encouraging any further downwardadjustments, so to speak.MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question? How much have you takenout of the nonborrowed reserves to date, Ed?MR. ETTIN. We've taken out $180 million in the first four-week period, reflecting the weakness in the monetary aggregates thatthe Committee was permissive toward, and another $200 million forovershooting borrowings in the first week when there was a very highdemand for borrowing. That was offset by a multiplier adjustment ofabout $350 million that went the other way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, the $200 million was somewhat of anartificial adjustment.MR. ETTIN. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the $180 million that you've reallytaken out.MR. ETTIN. Yes.MR. PARTEE. And the multiplier is standard, so that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The multiplier is the normal thing.-3-6/17/81MR. ETTIN. So, essentially, it's $180 million for theweakness in money growth.MR. STERNLIGHT. That $180 million applies just to the firstfour weeks; I don't think that it carries through.MR. ETTIN. That's right. It's in the first four-weekperiod. We've made no adjustments for the second three-week periodthat starts tomorrow.MS. TEETERS. Does that imply that you're putting the $180million back?MR. ETTIN. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.MR. ETTIN. There are no further adjustments.MR. PARTEE. There are no further adjustments. This is ChuckPartee. I might just say, Paul, that I think your proposal is verysensible. If I understand it, we now are looking at M-1B for April toJune of 3-1/2 percent, did you say? And that is assuming that thereis no more shortfall.MR. ETTIN. March to June is 3-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. Yes, March to June, the three-month period inour original directive, which we keyed back to last time and for whichthe objective was 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less. Well, 3-1/2 percentis certainly somewhat less than 5-1/2 percent and may be a little morethan somewhat less. So, it seems to me that we are at the lower endof the agreed upon path that we talked about and, therefore, that thegrowth in nonborrowed reserves should be permitted to show through inlower borrowings, to the extent that that occurs. I would note thatmy sense of the [situation] is that we've had a period of severalweeks--it's not just this week--in which we have had downwardrevisions in the expected money supply numbers. As I recall, at themeeting we were talking about May growth that was considerably higherthan -4.3 percent and June growth that was considerably higher than +1percent. So, we are beginning to develop this somewhat ominouspattern of shortfalls from staff expectations that has run for aperiod of weeks. And I agree with the point that you've often madethat those revisions often indicate something as to what is happening.So, our problem as we look into the next month or two, may in fact berather low-looking money numbers, lower than the staff is nowexpecting. I don't think this has any of the dynamic characteristicsof last year when [money growth] went off so very sharply in April,but it does seem to be pretty pervasive and it's a fairly ex endedperiod of weakness in the money behavior. Of course, the market ratesare reflecting that by coming down, although we resisted or didn't paymuch attention to that market development in March and early Aprilbecause we sensed that there was considerable strength in the businesspicture. Now it seems to me that the market is probably right becausethere is developing weakness in the business picture. So, I think weought to do what you say. But we ought to be rather sensitive now tosignificant shortfalls in the monetary aggregates because they'reprobably going to be reflecting shortfalls in the economy.6/17/81 -5-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I agree with a lot of the technicalanalysis you provided. I don't consider what is happening veryominous; I think it's rather happy.MR. PARTEE. To this point I'm not bothered, but I'm worriedabout what the next couple of months may show.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comment? How many people do wehave out there? Somebody must be commenting.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, Larry Roos. You're doing thingsbeautifully; just don't change what you're doing. I agree with you,Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me point out a couple of things. Idid some calculations--or rather I had some calculations done. If wedon't look so carefully at these cones that we're so fond of examiningbut at how we're doing in terms of trend, one way is to look at year-to-year changes. We are running high this year relative to last year.We have had a couple of years of decline in annual average aggregategrowth. It's going to be very difficult to get a decline in theannual average this year. If we ended up at the midpoint of our M1target--almost in a straight line from here on out, but only at themidpoint--it would look fine in terms of the way we arbitrarily setthese targets. On a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, we wouldend up with 6-1/4 percent year-to-year growth or something like that.And last year it was only--I haven't got the figure in front of me--5.9 or 5.7 percent, something like that. And it's almost certain thatthe M2 and M3 numbers are going to be significantly higher in year-to-year terms than they were last year. I think that has somesignificance apart from presentational. If we really are workingtoward lower growth, it may be more meaningful to look at annualaverages in some sense than to put all the weight on particularquarters, which is what the targets do somewhat inadvertently. Idon't like the feeling myself of coming out for the year with a higheraverage growth in all these aggregates than we had last year. Butthat's the way we're headed.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, this is John Balles. In talkingwith Lyle here, I'm trying to recall whether our published minutes forthe [March] meeting indicated, as I seem to recall, that we would beputting more weight on M2.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. BALLES. Is that [recollection] correct?MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure the formal directive didthat, though. I don't remember the wording, but I think it wasreflected in the tone of the discussion. I just don't rememberprecisely how it came out in the directive itself.MR. BALLES. The only reason I bring this up [unintelligible]scrutiny with our current policy. [Unintelligible] in spite of thefact that M2 is [above its] range [unintelligible] end of June6/17/81probably will take some of the sting out of the fact that M1 is comingin weak.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I don't know about the wording "takesome of the sting out." It may take some of the joy out.MR. PARTEE. But, of course, M2 is fairly weak for May andJune, too, isn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, if you look at it just in thenarrowest perspective from the last meeting, M2 is slightly below thelimit that we put on it. But if you look at it in the broaderperspective of the year as a whole, it is high and is running abovethe range. M2, according to the current projections, is only slightlybelow the figure that was put in the directive.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. End of conversation?MR. GUFFEY. That's the end from Kansas City.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Any more here in Washington? Well,we will proceed. Thank you very much.MR. ALTMANN. Is anyone left on the line?MR. PARTEE. Was there anybody there in the first place?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, that's it.END OF SESSION-6-