Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 31, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., on Tuesday, March 31, 1981 at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford, and Winn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns, Danforth, R. Davis, Ettin, Keir,Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Smith 1/, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of Governors1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to amend the Authorization forForeign Currency Operations and left following the action to reaffirmthe agreement to "warehouse" foreign currencies.3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A low; it was a high in the numericalsense, a low in reality. That was what--three or four weeks ago now,I suppose?MS. GREENE. Just before the Bundesbank's move, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since then, it has come off that very lowvalley. The market has continued erratic, but I don't think there'sany great judgment that there was much to be done about it. Thetendency was not cumulative in one direction or another. At the sametime, we've entered into some discussions with the Treasury as to whattheir views might be on intervention. They're going to start out, asall new [Administrations] do anyway, by not being very--let me put itthe other way around--by being quite cautious on whether interventionis useful or not. It remains to be seen. I don't think there's anybig question here that a variety of influences have suggested thatintervention under the current circumstances is not serving a terriblyuseful purpose. And there hasn't been any intervention except foryesterday, for what--three weeks or so?MS. GREENE. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The markets have been quite erratic on aday-to-day basis, but have shown no particular trend movement in onedirection or another after coming off the valley or the peak,whichever way one puts it. I myself don't see any particular need forany systematic intervention, in the near future in any event. We'llsee what happens in the market, but it has been rather trendless andfeatureless as I see it, though not featureless in the sense thatthere is quite a lot of short-term volatility. But that's the natureof the beast at the moment.MS. TEETERS. But you would still expect [the Desk] tointervene on disorderly markets?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is a disorderly market? That isalways the question.MS. TEETERS. I realize that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, this is not a--MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As with any new Administration, in termsof their own views, they are going to have to test their way inspecific circumstances. We had a circumstance yesterday which wasobviously of a highly exceptional character. But just forgettingabout that aspect--though that's an important aspect--I myself do notsee intervention as serving any particular purpose at the moment. Andwe haven't done any, so we haven't got a test of it. By somemeasures, I guess the market has been disorderly. By measures that wewould have considered appropriate ten years ago, certainly, it hasbeen disorderly. I think there's a question whether it is disorderlyin the present context of things. That there is some inherentvolatility here is, unfortunately, a fact of life. I'm not sure howit will settle down most easily, frankly--with an official presence orwithout.3/31/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't have, possibly, a fullhistorical understanding of the policy [that was in effect] before Iwas at the Treasury. During the time I was there, it was understoodthat the Desk had flexibility [to intervene] in relatively modestamounts to counter disorderly markets, using its own judgment, andkeeping both the Treasury and, of course, the Chairman informed. Andit was understood that on larger interventions there would beauthorization. I don't know whether we're moving in a direction nowwhere, even on modest efforts to counter disorderly markets, there hasto be specific authorization from both the Treasury and the Chairman,even in regard just to the use of Federal Reserve resources asdistinct from the joint use of Federal Reserve and Treasury resources.I don't know what the situation was prior to my joining the Treasury.Was it that clean-cut that there had to be specific authorization?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we've gone through every possiblevariant and permutation and combination of this through the years.Sometimes there has been [no intervention] and [that policy] wasmaintained for a considerable period of time. Sometimes there hasbeen intervention with rather specific authorization each time andsometimes there has been a more flexible view. We will try to workthis out a little over the next month or two in terms of consistencywith the Treasury's views. There is no definitive answer to thatquestion at the moment, so far as they're concerned. But as apractical matter, I don't see any urgent requirements at the moment.Now, that can always change on a day-by-day basis, and that is whatwill give us the grist for practical judgments in working this out.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Have there been periods of time,Paul, when there has been modest intervention to counter disorderlymarkets just using Federal Reserve resources?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, yes.MR. TRUMAN. Generally in the past--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I said "yes" hastily; I'm sure there havebeen.MR. TRUMAN. Yes. Generally in the past, until after theearly 1970s, the Treasury didn't have substantial balances of its own.So, most of the intervention was for the Federal Reserve accountexclusively, both in terms of building up very tiny balances and interms of all drawings on the swap lines.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think one can find every combination inpast history in terms of what has been done. But it has beenexceptional to have the Treasury participate to the extent it hasparticipated in the last four years or so. Nevertheless, the questionhas been a repeated one going back to the earliest days of floating[rates], when I participated from the other side [at the Treasury].Should intervention be joint, separate, or should the Treasury do itin the first instance or should we do it in the first instance?MR. BALLES. You started all this!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. John Balles raised this question of astudy. Let me suggest a procedure, if it's satisfactory. I'm not3/31/81sure whether you all are aware that some of these things were touchedupon in a System study, the results of which were sent out a fewmonths ago. Why don't you just say a word or two about that, Mr.Truman? Describe the nature of that study and its limitations forthis purpose.MR. TRUMAN. Well, the study was actually done in connectionwith the special System objectives for the calendar year 1979. [Theintent] was to encourage economists within the System to look again atthe floating exchange rate regime and how it had been functioning.Although there was some talk of encouraging staffs at the variousBanks and the Board to identify a broad range of issues, there wasn'tan attempt, as is often true in such a case, to arrive at a singleconclusion. The result was that a large numbers of papers--I thinknumbering in the 40s--were prepared by various people, and they weresummarized in the paper that was circulated to you earlier this year.One important section of that paper, in this context, had to do withthe question of exchange rate determination. I would argue from aneconomic point of view that one has to resolve that issue in one'smind before one resolves questions about the effectiveness ofintervention. I think it's fair to say, based on the paper--and infact the concluding section says this--that the jury is still out inthe sense that it is not entirely clear in purely economic terms whatthe effectiveness of intervention would be. You will find, though,among economists within the System, that both views are supported.And there are lengthy articulations of what assumptions they makeabout the substitutability of assets denominated in differentcurrencies. The paper was put together by Jeff Shafer and Joanna Grayand Mike Keran and was in a form a little different than often isdone; it was issued subsequently as a discussion paper by the Boardstaff. But it might be instructive. In fact, one of the reasons whywe put together the paper was that it did present a reasonable reviewor survey on these topics without trying to come to a detailedconclusion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is extremely difficult to identify anypeculiar results from intervention per se economically. Interventionserves a number of purposes, some of which are inherentlyimmeasurable, such as cooperating with a foreign central bank andmaintaining some spirit of harmony in markets, and some of which moredirectly affect markets, such as a psychological objective as to theintentions of the government in combination with or apart from otherelements of an economic program. Against that background, what Iwould suggest is that you take a look at that work, which has alreadybeen done. And we can consider next time, having looked at that andrefreshed our minds about what has been done, whether we can identifymore precisely what additional work, if any, might be desirable. Ifthat's acceptable, we'll have a little discussion of it at the nextmeeting in that context. It may be that there are things to be lookedat and we should have a go at it again; or we may conclude that thereisn't much more to be done. But those studies are not fresh in mymind, to say the least. In fact, I would say I have not read them andsome of the rest of you may be in that same position.We have to ratify the transactions, if we're finished withthis topic. Do we have a motion?MR. PARTEE. So move.3/31/81MR. BOEHNE. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Do you have anyrecommendations, Ms. Greene?MS. GREENE. [Recommendation--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was that concluding comment? I amafraid my attention wandered.MS. GREENE. It was that we do not yet know whether theRiksbank will request us to renew the increase [in their swap linethat was enacted last year]. In the event that they do, we probablywill hear about it before the next FOMC meeting and we would like tobe able at that time to recommend by wire that the renewal beapproved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can take an action, if we wantto. We can't wait until our next meeting, which comes [after] theexpiration of the [increase in the] line. I don't know that this is abig issue; but I can just as easily wait and see whether they requesta renewal.MS. GREENE. We thought they might wish to talk about it atthe time they repay. That is the reason we brought it up at thistime.MS. TEETERS. When are they scheduled to repay?MS. GREENE. The 23rd of April.MR. WALLICH. If we renew, does this mean that the implicittakeout from some further Euro-borrowing is pushed farther away intime?MS. GREENE. I fully expect that they will repay the drawing.The question is, if there's an increase in the arrangement, whetherthat should also be renewed. The reason for bringing it up now,although they are two separate items, is that when we're talking tothem about the repayment, we expect that they will ask for an initialreaction as to whether or not they could renew the increase in theline as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would think we could defer action onthis, but if there's any expression of opinion that would be helpfulin guiding conversations with the Riksbank, we might have such anexpression of opinion at this time.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, Mr. Chairman, everythingconsidered, I think it would be appropriate for us to agree to[extending] the increase if they request it. They are a responsiblecentral bank and I think it would be a little strange--we'd have tohave a good reason and I can't think of what reason we would offer--torefuse such a modest increase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The total amount of the line is what now?-5-3/31/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. $300 million; the temporary increaseis $200 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's $300 million, so it goes up to $500million. As I remember, when that line was increased last year therewere some pretty clear understandings that it would be used--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As bridge money.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --as bridge money to a financing, which ineffect is what they did, or perhaps for other contingencies of thatsort. But the obvious [purpose] was as a bridge financing to a marketfinancing or to an IMF drawing, which was in the picture recurrentlywith respect to Sweden. Is that still in the picture, or do they feelso confident now that they're not thinking of IMF drawings?MS. GREENE. I think that's something, if we are cooperativewith them, that we could remind them about, if the situation sorequired.MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, before the actions in January,there were some suggestions--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it strikes me that there are anumber of reasons why, in fact, we should not make a decision rightnow. We can have some discussion and see what the attitude is towardthese things. Assuming the attitude is favorable--and my inclinationwould be like Mr. Solomon's that we have the probability of a renewal[request] here--we don't have to take the formal action. We have tosee the way they will present it. And we can take the action at thenext meeting if it seems appropriate then, assuming they do requestit. Any objection to that?SPEAKER(?). No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If not, of course, we will conductourselves accordingly. Since we're on the subject of the foreignissues, we might as well jump to the amendments to the authorizationfor foreign currency operations and the renewal of the directives,which are standard material. The only [proposed] change involves whatis essentially a cleaning up of the language in the authorization forforeign currency operations. Do you want to describe that, Mr.Truman?MR. TRUMAN. Well, part of the changes are just a cleaningup. The one issue that the Committee might want to discuss is thequestion you have asked the staff to address of whether we should nowincorporate the informal limits on System [foreign currency] balancesinto the formal instruments. We looked at the question and wesuggested a way in which that could be done, but we also suggestedthat, on balance, we didn't think it was a good idea. Therefore, werecommended that any formal limit with respect to the System's overallopen position be the limit that now exists. And in that connection,we suggested as a technical adjustment that the two numbers that now-6-3/31/81appear in the authorization--one number is a footnote and one numberis in the text, with the one [in the footnote] being eight times thesize of the other--be combined to one number in the text and that thefootnote be dropped. Assuming the Committee accepts the propositionthat the informal limits be retained, we suggested that we might beable to simplify the presentation of those informal limits so thatthere's one overall number with three subnumbers rather than the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a bit lost. What specifically, areyou proposing? It's on what page of what memorandum?MR. TRUMAN. The memorandum from the Secretary is dated March24th. The first recommendation, on the first page, is that the formallimit on the overall open position be encompassed in the limit [notedin the text]. The second recommendation, on page 2, is that thenumber be moved from the footnote to the text. Those are thesubstantive recommendations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We now have an $8 billion limit on ouropen position.MR. PARTEE. In a footnote.MR. TRUMAN. But it's in a footnote, and the number in thetext is $1 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your recommendation is to move the $8billion from the footnote to the text?MR. TRUMAN. That's earth-shaking, I know!MR. GUFFEY. And change the $8 billion to $5 billion.MR. AXILROD. We also suggest the possibility of changing the$8 billion to $5 billion.MR. GUFFEY. Right. That's in the text.MR. AXILROD. It would give the Committee more flexibility indecisionmaking.MR. PARTEE. What is the open position now?MR. TRUMAN. It's $3.2 billion as I remember.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make sure I am clear on this.The substantive proposal is nothing more than moving an $8 billionlimit, which is now in a footnote, to the text.MR. TRUMAN. Right. But the substantive proposal withrespect to your charge to the staff was not to incorporate theinformal limits into the formal documents. That may require apositive decision, too, or a negative decision.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the total position, which is inthe document in the footnote, is $8 billion. That in some sensegoverns the total open position, and we would put that up in the text.-7-3/31/81The informal limits on the individual currencies we would not put inthe directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you rewrote them slightly, didn't you?MR. TRUMAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where do the informal limits appear?MR. TRUMAN. They don't appear anywhere; that's the issuethat we addressed. They appear in the notes or the records of theDesk [and the Secretariat], which I think is the proper way to do it,after having listened to the informed discussion of the Committee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how were they appearing in the notesthat is different from the way they now appear?MR. TRUMAN. That is listed on page 3 of the memorandum. Wewould suggest that the informal limit, as the Desk has it, be set at$4-1/4 billion, with sublimits of up to $2-3/4 billion in marks, $1billion in yen, and $1/2 billion in all other currencies. That wouldjust mean that subsequently, if the Committee in its discussion saidthat it wanted to raise those informal limits, any time it raised oneof the three components that would automatically raise the total. Itwould save some time; it's a somewhat simplified procedure.MR. WALLICH. Items 1-A and 1-B are the alternatives; we cando B while also doing A.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, they are part of the basic recommendation.MR. WALLICH. But 1-C would be a different procedure?MR. TRUMAN. It is an alternative, which we do not recommend.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, I guess I understand this. Letme repeat it. We have two proposals, basically. One is to move the$8 billion from a footnote to the formal text. Is this in thedirective?MR. TRUMAN. The authorization.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Authorization. The other is not to put anindividual currency limit in the formal authorization. We are nowconfirming an informal understanding, stated a somewhat different way,that says the total limit on the balances is $4-1/4 billion, the sameas the present limitation, of which the limits are $2750 million inmarks, $1 billion in yen, and $500 million in all other currencies.That is the same as we have now, expressed a little more felicitously.MR. TRUMAN. Right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What gets published: the $8 billion?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The $8 billion is the only thing that ispublished.3/31/81MR. TRUMAN. That is the number that is now published. Boththe $1 billion in the text and the $8 billion in the footnote are nowpublished. So, nothing is changed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way it is now, the authorization isfor $1 billion and then there is a footnote that says, in effect,except the Committee decided on $8 billion. So the $8 billion ismoved up to replace the $1 billion. Let's just focus on that one fora moment. Is that acceptable?MS. TEETERS. Is the $8 billion regardless of signs?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.MS. TEETERS. And the $4-1/4 billion is a plus.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The $8 billion would mean that if we werelong $4 billion in one currency and short $4 billion in another, thenet is not zero but $8 billion. It covers our overall exposure. Isthat acceptable?MR. GUFFEY. There is another part of the recommendation, andthat is that rather than put $8 billion in the text, we would put $5billion; it retains the language that's now in the text with respectto the Committee's authorization.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can put any number in there we want to.We got to $8 billion during the '78 operation, I guess.MR. TRUMAN. It was raised, I think, by $2 or $3 billion inDecember of 1978 and that limit has been there ever since. We nevergot there, but we came close.MR. GUFFEY. Well, to go at it another way, if I understandthe recommendation, it would be to go to $8 billion in the text anddelete the language that would permit the Committee to increase it.MR. TRUMAN. No.MR. AXILROD. We didn't assume the Committee neededpermission.MR. TRUMAN. The reason for the proposal that that languagebe deleted is that when this document was last thoroughly overhauled,there was an express authorization with respect to the old Swiss francdebt. And the express authorization said to treat that debt, whichwas part of the open position, outside of the $1 billion limit. Thatwas the reason for the language that we now suggest be deleted. It'snot that we're trying to reduce your flexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure how that language got inthere, but it seems clear that the Committee can always change this toput in whatever number it wants to put in, either larger or smaller.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, it's a good suggestion.It's strictly procedural. [But] I think it would be a mistake tochange the number; the markets might read something into that if wewere to change the number. I see no reason at this point,3/31/81particularly with all the discussion in the markets about a policyshift in the Treasury in regard to intervention, for us to feed that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can make the substantivedecision, but I think we have to have a reason for making it. If wewant to reduce it, we can reduce it. But if there is a strong feelingabout not suggesting a policy change here, or explaining what we aredoing, the straightforward thing is just to do the $8 billion.MR. PARTEE. But certainly we need to have some reason. Idon't know why we have $8 billion, but I don't know why we wouldchange it to $5 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we had $8 billion becausethat was the guess of what might have been necessary at the time ofthe '78 operation.MR. PARTEE. I think it was a building up of several things.MR. TRUMAN. Well, in December of '78, [our open position]went up to $5-1/2 billion at the end of year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had increased swap lines at that pointand so forth.MR. TRUMAN. I think it had previously been $5 billion and itwas raised by enough so that, during that environment, the Committeewouldn't have to adjust it every three weeks.MR. PARTEE. So it is whatever is needed to keep fromimpeding any operations we'd like to undertake. It's a great limit.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The more meaningful limits are theinformal limits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is $8 billion acceptable?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will have $8billion. Now, this other issue, if I understand it correctly, is theway it is recorded in the notes. Again, there's no substantivedifference. It would be recorded in the notes slightly differently,in a simpler way, which is what gave rise to the discussion. There isa straightforward limitation on how much in total we can have and howmuch of that total can be in marks, how much in yen, how much ineverything else. And it's exactly where we are now in substance.MR. CORRIGAN. Is it exactly where we are now? I thoughtthat under the way we operate now, if we changed one component, wedidn't necessarily change the total. Whereas this contemplates thatif you went to--MR. TRUMAN. Well, in effect, yes, we've been doing it thatway. That was the source of the confusion during the discussion inDecember, though, and that's why we suggested that we change it thisway. The only thing that has been changed recently has been the marktotal. But since we had an overall limit, every time $1/2 billion or-10-3/31/81$1 billion was added to the mark total we had to push everything elseup, especially since we were holding, and still are holding, about$250 million worth of all the other currencies.MR. CORRIGAN. But the presumption here would be that there'san automatic dollar-for-dollar lifting in the total.MR. WALLICH. Well, these currencies aren't substitutesnecessarily. So, if there's a reason for raising one, that's noreason to reduce another if that were to be the consequence of havinga ceiling.MR. AXILROD. But it's conceivable, if the Committee wished,that it could reduce the yen limit and raise the [mark or the othercurrencies limit]. It's not impossible to substitute among thosethings.MR. TRUMAN. Right, but it would be separately--MR. CORRIGAN. But then the understanding would be, barringan express decision that way--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much do we have now?MR. TRUMAN. As Gretchen said, in marks we have $2566million, or almost $2.6 billion. We have $399 million of yen, and$260 million of everything else.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, if we approve this, it implies aleeway of approximately $200 million in marks, $600 million in yen,and $240 million in everything else.MR. SCHULTZ. I thought we had more Swiss francs than that.MR. TRUMAN. No, it's $257 million or something like that ofSwiss francs and the rest of it is--MR. SCHULTZ. Where did I get the idea that we had more thanthat because we have a Carter bond?MR. TRUMAN. We, the United States, do; we, the System, donot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the Treasury.MR. SCHULTZ. Oh, I see; we've already sent it over. Webought it for them. The total position we have in Swiss francs is alittle over $1 billion, is that right?MR. TRUMAN. The United States has $1.3 billion. It's $1.4billion, using the historical rates, of which we have $250 million.MR. SCHULTZ. Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The substance of what we're saying here isthat these numbers are not changed from what we now have, but thereisn't much room for increasing mark balances and there isn't much room-11-3/31/81for increasing other balances. There is a fair amount of room forincreasing yen balances, but we have no intention of doing so.MR. BLACK. But we're going to say that a lot better than wewere saying it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says it more straightforwardly. That'sright. But there isn't a lot of room here, actually, in these currentinformal limits for increasing [our holdings of] anything.MR. TRUMAN. Actually, my figures are absent the $74.4million we sold yesterday. My figures don't include that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we have a little more room forincreasing marks, having sold some yesterday. Is that acceptable?MR. PARTEE. Sounds fine.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was there anything else? [Next] we haveparagraph 3 and paragraph 5. This is an attempt to have morestraightforward wording again, isn't it?MR. TRUMAN. Right, in paragraph 3. Paragraph 5 deals withthe fact that we now have a broader range of things that we invest in.Paragraph 6 reflects the fact that we no longer send out a daily callto the members of the Subcommittee. To reduce paperwork some time agowe combined that with the 2:30 call that goes to all members of theCommittee along with the Manager's regular reports.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think any of these changes issubstantive. One purpose of the change in paragraph 5, at least inpart, is that we now have authority to invest in foreign governmentsecurities and, in effect, we are limiting that and making clear thatthese [investments] are to be in liquid form. Are these allacceptable?MS. TEETERS. Wasn't there some question as to whether wewere going to put the informal limits directly in the directive?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume that we made the decisionnot to, in accepting the other alternative and these language changes.Hearing no dissent, I guess we need a motion. This is the formal[authorization], isn't it?SPEAKER(?). Yes. So moved.MS. TEETERS. Seconded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will adopt those.One other issue in this area is warehousing. Mr. Truman, are yougoing to comment on warehousing?MR. TRUMAN. We have had this agreement, the current one,formally since January 1977. The limit on warehousing foreigncurrencies for the Treasury and the Exchange Stabilization Fund is now$5 billion. The total that is now in use under that arrangement is alittle over $4 billion. The Treasury would just as soon renew theauthority. They may well be using some of those balances over the-12-3/31/81course of the next year to repay some of the Carter notes that comedue over the period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are recommending no change here?MR. TRUMAN. No change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This [issue] comes up every year as towhether we want to continue it. There's no change [proposed]. It isbeing used to the extent of over $4 billion against the $5 billionauthorization. Do we have a motion on this one?SPEAKER(?). You have a motion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without dissent, we will approve therenewal of the warehousing [agreement]. Mr. Altmann tells me we haveto approve one other thing here.MR. ALTMANN. We need approval of the foreign currencydirective and the procedural instructions with respect to foreigncurrency operations in which no changes have been proposed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are the basic authority for theforeign currency operations. There are no changes. They are justreviewed every year and accepted or not accepted. Obviously, changescan be proposed, but there are no changes being proposed by the staff.This is the basic [directive] for foreign currency operations and theaccompanying procedural [instructions]. They have been in effect [intheir present form] for three or four years.MR. WALLICH. It is noteworthy that any change inintervention policy can be accommodated within this document, nomatter what we do.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's very appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will renew theforeign currency directive and the procedural instructions. Thatconcludes all the foreign-related matters. We did ratify thetransactions, did we not? I think we are finished with the foreignside. We will go now to Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments? Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Peter, going back to your comments on the pathfor nonborrowed reserves: Did I understand you to say that youconsidered the reduction in the path that was agreed to roughly at thetime of that telephone conference call to be a temporary reduction andthat in the most recent 4-week period you are back to the previouspath?MR. STERNLIGHT. That is correct, yes.MR. PARTEE. Well, I hadn't understood that that was going tohappen. I can see how that would be an interpretation, but this is-13-3/31/81the first I have heard of that--that it was a temporary reduction andthen the path was restored.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure that's quite right.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's why I asked the question. Peterseems to think so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We set the path.MR. STERNLIGHT. That's my understanding of what was done.MR. AXILROD. That is exactly what was done after theFebruary 24th call. The borrowing level in the last 2 weeks of thefirst 4 weeks of the 8-week interval--I don't know what it was in the3rd week, but it was very low in the 4th week--would have been zero.It was understood after that call that half the adjustment would bemade to keep it at around $1 billion. And in the next 4-week period,we reverted to the original path, which itself implied borrowing ofaround $1 or $1.1 billion at that time. I thought that was made clearat the time.MR. PARTEE. It just shows how tricky this whole thing is; Ihadn't understood it. I think we have to be very clear in terms ofwhat the understandings are. Nothing happened adversely as a resultof it, but I thought we had made a downward adjustment in the paththat [would not be changed] until the Committee reconsidered thematter.MR. AXILROD. Well, if we had made the same adjustmentdownward in the path that we made in that two weeks, it would haveimplied borrowing rising to a considerable amount.MR. PARTEE. Well, this has explained something to me. Infact, I just asked yesterday: Why is the market acting the way it is?Well, it's acting that way because we have reverted to the [original]path. I had never understood that. I might have expected the rapidgrowth in money of the last month or so to have brought some tightnessin the market and it hasn't brought very much. Now I know why.MR. AXILROD. Yes, because in effect the Committee is stillunder its path that it adopted--MR. PARTEE. At the last meeting?MR. AXILROD. --at the last meeting.MR. PARTEE. But not as amended in the telephone conference.MR. AXILROD. Our interpretation of that amendment was thatit applied to the first 4-week interval. The second 4-week intervalwas leading to borrowing that seemed likely to bring the federal fundsrate back up to the 15 percent lower limit, so that no furtheradjustments were necessary one way or the other to bring to theCommittee's attention.MR. CORRIGAN. What did borrowings average in that secondfour weeks?-14-3/31/81MR. AXILROD. They were a little under $900 million, I think.MR. STERNLIGHT. About $900 million. This week they arerunning higher, and the average may move up some this week. Myrecollection of that would be that there was flexibility, [based on]the Committee's decision, to have made some further adjustment if ithad proved necessary to keep--MR. PARTEE. On the down side. Yes, I agree with that.MR. STERNLIGHT. -- the funds rate from tending to slide offbelow 15 percent; but as it was shading up, it didn't [provenecessary].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am a bit confused at this point. Maybethe way to state it is this: That I didn't realize you were back onthe original nonborrowed reserve path. Well, that's right. Myunderstanding is the same as yours, but I suppose you could say thatthis may be the source of the confusion. With total reserves runninglow, you might have raised that path and you didn't.MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right. Total reserves have beenrunning well below.MR. PARTEE. That's an additional or separate conceptualadjustment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [An adjustment] was not made which mightin other circumstances have been made. Maybe that's it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though we didn't explicitlydiscuss a return to path in the second 4-week period, it wasformulated the way Peter suggested, and Steve also, that theflexibility was for as long as necessary and that when it was nolonger necessary in terms of the fed funds rate, then it justautomatically made--MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, but I'm quite surethat it was pointed out to the Committee at the time that one of thereasons for making the adjustment to keep borrowing at $1 billion wasthat looking ahead to the next 4-week interval, it was apparent at thetime of the February 24 call that, unless something weird happened,borrowing--given an adherence to the nonborrowed path--would move up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was certainly a factor.MR. PARTEE. But it didn't move up much. Is that right?MR. AXILROD. Well, it moved up. I don't know what theaverage is going to end up being; it will be something like $900million or maybe a little higher.MR. STERNLIGHT. We were looking at about $900 million lastFriday as the average borrowing in the second 4-week period.MR. WALLICH. Essentially, we seem to have targeted on thefunds rate.-15-3/31/81MR. AXILROD. I'd say we have targeted on the nonborrowedpath; we had to in the last four weeks. We adjusted the nonborrowedpath for the first four weeks downward in order to keep borrowing inline with how it appeared to be evolving. That's how I would put it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me be clear about the funds rate.This is my interpretation, obviously. We made a decision on the 24thor whenever it was which, in my judgment, overrode the funds rate. Wesaid: This is the way we are going to set the borrowing path. Now,there may be some fogginess, and I can't put myself back there. Oncehaving set the borrowing path there, the federal funds rate came outwhere it came out regardless of where the limits were on the federalfunds rate. The path was reset. The only question is: reset fromwhat to what? It was reset, based upon some judgment of what theaggregates in total were doing combined, I'm sure, with some feelingin the mind of Committee members--and each one probably had a slightlydifferent feeling--as to the implications for interest rates. But,once having made that decision, the federal funds rate was no longerrelevant. We had our consultation when it moved below 15 percent.The result of the consultation was to set a certain nonborrowedreserve path, and the federal funds rate then fell out regardless ofthe 15 to 20 percent limit. And, in fact, it ran below 15 percentalmost all that time. That was of no concern to me because in my mindthe Committee had made a judgment that it would be overridden.MR. WALLICH. What I meant to say is that we targeted onborrowed reserves, which is very similar to targeting on the fundsrate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We always target on borrowed reserves.MR. WALLICH. Well, that's why we always target on the fundsrate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's true. I don't agreewith that at all.MR. AXILROD. The reason borrowing dropped below the $1billion we thought it would be at the time of the February 24th[telephone] meeting and [the assumption of] $1 billion we set for thenext two weeks was that in the next four weeks required reservesturned out to be weaker than was thought at that time. So, borrowingdropped and the funds rate dropped. If required reserves had beenwhat we expected at the time of the conference call, borrowing wouldhave stayed at about $1 billion. In the event, borrowing has comeback up in the last couple of weeks.MR. WALLICH. We start by [making a borrowing assumption] inthis way; subsequently [the actual level of borrowing and thus] thefunds rate [are] free to move. To make the place for that--MR. AXILROD. I'm trying to say we're adhering to thenonborrowed path and borrowing is fluctuating.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I'd like to address this question to Peter or toSteve. As one whose brain is not as facile as many of yours, when I-16-3/31/81sense this confusion among so many of you, would there be an easier orsimpler way of conducting this to be more effective and less complex?MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe I didn't report on it clearly enough.I don't see a simpler way of accomplishing the Committee's objectives.MR. ROOS. A total reserves operation wouldn't help?MR. PARTEE. No, because still the question would be whetherwe were reducing it temporarily or reducing it for the whole period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The confusion here arises, in my mindanyway, [in that] I had kind of forgotten what the implicit path wasfor the next 4-week period. We certainly lowered the nonborrowedreserve path for whatever period of time was left in the then currentperiod being used for operational purposes. That's clear. It wasdone against the background of a high M2 figure and the relatively lowM1 figure at the time, and whatever judgments various members of theCommittee had in their minds as to what was going on in the moneymarkets. I did not remember that the new path was exactly the same asthe old path. That may be true. In any event, we forewent what couldhave been a possible increase in that path when [borrowing was]running low. I think that was implicit in the decision. And Irepeat: Once having made that decision, it was my conclusion or myinterpretation of that decision that the federal funds rate limit wasno longer binding. It's never binding in the way we formally setforth the directive, but we had an inconsistency, we had aconsultation, and we reset the reserve path. Whatever happened to thefederal funds from then on happened to the federal funds rate in thelight of that path, barring any further consultation, which we did nothave.MR. BOEHNE. Maybe we ought to have more confusion, because Ithink things turned out pretty well over the last six weeks! It seemsto me that we did follow the spirit of the new procedure without beingmechanical. There was some judgment involved, and interest ratesdropped; there was an adjustment to demand factors, but we avoided afree fall in interest rates, it seems to me. This is about the way Ithink we would have wanted things to come out, if we could have[planned it].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't disagree with that. We made thejudgment in the reserve path. I think what is different and what willappear a little different to the market when this decision ispublished is that previously when we ran into the federal fundsconstraint, we said something about the federal funds constraint perse. This time we didn't say it openly; we said it implicitly, in myjudgment. And the implicit judgment was reflected in the fact thatfor at least two weeks or maybe three weeks--I don't remember exactly-- the rate was clearly below the 15 percent limit.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, one week it was 13-1/2 percent onaverage. Another week it was just a hair below [15 percent].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just a little below. So, one week it wasway down and in only one other week was it below.-17-3/31/81MR. ROOS. You mentioned the events of the period, drainingreserves because of the--MR. STERNLIGHT. Just before that February 24 telephonediscussion, President Roos, when the funds rate was flirting with thelower bound--it was tending to drop down to 15 percent or lower--therewas one day when our projection suggested that maybe we should bedraining a little, but because the funds rate was dropping below 15percent we drained a fairly sizable amount, more than we would havedone just on the reserve numbers alone. I think that was a Friday;the following Monday, when the projection showed no need to drain,funds ran below 15 percent and we did drain that day. I'd say therewere those two occasions when we were guided by the funds rate.MR. ROOS. That was a time when we were concerned aboutreserves growing too slowly, right?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, reserves had been growing slowly but,also, the Committee had not held its telephone consultation. Afterthat, as the Chairman said, the funds rate did not constrain us and itdropped down a bit.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At this point, there is no floor tothe fed funds rate. And it seems to me that in the future, if wecontinue with this operation, every time there's a telephoneconsultation and a decision is made to change the nonborrowed reservepath--ignoring the floor or ceiling as the case may be--then for therest of the intermeeting period we are operating without a floor orwithout a ceiling.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could arrive at a different decision.I think that was the decision we arrived at [in this case].MR. PARTEE. We could do both, I think: reset our path andreset a floor or a ceiling. We just didn't want to reduce that floor,that's all.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I was a little confusedimmediately after the meeting until I talked with Paul a couple dayslater because during the consultation Paul had said--and everybodywent along--that he wouldn't be particularly disturbed if the fundsrate went as low as, say, even 14 percent and then there might ormight not be a need for another consultation. And yet we wererequired to add reserves when it was down to about 13-1/2 or 13-7/8percent. So, I was thinking that maybe we had a kind of rough floorset around 14 percent. But then I realized, after talking to him,that the way he was interpreting this was that we basically didn'thave a floor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say that if I had thought the fundsrate was declining way down and was going to stay down, obviously, wecould have had another consultation. But I didn't feel that wasnecessary in the--MR. PARTEE. You thought it was very temporary.MR. SCHULTZ. It's also important to clarify that there wasnothing mechanical here. Just because the funds rate dropped below 15-18-3/31/81percent didn't mean that automatically the Desk was going to drainreserves. They look at the projections, both the Board and New Yorkprojections, and they look at the funds rate as an indication of whatthe conditions are in the market. And if the rate falls below 15percent, then the market is saying that things are easier than theprojections would seem to suggest. So, it's important that maybethere was the sense that 15 percent was regarded as an absolute floorby the Desk and the minute it went below that, then an automaticresponse would be triggered. That is not the case. That's not theway the fed funds rate is being used at this point in time. It is aconsultation point; it is not a mechanical thing on which we target.MR. WALLICH. We also now use the term "taken over a periodof time," which indicates that there is that flexibility you speak of.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. I was obviously one who was thoroughlyconfused in this second four-week period. Is it not true, despite allof this, none of which I disagree with, that had we not adjusted thenonborrowed path back to where it was the probabilities are that thefunds rate would have been down over that three-week period, anyway--just as a behavioral thing.MR. STERNLIGHT. You're talking about the second four weeks?MR. CORRIGAN. Yes. Had we not readjusted the path back--MR. STERNLIGHT. We didn't readjust it back because we hadnever really adjusted that second four-week part of it.MR. AXILROD. I'm not sure what would have happened if theCommittee hadn't met on February 24th and said it was all right tolower the nonborrowed path for the last two weeks of the first four-week period.MR. CORRIGAN. Okay.MR. AXILROD. The funds rate would have dropped to, say, 2 or3 percent in that two-week period.MR. CORRIGAN. That I have no problem with.MR. AXILROD. And then looking at the projections of depositsand required reserves, our numbers would have suggested that adheringto the nonborrowed path going into the next four-week period wouldhave brought the funds rate back up to 13 or 14 percent at that time,because borrowing at the time of that February 24th meeting wasprojected at $937 million precisely. So, if the adjustment hadn'tbeen made and we had just followed the nonborrowed path constructedfor the first four weeks [in the] second four weeks, funds would havedropped to around 2 percent and then moved back up to on the order of14 percent. What the Committee's action effectively did was to stopthat drop down to around 2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the Committee's action did twothings. I'd just forgotten all the details here. It did what youjust said and it forestalled what might have been a judgmental-19-3/31/81increase in nonborrowed reserves to take account of the shortfall intotal reserves.MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. Well, I was assuming that all throughthat period normal procedures would have meant raising nonborrowedreserves even further. And, of course, I would just assume that thatwas forestalled by the Committee's action.MR. CORRIGAN. Let me ask my question differently. For that2-week period at the end of the first four weeks, I understandperfectly what was done and why it was done. I, too, have been underthe assumption, obviously erroneous, that the path that youestablished for the last two weeks of the first 4-week period was thesame one you were going to stay on for the second four weeks as awhole. My question is: Had that been done, would we still have seenin that roughly 3-week period the funds rate below the original 15percent floor?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it might have been to a lesserdegree. I can't say for sure exactly where it would have been.MR. PARTEE. We would have had $200 million more borrowing, Iguess, throughout that second four weeks than we in fact had.MR. STERNLIGHT. About $160 million [more] of borrowing.MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm sorry. I'm not misunderstanding yourquestion, Jerry, [but] I can't put the question in that framework.The way my mind works on this, there's something I'm missing on that.That path in the last two weeks was simply to keep borrowing at $1.1billion for a two-week period.MR. CORRIGAN. I thought it was a new path for six weeks.MR. AXILROD. Oh, no. I'm sorry, there must have beensomething lacking in our communication with the Committee at thattime, then. No, that was not--MR. CORRIGAN. That's all my question is. I thought it wasfor six weeks. And my question is: Had it been for six weeks as awhole, would we have had more borrowing and presumably a somewhathigher funds rate? And Governor Partee's and Peter's answer are thesame.MR. AXILROD. The question would have arisen as we looked atit, going into the next four-week period. Holding the path that wehad originally constructed after the Committee meeting, if it lookedas if borrowing was going to have to be very low again, then thepolicy decision for the Committee would have arisen.MR. CORRIGAN. I think we're saying the same thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I just want to go on record to say that Ididn't understand either, and that may not be unusual. I understoodthe same thing that Jerry Corrigan just explained. When we droppedthe nonborrowed path, I thought it was for the remaining weeks in the-20-3/31/81period before the next FOMC meeting, which would have been five or sixweeks.MR. AXILROD. It would have been six at that time.MR. GUFFEY. Further, there was a misunderstanding on my partthat when we took the action that the federal funds lower bound was nolonger a constraint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.MR. GUFFEY. I have no recollection of any discussion, eitherinferred or otherwise, indicating that to be true other than, Ibelieve, Mr. Chairman, you stated--and I may have asked on thetelephone what you meant by reaching the lower end--that the federalfunds rate would be something below 15 percent. I asked what area youwere speaking of and you would not be pinned down, as I recall. Butit was also fairly clear to me at that time, apparently erroneously,that as we moved into the remaining weeks of the period the 15 percentwould still be a constraint or a consultation would have taken place.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is an interpretation that oughtto be cleared up because my interpretation, as I stated it, was thatthe directive literally says that we will consult if these things areinconsistent. We consulted. And my assumption was that the decisionwas made and we recognized that we were flirting with 15 percent andit might go below. I think that much was explicit. And, therefore,the new reserve path was controlling. Now, that does not say as anexercise of judgment that if the rate had really gone down, we wouldnot have had another consultation. We would have.MR. MORRIS. I think I'm right, Steve, in saying that theCommittee actually got a lower nonborrowed path in the second 4-weekperiod because, in the absence of the [telephone] meeting, you wouldhave been required to raise the nonborrowed path.MR. AXILROD. Oh, absolutely. Sure, we would have beenrequired to raise it the first four weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably the source of theconfusion: What you would have done in the absence of that[consultation]. I had forgotten, but technically it seems to be thecase that the path was set just where it would have been settentatively four weeks earlier. But the issue just ordinarily arisesas a matter of discretion. If total reserves are running [off]enough, we raise it. We didn't do that.MR. AXILROD. We didn't do that in either the first four orthe second four weeks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope this has clarified things a bit.MR. AXILROD. I hope it's clear. I tried to explain in theBluebook that the sharp drop in nonborrowed reserves in February, whentotal reserves also declined about the same amount, reflected theadjustment made in lowering the path below where it had originallybeen set. And the rise then in March kind of offsets that, because we-21-3/31/81lowered it and kept the March levels. So, we get a bigger increase inMarch. The two months together are about right, so to speak.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's just what you said yesterday when Iasked precisely the same question, but we didn't focus on it this way.So I was still not communicating at that time.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions.SPEAKER(?). So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we shall ratify them.If we could take a moment, just in logical order, we have theauthorization for domestic open market operations to review. This,again, is a routine item for the [annual organization] meeting. Thereis no change proposed. It's the basic authorization for domesticoperations.SPEAKER(?). Move it.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion? Without objection, weshall approve it. Maybe we should just slip in this lending issue,too, while you have the table, Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't have anything to add to the shortmemo that went around on that. We believe that the lending operationto avert delivery failures remains a useful item in the goodfunctioning of the government securities market and, in that sense, isreasonably necessary to its smooth operation and, thus, an aid to theconduct of open market operations. And it's a modest money maker forus. It much more than covers its cost of operation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This one seems to be a little less routinethan the others. We do have to justify this in terms of promoting theends of open market operations, I guess, and that is a matter ofjudgment. Mr. Sternlight has so indicated. I'm not sure that this isa business that we should be in, as a matter of routine; it reallyshould have that justification. But we have the authorization andwe've done this for how many years now?MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh, 6 or 8 years.MR. MORRIS. Well, if we're going to continue to have $50 to$60 billion deficits, it's going to be an essential tool.MR. PARTEE. There would be a greater problem if we didn'thave a deficit. We wouldn't have so many securities available todeliver them.MR. WALLICH. And eventually own them all!-22-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think the markets should usethis as too much of a crutch. There is an effort--we charge a penaltyrate on this stuff compared to what the market charges, don't we?MR. STERNLIGHT. That's right, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is at least one indication of [ourobjective of] discouraging it and not using it excessively. Do wehave a motion on this one?MR. CORRIGAN. Peter, on the first page of your memorandum,there is a reference to the volume of trading and that it may have putstrains on your automatic clearing mechanism in government securities.Are you talking about our system or are you talking about the Streetsystems there?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I was not referring to the System'sopen market operations but to the volume of traffic through theSystem's clearing mechanism.MR. CORRIGAN. No. The clearing mechanism through the Fed?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. CORRIGAN. The dealers, then, have never set up any kindof interface of their own with our system to move a lot of stuff outof ours.MR. STERNLIGHT. No, but in a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I need a second.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will approve this.I think that is all the authorizations and directives and so forththat have to be approved. So, we can go to the substance of ourdiscussion. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.][Coffee break][MR. AXILROD. Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will just make one preliminary commentmyself: As we focus on these numbers, let us recognize that we arenot [skillful] enough to hit any of them. And we are engaged in anexercise [of assessing] which way the risks go in substantial part,following a period when velocity has been way off from expectations orinterest rates have been way off from expectations, however you wantto state it. In fact, they have both been off from expectations. Isuspect that when we sat here the last time we were all somewhat[expecting], in setting the reserve path, that interest rates weregoing to go up with any of the reserve paths. Instead, they came downby quite a few percentage points, which cast a quite different lighton things as the period progressed. There is nothing we can do to3/31/81eliminate those uncertainties. I just think we ought to be aware ofthem. Who would like to comment? Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a comment andask Steve some questions. These figures on adjusted M-1B, of course,are going to be the great guessing game of 1981. There has been a lotof solid analytical work done at the Boston Bank and by the Boardstaff on what happened in earlier periods when NOWs were introducedand so forth. We have some survey data already. We intend to do somemore surveys. Yet I, for one, Steve, end up with a feeling of alittle skepticism about how much we solidly know. I'm told by mystaff, whom I have had looking into this, that if we took at facevalue the survey data that came in from the banks and the S&Ls forJanuary and February and assumed that about the same results prevailedin March that prevailed in February, we'd end up with something like aweighted average for banks and S&Ls together of 82 percent of thesource of NOWs being demand deposits and the balance being non-transaction accounts. That is in a bit of contrast with the bestjudgment of the Board staff. It came out in the Greenbook, forexample, that in January 80 percent of the NOWs came out of demand,and the figure for February and March was 75 percent. Using thefigure that we came up with of an 82 percent weighted average as arough estimate for the first three months of the year--and I don't saythat I have complete certainty on that either--rather than the [Boardstaff] figures I just cited, we would come up with a 5.2 percentannual rate of gain, seasonally adjusted, for M-1B from December toMarch, versus your figure of 3.2 percent. In other words, it would bea full 2 percentage point difference and the level of M-1B would be $2billion higher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's from January to March or Decemberto March?MR. BALLES. December to March. And we would, in fact, befairly close to the midpoint [of our target]. It's just a word ofcaution that, from my standpoint at least, I would feel a little saferif this Committee for its own deliberations had in mind a range ofpossible outcomes rather than a pinpoint figure, because at least atthis point in time, I don't feel we have enough information to have asolid figure that's measurable to the extent we do for a lot ofeconomic statistics and so forth. Having expressed my misgivings, Iam turning to you, Steve, to see if you can reassure me or tell methat things are better.MR. AXILROD. Since I don't know the method of calculationused by your staff, I certainly can't do much reassuring. Thepercentages we took were based on the surveys from banks. We askedwhat percent came from demand deposits and what came from otheraccounts. We got similar percentages out of the Michigan survey ofconsumer attitudes. For the S&Ls we took the percentages that theHome Loan Bank people told us came out of their own accounts versuswhat came from other institutions. The amount that came from otherinstitutions we divided up in the same way as on the banks' reportsand we rounded a little. We came to 80 percent for the first monthand then 75 percent for the next two months. I'm not sure of theexact number, but I think it probably came out at something like 76 or77 percent. Probably the best thing to do is for us simply to send tothe Committee a note on the exact calculation method we used, and then-24-3/31/81it would be verifiable against how other people might like to viewexactly the same data.MR. BALLES. Maybe I could pinpoint this a bit more. Is myunderstanding correct--I got this from somewhere--that youjudgmentally shaded down somewhat the survey data that came in fromthe institutions, at least for January if not February, in terms ofthe percent they reported as coming from demand deposits?MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm not certain of that, PresidentBalles. I know that we tried to make allowance for the fact that thesample we used was wrong--well, not wrong, but it had more large banksrelative to small banks than there are in the nation as a whole. So,therefore, we tried to weight it so that we gave more weight to smallbanks [in the survey], in line with their role in the nation as awhole. We didn't simply average it, so to speak, which would haveresulted in a higher number because the sample had fewer small banksrelative to large banks than is true nationally. Now, that could be adifference. I don't know whether, in fact, it is.MR. BALLES. The only other comment I wanted to make on this,Mr. Chairman, is that some of these fine and really well-designedanalytical studies that were done, say, with respect to the NewEngland experience, lead to a conclusion that probably about two-thirds of the source of NOWs was demand deposits and the rest was fromsavings and so forth. We have a feeling that that might not beapplicable to the United States as a whole in 1981. We see that avery large number of respondents to the surveys, contrary to what Iunderstand was the case in New England, are permitting minimumbalances to be held in various forms of savings instruments, such aspassbook accounts, money market certificates, the 30-month smallsavers certificate, etc. At least in the West, the largest banks andthe largest S&Ls, in fact, are permitting those so-called minimumbalance requirements for NOWs to be held in savings instruments, whichI understand contrasts somewhat, Frank, with what had been theexperience in New England. If that practice should prevail as wecontinue to keep this under observation during the rest of the year,it might lead to a greater proportion of NOWs coming out of demanddeposits and less out of savings. So, there is the possibility thatthe present methodology could be understating the adjusted growth inM-1B. But I think that needs some more study.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think your comments are very welltaken in the vein that there is uncertainty here, which I doubt we canresolve completely, but we've got to keep looking at it. I think wejust have to recognize that there is a band of uncertainty. And inthat connection, we assumed in the target for the actual figures, theequivalent target, that this would pretty quickly go down to two-thirds, didn't we?MR. AXILROD. Well, but we changed that assumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have? We haven't published a new one.The question is when we should indicate that there is a new targetequivalent for the actual figures, if we change that assumption.-25-3/31/81MR. AXILROD. We have postponed that two-thirds because thelatest data coming in suggest that [proportion from demand deposits]remains very high, and we have stayed with the same [assumption].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But at some point we will have to changethat other target, won't we?MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. But we haven't. For surewe would do it around midyear. But whether we would want to do itbefore then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I might want to do it before then ifI thought it became big enough so that it was really significant.It's the other side of saying that this adjusted figure may understatewhat actually has been going on.MR. BALLES. I can only speculate that the extraordinaryincrease in velocity of M-1B, as reported based on the adjustedfigures, could not have been so big if the adjusted figures shouldhave been adjusted higher. We get those sorts of interactions goingon. So I, for one, just have to express some skepticism. All I'mdoing is trying to find out how solidly we know what the adjustedresults are. And, if anything, I have a hunch--and that's all it is--that perhaps we should be addressing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The answer, of course, is not verysolidly, which is a matter of curiosity. It may affect how peoplethink, if people were suspicious of this estimate we made of 75 to 80percent, depending upon what month. If you had to guess, is it thegeneral feeling that that percentage sounds too low, which is what youare suggesting, John?MR. BALLES. Yes.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, we did a more comprehensive survey ofinstitutions up in the Ninth District. While it wasn't a big survey,it was done very carefully; we did in-depth interviews with theaccounting officers and all the rest. We are finding the same thingMr. Balles was suggesting, including that for large numbers of theseaccounts the kicker is in what they call a "hostage" account, asavings account. And, therefore, there is no minimum balance to speakof at all in the NOW account itself. I'll send that to you, Steve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will never resolve this because, evenif we did it very accurately for this early period, which we can't, wejust don't know how it affects the behavior from then on. And nobanker can tell us because he doesn't know either.MR. MORRIS. I assume the purpose of this scheme is to reducereserve requirements.MR. FORD. Sure. They want to keep the money in the bank butin the form of an account that has the lower reserve requirements.That's why some of them, I'm told, are continuing the ATS approach,which one would have thought would have been outmoded.-26-3/31/81MR. BLACK. Well, a lot of them are not even offering NOWsbut are sticking with ATS accounts because that stays in for that veryreason.MR. FORD. So, from the [market] I think what you are hearinghere is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The ATS account ought to work the otherway. I would think the inclination would then be just to call thesavings account an ATS account, which means it's all--or a largeportion of it--coming out of savings accounts. It's very difficult.Well, Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. I wanted to ask one question, in the same vein asJohn's about how some of the technical work was done, on this issuethat has been raised by some of the money market gurus about theseasonal adjustment: As I understand it, for the first quarter of theyear it would not have made a lot of difference in the adjustments youmade for December through March, but looking ahead to the next quarterof the year, there might be some problems with the big seasonaladjustment. I would like to hear, Steve, how you factored that intoyour projections and whether we are facing the possibility of any bigsurprises just due to the fact that we haven't yet been able todevelop an appropriate seasonal adjustment.MR. AXILROD. We will be putting out the revised seasonals inMay. They are delayed this year because last year was so exceptionalthat we didn't feel we could run an ordinary X-11 and we were tryingto do some modeling to abstract from the credit control program, whichis a one-time event. But as a temporary ad hoc measure, we werethinking that what we should do is to take 80 percent or 75 percent,whatever the number is, of the other checkable deposit increase abovetrend in 1981 and put it back into demand deposits when we seasonallyadjust. So we would not be adding it in unadjusted; and that's whatthe market is focusing on. I asked the fellows back in January, rightafter the first week was so big, to keep track of a series on that tosee what difference it made. And as you suggest, it doesn't make asubstantial amount of difference in January, February, and March. Thegrowth rate in January, as we do it now, was 2.9 percent; if we hadthrown the demand deposits back in, it would have been 2.0 percent.This would be partially but not entirely offset in February; where wehave now a -2.3 percent, it would have been zero. And then in March,it doesn't happen to make any difference. You are quite right thatwhen the seasonal factors get large in April, May, and June, it makesmore of a difference. On our current estimates of the distribution ofOCDs between savings and demand, it would lower the growth rate forApril, and I'm going to round, by 2-1/2 percentage points. The growthrate adjusted "properly" would be lowered by about 2-1/2 percentagepoints. In May it would be raised by 3-1/2 percentage points and forJune it would be lowered by 2-1/2 percentage points. So, they're notquite offsetting, but that would be the relationship. We havepresented the targets as we're [making these calculations] now. If wehad presented them in these other terms, instead of 6 percent, let'ssay, for April, May, and June, we would have presented underalternative B something like 3-1/2, 9-1/2, and 3-1/2 percent. Aprilwould have been low, May high, and June low. But we are presentingthem on something like a straight 6 percent if you take alternative B.And as long as we measure against the target in a way consistent with-27-3/31/81how the target is set, I don't think we have troubles. We don'tintend to measure it in an inconsistent way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me what you are saying, if Iunderstand you correctly, is that one can pick any one of thesealternatives and seasonally adjust it the other way, which seems moresensible to me, and the growth would be bigger.MR. AXILROD. The growth would be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bigger or smaller?MR. AXILROD. Well, the growth would be somewhat smaller, theway it works out on these figures. The growth, by the way, fromJanuary to June evens out entirely.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be smaller in April, bigger inMay, and smaller in June.MR. AXILROD. The numbers I gave add up to 16-1/2 percent theother way and to a little under 18 percent the way we are doing itcurrently.MR. MORRIS. Well, it's still smaller than the average noisefactor in it.MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right. Also, we think theseasonal is going to change in any [event]. And that isn't done yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it bothers me a little, because itjust seems conceptually that we should seasonally adjust these things.MR. AXILROD. Oh, that's right. Given the size of theshifts, we should. But this is very ad hoc. We don't know because wedon't know how the OCD series is going to behave once [the shiftshave] happened. This is just putting back into demand deposits whatwas shifted out. But once it is shifted out, combined with somesavings deposits, it bears interest. Given that interest payments aremade, we don't know that the seasonal behavior is going to be thesame.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know you don't know. But as a firstapproximation I would think it would be more like the demand depositseasonal than no seasonal at all.MR. AXILROD. Well, I think [that's true of] the shift. Butotherwise I doubt it. When interest rates fall, I don't know what isgoing to happen to these accounts. Their behavior is going to be verydifferent, I'm convinced, than demand deposits. We might be able toget the cyclical movement out, but it's going to be something of aproblem. But we intend in May to get this all corrected. As of themoment, we are operating in this way. And I don't think the Committeeis being misled as long as we set the target and measure against it ina consistent way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.-28-3/31/81MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Balles talked about a range of possibleoutcomes. It's rather important to think along those lines because,at this point, it's easy to parade the horribles. In spite of mygreat respect for Mr. Kichline, I think his forecast is not likely tocome to pass. If you look at what he has for budget deficits--$85billion [in 1981 and $94 billion] in 1982--and then look where he endsup with his GNP forecast, which is for very sluggish growth, I thinkthe proper assumption is that we have very high interest rates duringthat period. From my discussions with bankers around the country, Ijust don't think the real world is going to operate that way. I getthe feeling that they're pretty concerned about the financialcondition of a lot of corporations out there, and I just don't think alot of companies can stand that kind of environment for that length oftime. I don't know what it's going to be like, but I doubt that it'sgoing to be like that forecast. Take two possibilities. One is thatthis M2 growth is more meaningful and that we get tax cuts thissummer, which are going to be very expansionary. We [could] get anenormous surge in money growth in the last half of the year and veryhigh interest rates, and then get socked like the devil in 1982. Ortake the other way around that we are going to have a much weakereconomy short term than now appears likely, so [money] growth is goingto be much slower. Add to the whole problem what the House BankingCommittee said--I was struck by this--which was that they could acceptthe upper end of the target ranges for monetary growth for 1981provided that budget and other fiscal policies offset the highunemployment effects that the monetary policy is expected to produce.That seems to me to be a scenario for absolute disaster. If they aregoing to continue to look to us to hold the line, I don't think wehave a choice. We've said what our path is going to be and, if wewere to attempt to ease, it's pretty clear that everybody would thinkwe had let the inflationary cat out of the bag. And it seems to methat interest rates would be even higher under those circumstances.So, I don't think we have a choice; we have to stay on our generalpath here. But the scenarios of what could possibly happen can bepretty wild. So, it's rather crucial at this point to try to retainwhat flexibility we can and to have some range of options because thisis a pretty tough period we are heading into.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure where that leaves us.Mr. Black.MR. SCHULTZ. Scared!MR. BLACK. I can't answer that question, Mr. Chairman. Ihad something in mind I wanted to ask and get an answer on. Bill Fordmade the main point I had, but I would add that what really concernsus is the bulge that we ordinarily get in M-1B in April on anunadjusted basis. If the NOW account portion is not somehowseasonally adjusted, that bulge is going to be overstated and thepsychological effects on the market concern us. We were going tosuggest that we try some kind of ad hoc adjustment on that, Steve,along the lines that you were playing with, just to avoid that adverseeffect. We played with it by applying the demand deposit seasonaladjustment to that portion of the NOW accounts that we thought cameout of demand deposits and the savings deposits seasonal adjustment tothe other portion. We estimated that in April, which was the monththat concerned us, it would probably be overstated by about 3-1/2percentage points, and that seemed to be a very bad time for that-29-3/31/81figure to be appearing because we seem to be making some progresstoward our ultimate objective. We were hoping we could do somethingabout that, although--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we seasonally adjusted it, it would be3-1/2 percent higher than if we didn't.MR. BLACK. No. If we don't seasonally adjust the NOWportion, the seasonal will pull [it up]. April has a very highseasonal adjustment factor and if we don't apply that to the NOWaccount portion, then we estimated--this may not be exactly right--MR. PARTEE. It's a build-up for the tax payment, I guess.MR. BLACK. --that it would be overstated by about 3-1/2percent above what it really was in fact, as nearly as we couldestimate at all. I'm well aware that we don't have all theinformation we need for any kind of rigorous seasonal adjustment, butthat one month really concerns us. It doesn't make that muchdifference in what The Wall Street Journal is covering, I don't think.But it could at that particular juncture.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I feel that we're really trapped ortripped up by our own procedures. We built in the expectation thatwe've lowered the ranges and yet we make no allowance for base driftin our targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say, if I may insert a commentrelevant to base drift, that I look at these targets somewhatdifferently. We look at these cones, which always gives us animpossible problem at the beginning of the year; because the cone isso narrow at the beginning of the year, we're always outside it. Ifwe were to attach this cone to where we, in fact, ended up last year--and we concede that we ended up high last year--and took the targetsfrom the fourth quarter and showed where we wanted to end up thisyear, I think one can argue that we are now about in the middle of therange where we should be. I am sorry that I don't have the picturewith me but we're about in the middle of that channel.MR. PARTEE. A longer range, sort of starting off in thebeginning of '80.MR. MORRIS. That's for M-1B, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. We're clearly high on M2 and M3; I'mjust talking about M-1B. In other words, stated another way, we endedup the year high, so having a low quarter brings us back to where weshould be.MR. WINN. That's right. That would be my point: We're inthe upper end of the old range even though we're below the range forthe--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or stated another way, we didn't changethe target's slope much. If you just extended that target for lastyear, we'd be at about the middle of it now.-30-3/31/81MR. WINN. Well, that again is where we've tripped up. If westart to adjust the aggregates for the transaction part of moneymarket funds, that is clearly one thing. It's not the total moneymarket funds, but we see the transfers going through on our checkclearing operations, so they are being used. Second, we have RPs andEurodollars and one can argue how much of that belongs in the picture.And if we adjust the aggregates on a real M-1B or transaction typebasis, it results in a much higher figure than we're reporting. So,not only have we got our targets out of focus but the bullets [withwhich] we're trying to hit the targets all seem off to me. We reallyhave two major sources of confusion for which I'm afraid we're goingto get beaten over the head no matter what evolves. Add onto that alook at the economic analysis: We have inventory certainly tight orunder control; we have consumers who certainly have behaved farstronger than anybody thought they would, but they're continuing to dothat; we've projected construction expenditures in office buildings,apartment houses, and hotels that really are starting to jump in avery big way; and we have the stimulus from the deficit that'scertainly a pretty big one. And we ought to recall that we've beenprojecting declines since 1979. Now, one of these times we may getthat, but we're not sure we're going to get that. So we're higher inthe range than we think we are. We're much higher if we adjust theaggregates. And we may have a stronger economic picture than we thinkwe are facing. All of these factors give me pause as we start to setour objectives for the next three months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, let me start with a wordon the price outlook. I sense for the first time at least a fewstraws in the wind that are consistent with some backing off oninflationary expectations. I don't think there's much hard evidenceone can point to, but I do get a little flavor of that. It's alsotrue that we could get lucky in terms of the consumer price indextoward the end of this year. Now, if the staff's estimates aboutmortgage rates [are right]--that they're just going to stay high--theypresumably won't be adding. And I think the outlook for food prices,assuming we continue to get some moisture in the Midwest, is a gooddeal better than it was even a few months ago.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you get some rain in the last fewdays?MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, some rain is starting to come. And theenergy price outlook, I think, is also distinctly better. So, maybethere's a little ground for optimism there. On the economy, I lookfor a flattening out in the second quarter, but I think the potentialfor strong upward pressures later in the year is very real. And inline with one of Mr. Schultz's two scenarios, I think the potentialfor strong financial pressures in the second half of the year andstrong pressures on money growth is very real. I noticed in Mr.Kichline's forecast, for example, that he has the Treasury borrowingalmost $50 billion, $49.2 billion, in the fourth quarter, which isconsiderably greater than even the $35 billion we had this [quarter].So, I sense that whatever problems we may have now with controllingmoney and interest rates are only going to get worse as the year goesalong, partly because the risks are that the economy is going to bestronger rather than weaker in the second half of the year. And I-31-3/31/81couple that with my sense that M-1B is giving us the wrong signals.On this money market fund thing, for example, we did a littleexercise. It doesn't mean anything, but just as an example: If youtook the growth in money market funds over December to March and justadded in one-tenth of the growth to M-1B, that raises the growth of M-1B for the quarter to 6.2 percent. And that, again, doesn't sayanything about this other matter that Mr. Balles was pointing toearlier.MR. FORD. How would you rationalize doing that?MR. CORRIGAN. No rationalization. It's just a guess, just anumber. You just take one-tenth of the growth in the money marketfunds phased in at the rate at which they actually grew and add thatinto M-1B.MR. PARTEE. But you should have taken two-tenths of thedecline in savings accounts and added that in, too. You didn't dothat.MR. CORRIGAN. Why should I do that?MR. PARTEE. Because savings accounts are transactionsbalances also.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, but they're in M2. I don't think itmakes--MR. PARTEE. So are money market funds.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, we can dispute that, but I think thisunderstatement of M-1B is very real.MR. PARTEE. I don't know.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, whether or not it is, I think it is. Itjust adds further weight to the argument that M-1B is giving us somefalse signals here. When I put it together, in terms of policy, Iwould not be allergic to giving a little more weight to M2 in linewith one of the points that Steve made. Also, the whole [situation],at least in my mind, argues in the direction of doing the best we cannow to keep well within the targets because later on I think it's onlygoing to get harder.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Looking at the situation that we have, theeconomy is much stronger than we had expected. Once again, we've hada recession predicted that so far hasn't materialized. As a result,the degree of slack in the economy and the pressure on prices andwages are less from excess capacity. The conclusion one is driven tois that our past policies, which we thought were quite restraining,were much less restraining. As for why that should have been, I sharethe views that have been expressed around the table. M-1B is probablymisleading. People are probably treating their money market mutualfunds and other sources of liquidity as at least a factor that allowsthem to use their checking accounts more actively. At the level ofholders of very large liquid assets, bear in mind that the Treasury-32-3/31/81has issued an enormous amount of bills, including cash managementbills, which at least go into L if they don't go into the loweraggregates. While these would be absorbed again as the Treasuryavoids borrowing and people use this liquidity to pay their taxes,nevertheless, there is probably some additional liquidity, and someresidual liquidity will remain. So, if we were to look at thesebroader aggregates, including all short-term assets, we'd probably seea higher degree of expansion. Now, M2 is probably a more relevantguide than M-1B. I don't want to bore you again with my views aboutinterest rates in real terms after tax and why they haven't been veryrestraining.As far as the outlook is concerned, I think there is a senseof unrealism about the Greenbook. It would be nice if things workedout that way with slow, stable growth. We have to bear in mind that[the level of economic activity] is really a little higher alreadythan we thought it would be as a result of the strong first quarter.But the realism of the outlook is undermined by the fact that we useM-1B at 4-1/2 or 4-3/4 percent. I think the chances are that we willbe pushed at least to 6 percent, the upper limit. We have had basedrift raising the whole level of the aggregates over time. So, I findit hard to believe that we'll get quite the same pressures in terms ofrestraint that are seen in the [staff's] outlook. I do see that we'regoing to get strong budgetary pressures. My impression is that therisks are very much on the up side and much less on the down side.That would encourage me now to want to accumulate such reserves ofrestraint as we can. We're lucky in a way to have undershot the[targets], at least with respect to the narrower aggregates. And I'dhusband this reserve. We'll probably be pushed off that point laterin the year. There's no reason to volunteer [to go] in that directionnow. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I would like to remind you that those deficitnumbers are not independent of the forecast. Our projected deficitfor next year is considerably above the Administration's, primarilybecause of a much, much weaker forecast--a 0.5 percent rate of realgrowth rather than 5 percent, and higher unemployment rates andinterest rates. I think we added back in about $18 billion forinterest payments based on our interest rate forecast rather than theAdministration's, and we're losing about $25 billion in deficit perpoint of unemployment, if you compare the 6 percent with 5 percent.So, if Henry's scenario that the risks are on the up side comes true,the size of the deficit will be considerably below what is beingprojected at the present time. As I understand this forecast, thestaff had a great deal of difficulty getting any of the GNP numbers towork out because of the paucity of money. It is a very tightforecast. And the interest rates that would have come out of just amechanical running of the model are considerably higher than what arebeing shown here. So, in contrast to what Henry says, I would thinkthat the risks are on the other side. The consumer is running out ofsteam; the automobile [sales] probably won't last. [Businesses] canslow down investment. I don't feel strongly enough about it to saythat [the risk on] the forecast is on the down side, because I thinkwe have some real demand pressures which are being suppressed, namelyin housing at the present time, which with any sort of readjustmentwould rise.-33-3/31/81This forecast is one of the gloomiest I've ever seen. And itcertainly is gloomier than any forecast that is in the public [arena]now, mainly because of the underlying assumptions about interestrates. I don't particularly want [policy] to let up. On the otherhand, I don't want to screw it down any harder at this point. Itseems to me that the best way to do this is approximately alternativeB because what Fred says about other corporations [is true of thethrifts]. We're going to have impacts on the thrifts. If we keepinterest rates up there, we'll get a lot of emergency reaction intrying to rescue them. A very good study was done here at the Boardon the number of corporations that have had their ratings in the bondmarket downgraded. It's not only surprising, it's fairly widespread.There are going to be a lot of corporations in trouble, and I don'tsee making it any worse for them. I would also point out that we haveM2 misspecified relative to where we've set the M1 measures. We havedecided to keep the M2 target where it was last year, even though thestaff's best estimate was that it would be higher. So we're trying toget M2 into a slot that's inconsistent with M1. And if we just lookat the fact that we're over [our target] on M2, I think that is goingto lead us to actions to depress its growth and depress the M1s [more]than ever. And we've got the money market mutual funds. We have aninterest-sensitive, very interest-sensitive, [component] in the M1measures, and if interest rates begin to drop, we're going to besitting here worrying about the fact that M2 is going down, not thatit's going up--and for [a reason] that's not connected with ourtargets. In terms of the alternatives, I come out for "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I have the same sense of disquiet that'sbeing voiced around the table, because somehow everything doesn't seemto hang together. We really can't explain why the economy has been asstrong as it has been over the fall and winter. And not being able toexplain why it has been so strong, we don't have a very firm grasp onwhat it's going to do in the period immediately to come. I think wehave to be pretty flexible and await developments. I have a sense oftrepidation that Fred's expectation is going to work out: That therest of the year will be stronger than we are now anticipating andthat there will be a tendency toward very rapid money growth. I hateto talk about these neat little adjustments of what ought and whatought not to be counted, but just in plain old M-1B terms, as velocityturns around, I think we're going to have very fast growth to contendwith. And the tax cut will [create] some stimulus to the economy and,therefore, a difficult situation for us to contend with as the yeargoes on from the standpoint of our target ranges.Now, I don't think interest rates are so low, as Henry does.Looking at the Bluebook [appendix], you find that the long-termgovernment bond yield is 13 percent, the long-term corporate bondyield is 14 percent, and the long-term mortgage rate is 15-1/2percent. It seems to me that those must all be positive real interestrates by some margin, but they are not, except in the case ofmortgages, having that much effect on behavior. That troubles mebecause I think they will come to have an effect on behavior. Andwhen attitudes shift, then we could find a rather sharp[deterioration] in the [economy]. So, I wouldn't urge deliberatelygoing about raising interest rates, but I think we ought to stick withthe course we've set. I didn't mean to offend Jerry on his money-34-3/31/81market fund calculation, but the fact of the matter is that theturnover of savings accounts is greater than the turnover of moneyfunds. So, if you add some portion of money funds in, you ought toadd some portion of the decline in savings accounts into thecalculation. You'll never reach an end on this because of the greatdifficulty of dealing with these problems.I come out, Mr. Chairman, somehow right where Nancy did. Ithink we just ought to follow alternative B, which is somewhat of amiddle course, and have plenty of room to adjust as we go along in thespring. I like "B" because it doesn't use up our room too rapidly.Our previous experience, you'll recall, is always that things go alongpretty well until we get to a double-digit month--and one will becoming before very long--and then perhaps we'll have to cope with avery low one. I think ["B"] is the way to go. I am troubled by theseasonal adjustment problem. If the April number has something like a3-1/2 percent overstatement, it's not going to be good psychologicallybecause it will probably give us a pretty high April number and willlook bad as it develops. I don't know what to do about it, but weought to think about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the other side of that coin is thatif we don't get a high April figure, we really have a much lowernumber than we think we have when we're publishing it.MR. PARTEE. Well, we might get a very high April figure.How would you handle 15 percent for April?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, at 15 percent it's not so bad. We'dknow it's high.MS. TEETERS. But remember last April we had an estimate atthis time of the year for a very large growth in April because of theenlarged refund. And, in fact, it came in at -14 percent, as Iremember.MR. PARTEE. Yes, there's tremendous volatility in thatmonth.MS. TEETERS. April is just a terrible month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have listened to all theseconcerns, which seem to be pointed in one direction. But it seems tome that the scenario could be quite different in that the secondquarter could turn out to be much weaker than the staff is projecting,and I'm inclined to think that that will be the case. Not that itwill be a second quarter such as we had last year, where we had a[GNP] drop at a 10 percent annual rate, but that it will be asufficient drop to put us in the situation of having to decide whetherwe are going to follow a monetarist course and let interest rates dropsubstantially or whether we're going to decide that we will do thingsdifferently this year--maintain a relatively high level of rates inthe face of a weak economy and perhaps produce a much poorer thirdquarter than we have projected as well. It seems to me that this isjust as logical a scenario as the ones that have been written so far.The fact is that at the moment we just don't know to which of these to-35-3/31/81attach the higher probability. So, therefore, the staff comes outwith zero, which I think is a commendable position if you have to comeout with a number. But I'm really concerned about facing exactly thesame problem we did last spring.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's much easier to disagree with thestaff forecast than to come up with one of your own.MR. PARTEE. It's the statistical--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does this lead you to any particularconclusion among these alternatives?MR. MORRIS. I think "B" is the one that I would support.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though I agree that there's alot of uncertainty as to how much the second quarter will weaken andhow much increased strength in the real economy there will be in thesecond half of the year, I feel that there's a greater presumption ofstrength in the monetary aggregates. Now, I'm not talking aboutApril, but we're not likely to see the same velocity of circulation,and there are increases in defense spending and tax cuts of some kindcoming long. Therefore, it seems to me that to position ourselves asflexibly as possible, we ought to aim for a return to the bottom endof the range by June rather than to the midpoint. However, eventhough that's alternative B, I think a $1.3 billion borrowingassumption would be just as compatible with that as a $1.5 billionassumption. I'd go on to suggest that to the extent opportunitiesarise for a discretionary adjustment of the nonborrowed reserve pathduring the intermeeting period that we bear in mind the overshootingof M2. If that continues to overshoot in a significant way, thatshould be factored in. Our analysis is that alternative B, even witha $1.3 billion assumption, probably means a rise in the fed funds rateof maybe a point or so from present levels. That's a very roughguess, but we might have something close to the 15 to 17 percentrange. If you take the midpoint, it would be a marginal increase, butI don't think it would be that significant that it would cause a lotof reaction. And that's the best position we can be in; I think itwould be a great mistake to go either to "A" or to "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Yes, sir. I would opt for alternative C and Iwould base that on the following rationale: I assume that our primaryobjective is to achieve a start on reducing the rate of inflation wehave had and that there is an effect on inflation of reducing thegrowth of, let's say, M-1B. We had M-1B growth last year at about a7.3 percent rate. A reasonable reduction, if we're able to achieveit, would be from that 7.3 percent to 6 percent growth, let's say, forthe period from February through the end of the year. If we set thepaths for growth as reflected in "C," I think we can achieve that 6percent annual growth. I think we can do it without having animpossibly low rate of output. We project, assuming 6 percent M-1Bgrowth for the year, real GNP of something in the area of 0 to 1percent. That's obviously slow growth, but it's not negative growth.I don't think that we can achieve a fast growth of output and still-36-3/31/81have the necessary degree of monetary restraint to achieve a reductionin inflation. Now, that 6 percent I'm referring to is on anunadjusted basis. We assume--and maybe some would argue-- that NOWaccount flows have almost ceased and that in the period ahead we canuse an unadjusted aggregate and not be in trouble inasmuch as webelieve that the big NOW account change has already occurred. So, tomake a long story short, I think the best way of achieving our targetsand the best way of bringing down M-1B growth as necessary to have asalutary effect on reducing inflation is "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve, what is the latest on NOW accountgrowth in the last couple of weeks? I forget. Has it come downfurther or not?MR. AXILROD. Let me get the figure. Here it is. For theweek of the 18th, it's only about $500 million and we're projecting$600 million for the week of the 25th. Our pattern had been that bigincreases occurred in the first couple of weeks and then they sloweddown in the last couple of weeks of the month. In the early part ofthis month, increases had been about $2 billion. I would assume fromhere on out--or early next month--that the increases might be more inthe $1 to $1-1/2 billion range and then come down again. We are at ahigher rate of growth than we expected.MR. PARTEE. You are talking about several billion a month.MR. MORRIS. Actually, Larry, the New England NOW accountexperience would indicate that we are not going to have a completeadjustment to NOW accounts for two years. The idea that the countryis going to adapt to this in a few months just does not jive with theNew England experience. Now, maybe the rest of the country moves alot faster than we do in New England, but I doubt it.MR. SCHULTZ. The fact that we have much higher interestrates now indicates that the adjustment would take place more rapidly.We are seeing shorter lag times in everything.MR. MORRIS. Well, it may be more rapidly, but to argue thatthe adjustment is largely over I think is just wrong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will see. It would certainlyease our problems if it were over fairly soon. I'm a bit confused bywhat you said, [Larry]. I just want to clarify it. I'm a littlesurprised that you came out for "C." It's against that backgroundthat I ask this. My confusion is what numbers you are using. Thenumbers in the table, as I understand it, are adjusted M1 figures.So, when you talk about 7.3 percent last year, you are talking aboutthe unadjusted figure.MR. ROOS. Yes, I'm talking about the unadjusted figures:4-1/2 percent March to June M-1B on page 7 under alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that 4-1/2 percent is adjusted.On an unadjusted basis, that means what: 6-1/2 percent or something?MR. AXILROD. Last year?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, right now.-37-3/31/81MR. AXILROD. 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's only a 1-1/2 point difference now?MR. AXILROD. That's our estimate. That's from March toJune. From February to June it's 2 percentage points different.MR. ROOS. In other words, that would give us a 6 percentunadjusted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And if you talk about 6 percent throughthe year unadjusted, this estimate may be wrong in the amount ofshifting. You may be assuming less shifting but, as we have [now]estimated, it's at the bottom of the range for the unadjusted figure.MR. ROOS. I think that's 6 percent from the first quarter of1981 through the period ahead.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Six percent from the first quarter throughthe last quarter, unadjusted?MR. ROOS. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would give you slightly less than 6percent for the year then, which is at the bottom of the target thathas been set. I just wanted to make sure that's what you were saying.MR. ROOS. That's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to come in at the bottom of thetarget range for the year. I just wanted to clarify that. Thatmeans, in terms of the adjusted target, that you would be happy tocome in at 3-1/2 percent or so.MR. ROOS. Yes, but we have some differences with the degreeof adjustment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that I understand may be a problem.But it's in that neighborhood, right? Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. This futility that we all encounter in trying toforecast the economic outlook is perfectly understandable. Thatreinforces my basic belief that we ought never to lose sight ofsomething that I think we all agree on: That we have to get theseaggregates down over the long run. If we work in that direction, thenwe have an automatic stabilizer in place. And that is something wesometimes forget, I think. If the economy does turn out to bestronger, as it may, then that would tend to exert some kind ofbraking action; and if it turns out to be weaker, which I think youmade a good case for, Frank, then we have an automatic stabilizer onthe down side. So, in choosing our short-run targets, we always oughtto bear in mind the risk involved. We have had three years in whichwe haven't been able to reduce the rate of growth in the aggregates asmuch as we wanted. We came in a little above target last time, sothat leads me to suggest that we ought to resolve the risk by choosinga little lower rate than we otherwise might. And I think around 6percent on an unadjusted basis, as Larry suggested, would be aboutright between February and June.-38-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The unadjusted basis?MR. BLACK. Right. Unadjusted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, you're on "C" basically; I just wantto be [sure].MR. BLACK. A little above "C" or between "B" and "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Six percent on an unadjusted basis, fromwhat Steve just told me, is equivalent to "C."MR. PARTEE. March to June is shown on the next page here;it's 6 percent.MR. BLACK. Yes, I'm talking about February to June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're below "C" then, if you'retalking about February [to June].MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's 7-1/2 percent on "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to clarify where you are.MR. BLACK. Let me get my [Bluebook].MR. FORD. It's on page 8.MR. BLACK. Page 7 is what I'm talking about.MR. PARTEE. Well, you're talking adjusted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're adjusted.MR. FORD. They're adjusted. The unadjusted is on page 8.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Keep these two pages in mind.MR. FORD. Do you know what they did? What's causing theconfusion, I think, is that the staff switched what they put inparentheses and what they don't--MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at the last line on page 8, asI understand it--. It doesn't seem right. Well, we don't look atMarch to June [on a quarterly average basis].MR. BLACK. You want to look at February to June or March toJune.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right. February to June orMarch to June, whichever one you prefer to look at.MR. BLACK. Yes, I thought I was in between "B" and "C"[with] the 6 percent on the unadjusted. The unadjusted is at the top,isn't it, and the adjusted is at the bottom? I meant 6 percent on anunadjusted basis.3/31/81MR. BALLES. Vice versa, Bob.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait a minute. We are saying on anunadjusted basis, February to June produces an adjusted figureconsiderably below "C." We better all try to get this straight in ourminds. I think the confusion is because of the parentheses. The realfigures are in parentheses; the adjusted figures are not. So, if youwere saying 6 percent on the unadjusted figure, you're at only 4percent on the adjusted figure, which is below "C."MR. BLACK. Well, I did not mean to be below "C." I'mconfused on this. It's devilishly confusing anyway. I thought what Iwas choosing was something between "B" and "C" on M-1B on chart 1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's okay. Those are the adjustedfigures.MR. BLACK. Okay. Well, somewhere in between there, erring alittle toward "C" is really what I had in mind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.MR. BLACK. I [understand] this well periodically and then Iget myself confused. It's tricky business.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's easy to get confused. I think we hadbetter be sure what we have decided before we go on. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I don't think I can add to the confusion, andcertainly I won't try! I think a good plan, when you don't know whatto do or what is going to happen, is to take the middle ground, and itseems to me that "B" captures that about as well as anything. So, Iwould be for "B." I would like to pick up on a point that Nancy made,however. The M2 target that we have is quite unrealistic in the sensethat it's not consistent, at least in the staff's judgment, with theM-1B target. So, I don't think I would be maneuvering M-1B around agood bit to hit an unrealistic M2 target, which is another way ofsaying that I don't think M2 is much of a refuge just because we arehaving trouble knowing what is happening to M-1B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I recognize, like Governor Wallich,that the economy has turned out to be stronger and has remainedstronger for a longer period than one would have expected.Nevertheless, it's hard to see where the sources of continued strengthwill be. It's hard to see that the saving rate will fall much furtherthan where it is at the present time and, of course, the outlook forgrowth in income does not leave much room for consumers to continue tospend heavily out of income. So, I wouldn't see strength continuingto come from the consumer sector. Again, it's hard to see that therewill be any strong surge in investment spending. So, in contrast tosome of the views that have been expressed around the table, it seemsto me that the staff forecast is certainly as good as any I have seenand probably better than most. For lack of a better forecast, I wouldbase my expectations on the staff forecast.-40-3/31/81In the circumstances, I think we need to preserve ourflexibility and, as has already been expressed, it probably would bestbe preserved by alternative B. I believe that in the circumstances weshould give somewhat more weight to M2. Alternative B would do thatto a degree. Certainly it allows for a gradual return of M-1B to alower range in time. Hopefully, over the period of the year, we willget back closer to the top of the target range. I think the risk ofalternative C is that we may force higher interest rates over time--interest rates higher than are likely to be sustained. And we maythen find ourselves facing a rather sharp fall-off from the peak ratesthat might be reached. So, I think alternative B is the one thatassures us the most flexibility, the most ability to maintainstability, and at the same time maintains a posture of significantrestraint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to thestaff forecast for the economy, I don't know that there's very much todisagree with if you can't come up with a better forecast. But sinceI'm not a professional economist, I guess I can take the liberty ofsuggesting that the forecast in the past has consistently undershotthe actual performance. And queuing off of that history, I wouldbelieve that we may be looking forward in the period ahead to somewhatstronger growth than is evidenced by the staff forecast in theGreenbook. Having said that and then looking at what is described asthe downward shift in demand for money that has been very great in theperiod just passed--and the sub-talk that we'll return to some morenormal level in the period ahead--it suggests that we are going tohave very strong money growth as we move to the second quarter andperhaps into the third quarter. If that's correct, it seems to methat we ought to take what we can get now, and that would suggest atleast "B" and perhaps "C." And since I can't decide between the two,I would take something in between. The borrowing level that has beendescribed in the Bluebook as being consistent with alternative B, andI believe that's $1-1/2 billion, seems a bit high to me. Let me makethe point that there has been some discussion about whether or not M2should be taken into consideration for the period ahead. I'd like tosee it taken into consideration in a sense that it is running veryhigh. And at the time the staff sets the paths for the period aheadand the borrowing level consistent with those paths, M2 should beeither explicitly in the directive or, because of the discussionaround this table, implicitly be taken into consideration and notlowered. Thus, that suggests a bit firmer policy, or closer to "C"than to "B." I would just come out someplace between "B" and "C,"which is about 6 percent from February to June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was that last comment? It's the lastsentence I need.MR. GUFFEY. It's 6 percent if you are looking from Februaryto June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.MR. GUFFEY. M-1B goes to 6 percent and M2 to 12 percent; orif you are looking at March to June, it's about 5-1/2 and 10-1/2percent.-41-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, in terms of these alternatives, Itoo would favor "B" for many of the same reasons that have alreadybeen cited. But I do have one question. Perhaps I am the only onearound the table who doesn't understand this, but I wonder if youwould repeat what you believe to be the significance of the federalfunds range associated with "B." We've had an extensive discussion--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Axilrod would have to addressthat. I will give you a general answer: The federal funds range thatwe cite in the directive is the trigger for consultation, and thenwhat it means depends upon the nature of the consultation.MR. BALLES. My further question, Mr. Chairman, would be withrespect to the telephone conference call on February 24, when Ihappened to be out of town and wasn't able to participate. It wasdecided, as I remember from reading the memos, that there would be nochange in the official funds rate range at that time. But was thatalso meant to imply that the Desk was free in some sense to come inwith an actual federal funds rate lower than the officially specifiedrange? If that is the case, is that also what is suggested withrespect to this future period? That's what I'm trying to get someclarification on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm just taking it literally. I'mnot talking about what numbers we put in there. The purpose of thefunds range is that if an inconsistency develops, as it says, we willhave a consultation. What happens during that consultation is an openquestion. It depends upon what the results of the consultation are.MR. BALLES. Well, to take an extreme point of view perhaps,I would want to know why it wouldn't make more sense to have a federalfunds rate range centered pretty much around where we are now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my comment is entirely independentof where this federal funds range is set, which is something nobodyhas addressed yet. You may want to address yourself to that question.MR. AXILROD. I probably should say something. There are anynumber of ways one could set this range. One is to project whatinterest rate level the staff thinks is consistent with theseaggregate targets and set a range of plus or minus 2 to 3 percentagepoints around that. That would again be different than taking thecurrent range, because we don't think the current range isparticularly consistent except for "A." We have done that in the pastunder previous kinds of operating procedures. I have felt reluctantin general to make the range substantially different, even though ourstaff forecast might be substantially different in a sense, from wherethe Committee had been. So, what these ranges really represent issome skewing of the present Committee range; they are skewed to allowfor where we think the funds rate will be, but there is more room ontop because our projection is that, if anything, rates will go higherthan where it appears the rate will start off and not that they willgo lower. So, they're in some sense judgmental in that respect,trying to distend the existing range to make allowance for how wethink the funds rate comes out of the analysis.-42-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will tell you what my personal attitudetoward setting those ranges is. I look at what the staff has to say,but I don't think that's the controlling thing. It's where do we wantto have a consultation if it went either down or up, which may or maynot be consistent with where the staff estimates that the market mightbring it. Those estimates are not very good. They may be the bestestimates that can be made, but I look at the range and say, as afirst approximation: What level of interest rates might disturb usenough to want a consultation?MR. GUFFEY. That would suggest we could narrow it to 2percentage points.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd be having a consultation allthe time, I suppose.MR. BALLES. Well, to take an extreme view, which I'm notnecessarily proposing here: Since the recent fed funds rate has beenaround 14 percent, if we want to allow some room both on the up sideand the down side for the Desk to operate without the necessity of aconsultation, we might specify a range of something like 11 to 17percent to go along with "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Quite possibly.MR. BALLES. If there's some flaw in that argument, I wishsomebody would point it out to me; there may be a flaw.MR. AXILROD. Well, it depends. There's no flaw in the logicof the argument, clearly. But the staff expectation of "B"--what wepresented--is a borrowing level of $1-1/2 billion. If the Committeechose that borrowing level, I believe that the funds rate probablywould be above 15 percent and maybe closer to 16 percent, althoughthese relationships are loose. In that case, the range around thatwouldn't be 11 to 17 percent; it would be quite a different range ifthat was where you wanted to start and you wanted to allow variationaround that. If you wanted to start at 14 percent as you weresuggesting and allow variation around that, then I don't think theborrowing level we specified for alternative B is consistent with thatapproach.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we have two choices. One isto take what we think it probably would be--let's say 15 to 17percent--and then have a symmetrical range with enough room on eitherside. Or we can deliberately put it off center from that 15 to 17percent--let's say, John Balles' 11 to 17 percent--because we want totrigger a consultation at 17 percent. I think we are better offcontinuing to have a 5-point range that is symmetrical [around] themost likely area it will be within because the Chairman can alwayscall a consultation anyway.MR. MORRIS. My concern, given my view of the second quarter,is whether, using John's range, we would want to allow the funds rateto go down as low as 11 percent before consulting. That's why I wouldprefer a higher lower limit than a lot of you.-43-3/31/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If 15 to 17 percent is the best guessof the staff [at the Board] and in New York, then we can talk aboutsomething like 14 to 19 or 13 to 19 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we haven't set the borrowing levelyet. Let's finish the go-around and we'll get back to this subject.It's obviously a variable we have to set. Who hasn't been heard from?Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I share many of the concernsthat have been expressed with respect to the forecast. I think theeconomy is and probably will be a little stronger than is projected.Possibly I'm influenced by the people I've talked to down in our partof the country where things tend to be a little stronger. Also, Ihave a concern, obviously, about inflation in that there doesn'tappear to be very much progress in that regard. For the reasons thathave already been discussed with respect to the uncertainty about M-1Band also for the arguments that Steve presented on M2, my inclinationwould be to put a little more emphasis on M2 at least for the timebeing. I favor maintaining a fairly firm stance in the policy areaand I do have some sympathy for alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle.MR. DOYLE. Mr. Chairman, as many others have today, I comeout on the gloomy side of the forecast on the real economy. Theprincipal reason for that is that it's just inescapable in ourDistrict to come to any other conclusion. I know that the plight ofthe automobile industry has been widely acknowledged, but I think it'simportant that the impact of that industry and the state it is in beseen in terms of what it does to us in the Seventh District. Forexample, there are all kinds of numbers on just what the employmentbase is, but I will cite just a couple of observations about that.Even little American Motors, which I think had less than 2 percent ofthe market last year, is the largest single employer in the state ofWisconsin. While hundreds of thousands of jobs have gone down on theproduction side, their board just recently announced that they haveterminated 60,000 salaried employees, and a cut into the staffing sideis quite a change. The second point is that the plight of Chrysler, Ithink, has tended to overshadow somewhat some of the problemsthroughout the rest of the industry. Of all of the automobiles soldin the country last year--just the domestic models--Ford only had twomodels in the top ten, and one of those was the Pinto which is nolonger made. One has to go all the way down to about the 21st rankbefore we find the car that used to be the number two and number onebest seller in the country: the large size Ford. The most difficultaspect, however, is the future. The industry has always been acyclical one and it has always been optimistic. But it is extremelypessimistic. I think that relates primarily to two things. One isthe difference in wage [costs] as they perceive them between theimports and the domestic models. While those figures again are allover the board, they could be greatly understated if we take intoaccount such factors as absenteeism and other benefits for theAmerican worker. And the second is the growing conviction among thedomestic automakers--and we hear this more all the time--that thelarge car must come back in order for them to survive. They areconvinced that, given the choice between a high-priced small car and ahigh-priced larger car, the consumer is going to take that large car.-44-3/31/81I'm not saying they're right; I'm merely reporting how they feel aboutit. But if they are wrong, that will have a very serious impact downthe road.Despite that, there are some bright spots in our area,particularly in steel and capital goods. But on balance, and despitethe suggestion--and certainly our directors feel very strongly aboutthis--that we should be easing economic policy, strong inflationarypressures still persist. That's particularly true in agriculture,where we probably have been lucky so far as price increases areconcerned, as others have commented here. We possibly will seecontinued upward pressures on prices toward the end of the year. Andbeyond that, any arguments toward easing tend to focus more on thecost of money. In fact, I think many of us feel the reason whyautomobiles, for example, are not selling is because of the pricesrather the cost of money borrowed to acquire them. So, on balance, Iwould concur with alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. According to my little checklist, Mr.Ford, you talked but you didn't express any conclusion about where weshould go.MR. FORD. Well, after listening to all the discussion, Ifrankly am confused by the indicators we're getting on the realeconomy. I've never been a great believer in trying to fine-tune theeconomy from one month or one quarter to the next, anyway. I come outbetween "B" and "C," where a number of other people have, with JohnBalles' reservation, however, that we ought to allow the lower end ofthe funds rate range to be at least somewhat lower than what the rateis today as we're sitting here. I'd be inclined to go for a "B-"solution with a little more stringency in the control of theaggregates growth and a little more attention to M2. Although Nancy'sargument about the unreliability of M2 also concerns me, I feel morenervous about the problems with M-1B than I do about the problems withM2. And looking at the growth rates that the staff has for M2 inthese various [alternatives], I'd lean toward trying to come down onM2 a little harder than "B" with an in-between policy prescriptionsomewhat like a number of others have expressed, except with the fedfunds range having a lower low end that will allow some flexibility inthe next few days so that if the futures market for the T-bills, forexample, is right, we don't have to be on the phone with each othernext week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich, you were not veryspecific. I gather you are on the lower side of things.MR. WALLICH. I was for "C," and I would like to see thefunds range a little higher than it is there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A little higher?MR. WALLICH. Higher.MR. PARTEE. He always goes that way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't quite sure how to interpret you,Mr. Winn, but I thought you were in the same direction. Is thatcorrect?-45-3/31/81MR. WINN. Oh, no, "B" to "C," or something like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. I'm kind of a "B-," but I could go with "B" ifwe put a little more explicit weight on M2, even if just in terms oflooking at the path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. I was arguing against "A" and "C." So, I'm for"B" and I tend to agree with Tony that we ought to start out withborrowing around $1.3 billion. And I would go with a federal fundsrange of 12 to 18 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a lunch for Mr. Mayo and Idon't think we're going to complete this [discussion] before lunchwithout forcing things a little faster than I think is appropriate,considering the uncertainties here. It's clear that nobody has beenfor "A." There are a lot of "Bs," quite a few "Cs," and some inbetween "B" and "C." We really have had very little discussion of thefunds rate until very recently. I am comfortable myself on this. Idon't think I would be quite comfortable flat out aiming for "C." Iwouldn't be very comfortable going much above "B," depending upon howthings happen here. It's a question of how we posture ourselves onborrowing and the funds rate and how we react to the inevitableuncertainties that arise. I may feel differently about the borrowingand the funds rate or whatever, depending upon what happens in thenext couple of weeks. If it remains very quiescent for the nextcouple of weeks, we have quite a lot of room for growth. If wesuddenly get a jump in April, we're on the other side of the fence,and I think we will need a little discussion of how to proceed undervarious hypotheses--or at least two hypotheses. One is if moneysupply comes in weak in the short run and the other is if it comes instrong in the short run. When is lunch scheduled--at 1:00 or 1:15p.m.?MR. ALTMANN. Guests are arriving in your office at 1:15 p.m.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if it's 1:15, I think we can proceeda little further. I'm a little worried about how the directive iswritten in the light of the various options before us. In generalterms, I take it that people are prepared to react fairly strongly, bywhich I mean they are prepared to see the borrowing level go up and adiscretionary adjustment in the path or whatever, if [monetary growth]began running significantly above "B." Nobody has been for above "B,"so I assume that that is the implication of that approach. I assumethat if we really got below "C," let's say--and there isn't a very bigmargin between these--in the way the numbers came in, that nobodywould resist a decline in interest rates in that possible scenario.Where has the borrowing been just recently? It's under $1 billion,isn't it?MR. STERNLIGHT. This week it's coming in a little higher.It's averaging about $1-1/2 billion because one large bank borrowedsubstantially this past Friday and that is tending to raise thisweek's level. The implicit level that we're shooting for in this week-46-3/31/81is about [$1.150] billion, but it seems to be running higher thanthat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's that high, [$1.150] billion? I guessI would at least raise the question why we should start out any higherthan where we are, given that the money supply isn't moving in anyparticular direction. It's contrary to a "B to C" view of thingsuntil we get some evidence that it is moving in one direction oranother. I just don't feel confident enough about any of theseforecasts to suggest a strong view that we should move off theexisting level. But the implication is--you know, literally it canhappen in a week--that if a great big figure comes in as it sometimesdoes, assuming that it either happens in a week or over the course oftwo or three weeks, we would be prepared to move the path prettyquickly if we felt it was getting above the "B" path.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't March fairly strong, Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. I don't know how tointerpret it. The latest estimate is 8 percent or 8-1/2 percent.MR. AXILROD. Yes, 8-1/2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you just look at March in isolation,that's a reasonably big figure. If you look at it against theprevious two months, it doesn't seem very big, and the most recentfigures are slack. And if I take the revisions as my leadingindicator--that has been the most reliable indication--they're notvery clear but they're certainly not being revised upward as they dowhen this gets a lot of momentum. If anything, the latest revisionshave come in a little weak, haven't they, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Yes. Last week we revised down the [mostrecent] weeks in March.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't March M2 still runningaround 19 percent?MR. STERNLIGHT. It's 16-1/2.MR. AXILROD. Yes, M2 is around 17.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 is certainly high; there is no questionthat M2 is high. The prevailing view--and I should say that noteverybody mentioned it--among those who did mention it, with at leastone exception, was to give some weight to M2. And I think that that'simplicit. I should, though, make it explicit in what I'm saying, thatwe would give some weight to M2 in adjusting the reserve path. Again,I'm not quite sure what number to put down in the actual directive.But if I read the Committee right, the members are certainly moredisturbed about exceeding "B" than falling somewhat short of "B."MR. PARTEE. So long as it isn't short of "C," I think Iwould agree with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably a fair summary.What bothers me is how to word this. I'm not sure there's any massivedifference of opinion. I do think all these federal funds ranges seemtoo high. All these ranges as stated, given the uncertainties that-47-3/31/81exist, may be quite appropriate in terms of the best estimate thestaff can make. But I would get worried if the funds rate shot up to20 percent here, quite frankly, without reconsidering just where wewere. I would not get particularly worried if it went down to whereit was before, conceivably, depending upon how business [conditions]unfold in the next few weeks. The lowest was 13-1/2 percent on aweekly average basis. I can imagine circumstances in which that wouldnot be at all disturbing and may be desirable. The numbers I hadscratched down here before I heard any conversation were 12 to 17percent, but I had no particular brief for that exactly.MS. TEETERS. Why don't we make it 12 to 18 percent, as Fredand I [suggested].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is symmetrical around where we are,sort of.MR. PARTEE. Where are we--around 15 percent or plus alittle?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this week, I guess it would be alittle plus.MR. PARTEE. Probably 18 percent, given--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The most recent figure is 14-1/2 percentor something?MR. STERNLIGHT. This week it's averaging 15.07 percent sofar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it will probably ease for the restof this week, given all the borrowing that has already taken place.That still doesn't tell me how to write the directive, which makes mea little hesitant. But I suppose we could put in a number somewhatbelow "B" if that captures the center of gravity, with whatever fundsrate range--MS. TEETERS. We've used language in the past that gave anumber and then said we wouldn't be disturbed if it fell slightlyshort of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we could use that kind of language.Maybe that captures it. We could say "B" or lower, depending upon--MR. PARTEE and MS. TEETERS. Somewhat lower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the language we've used before?It was "somewhat lower depending upon"--MR. AXILROD. I think "or somewhat lower."MR. ALTMANN. "Somewhat less."MR. AXILROD. Well, we had language about interest rates--that you were not forcing them down.-48-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Did we actually put that in thedirective or was that--MR. AXILROD. There was such language. I'd have to look itup, but there was such language.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe that is the kind of languagewe need here. Can you provide that language to us, Mr. Secretary?MR. ALTMANN. Possibly.MS. TEETERS. What have the borrowings averaged in the lastfour weeks?MR. STERNLIGHT. Last four weeks?MR. AXILROD. Well, in the last three weeks, which is easy to[calculate], they were almost $800 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but what do we actually put in the[path]?MR. AXILROD. But before that, they were in a range of $1.1to $1.7 billion in that one exceptional week.MS. TEETERS. So $1.3 billion would be an increase in theborrowing level over where we've been most recently?MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. In some sense, for this four-weekperiod that is ending, we are aiming at an average level of borrowingsomewhere on the order of $900 million. We're aiming this week at$1.2 billion because in the earlier weeks borrowing had dropped wellbelow that $900 million. So, it's coming up this week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just point out the consequences,not just the arithmetic consequences, of this decision in terms of itsimplications. If we went with "B" and if the forecast is [right]--andI think most people agree with it in terms of tendencies toward a weakeconomy in the short run and weaker than average in some sense for theyear--a 6 percent growth in M-1B in the second quarter maintainedthrough the rest of the year would leave us within our target, butbarely, with the prospect of a pretty good interest rate fluctuationif this next quarter is really soft. "B" potentially forces [thefunds rate] up against a natural tendency. "C" continued through therest of the year, I guess, brings us--MR. AXILROD. To the bottom end of the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The bottom end for the year as a whole?MR. AXILROD. That's right. And "B" to the middle.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be more than the middle, wouldn'tit? It's three-fourths [of the year at] 6 percent and one-fourth atwhatever it was.MR. AXILROD. [Unintelligible].-49-3/31/81MR. PRELL. "B" would be in the middle by September and thenyou'd have to decelerate slightly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we'd be above [the middle], yes. Well,these are monthly growth rates rather than quarterly. What is theequivalent quarterly growth rate here for "B"? It appears someplace,doesn't it?MR. AXILROD. Well, the equivalent quarterly growth rate is5.7 percent for M-1B over the 6 [months].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, so it's a little less. But we'dstill be above the middle of the range, I think. It would not berunning at the top of the range, but just slightly below it after asmall first quarter. It's right at the middle of the range inSeptember. Continuing at 6 percent must put us above [the middle],but not as close to the top as I thought.MR. AXILROD. Well, yes, quarter-over-quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All that suggests, I think, that we shouldbe more conscious of exceeding it than falling somewhat low. Whatlanguage do we have that was actually in the directive?MR. ALTMANN. It was in December [1980].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that language was: "...someshortfall in growth would be acceptable in the near term if thatdeveloped in the context of reduced pressures in the money market."MR. SCHULTZ. That sounds pretty good because, as I recallSteve's figures, the staff is looking for velocity to slow down somein the second quarter so you were anticipating that we would have tohave the higher borrowing, weren't you? What were you looking at interms of--MR. AXILROD. In terms of the level of borrowing?MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, for "B." You were talking about $1.5billion, weren't you?MR. AXILROD. Yes. We had a rather high level of borrowingbecause we were assuming considerably higher interest rates than Ithink the Chairman or the specifications are either explicitly orimplicitly assuming. So there would be a difference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not particularly assuming alevel of interest rates. All I said is that I might want to consider[an adjustment] at some point if they got high enough. I'm suggestingthat this is what the relationships look like and if we want to hit"B," we'd better go out and increase the borrowing right away. ButI'm saying: Let's wait and see and get some evidence that thatprojection is in fact being borne out before we move. It may well becorrect or maybe we will have to go even further, but let's wait andsee.MR. PARTEE. I don't think we'd have to be as specific asthat language that you just read, Paul. I don't know why we don't-50-3/31/81just say "growth in M-1B from March to June at an annual rate of 6percent or somewhat less."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that may be, because I'm not surewe're talking about reduced pressures. It might be that we'd acceptsomewhat less if [the funds rate] just stayed where it was.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think so too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to see what we're talkingabout. You said 6 percent is the figure you were thinking of forMarch to June.MR. PARTEE. I was thinking March to June. After all,tomorrow is April 1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.MR. PARTEE. And it seems to me, even though we don't quiteknow March, we ought to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to use March to June,too.MR. AXILROD. Governor Partee, I would mention that we reallyonly know half of March.MR. PARTEE. I know. But people think we know it.MR. SCHULTZ. People think we know a lot!SPEAKER(?). As you can tell from the previous discussion, wehave great faith in the forecast!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can say 6 percent or somewhatless or I suppose we can say 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less. I don'tknow where you want to put the funds rate range. As I say, I wouldwant to look at it even if the funds rate were at 17 percent if theeconomy were also quite weak at the same time. It wouldn't bother meat 17 percent if the economy were quite strong. But that's somethingwe don't know until we sit down and look at it.MR. PARTEE. Speaking for those who like a wide funds raterange, I could accept 12 to 18 percent. I think we ought to have a6-point range rather than go back down to a narrower range.MR. BOEHNE. I think 12 to 18 percent makes sense.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would prefer 13 to 19 percent. Itseems to me a little more symmetrically placed around--MR. PARTEE. Well, if you think it's 15 percent now, 12 to 18is even-handed. But if Paul is sensitive to high rates, as he seemsto be, we're going to have a telephone conference call if the rategets up there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do have the feeling that at some pointwe would want to consult.-51-3/31/81MS. TEETERS. I can support the 12 to 18 percent. Are youimplying that we'd stay at about the $1.1 billion in borrowing andthen let it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wanted to get to that next. I wasimplying that until we get further information we'd stay roughly wherewe are, whether that's $1.1 billion or slightly over $1.1 billion.But consistent with this whole attitude is that if the money supplycame in strong, we would be prepared to move pretty quickly, whichmight mean a discretionary move as the natural result of holding thenonborrowed path steady. And we'd be quicker to move in thatdirection if it came in strong than if it fell short.MR. PARTEE. That is to adjust the nonborrowed path?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A more even pattern of borrowingyielding the same total as this week would probably give us a lowerfed funds rate than the 15+ percent we're seeing, right? Therefore,if we're talking about keeping the present fed funds rate, which isaround 15 percent, then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't particularly care myself about thepresent level of the federal funds rate.SPEAKER(?). Well, I think this is going too far.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we would certainly have tostart off with it there. Then I think we probably are talking aboutsomething closer to $1.3 billion than $1.1 billion.MR. WALLICH. As to the lower level of 12 percent [for thefunds rate], if we get there, it would have to be below that onseveral days before we say that over a period of time it has beenbelow that. And then we would have done about three-fourths of thedrop that we had in 1980.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have no vested interest in 12percent. If you want to make it 13--MR. WALLICH. No, I want to make it substantially higher.MR. PARTEE. I don't think making it 13 is going to capture[Henry's vote].MR. CORRIGAN. I would prefer to state the March-to-Junegrowth rate at 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less. I could go either 12to 18 or 13 to 18 percent on the funds rate and borrowings startingout in a range of $1.2 to $1.3 billion. But I still have a questionin my mind. Suppose we did either one of these things and M2continued to grow at, say, 15 percent. If M-1B was around 5-1/2 or 6percent but M2 was 15 percent, what would we do then?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we can deal with everypossible contingency, but I--MR. CORRIGAN. No, I [realize that].-52-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to take the specifications yousuggested, if M-1B came in around 5-1/2 to 6 percent and M2 was veryhigh, we would lean on the tighter side. We might make an adjustment.MS. TEETERS. But we'd do it with a consultation?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that would require aconsultation if the funds rate were in the range and so forth.MS. TEETERS. Suppose it's all money market mutual funds?MR. CORRIGAN. Well, there's a little more to it than--MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] market rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm sure if it did, it will be all.MR. PARTEE. [The money market mutual funds] are verysensitive to market rates. If market rates go above what the fundspay, the money that is in the funds will move back into the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a question of whether we give someweight to M2. But we don't have to word the directive that way; italready does. The directive always gives weight to M2 as I recall.MR. CORRIGAN. I'm reacting a little, Tony, to that memo thatyou distributed, which effectively points out that we don't make anyadjustment in the paths for the nonreservable components of M2regardless of what they do.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though I distributed the memo,on balance I would prefer that greater attention to M2 be done on ajudgmental basis rather than a mechanistic one.MR. CORRIGAN. I agree with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I'm not talking about a formula. Thedirective just specifies a target for both, which implies that we takeaccount of M2. I don't think we have to change the directive for thatpurpose.SPEAKER(?). Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have to have some knowledgeamong ourselves about what weight we give to it; I'm suggesting thatbe on a judgmental basis. If we want to give it weight, that doesn'tin itself require a consultation. The substantive question is whetherwe want to give it weight.MS. TEETERS. Well, it all depends, in Jerry's scenario, onwhat is making M2 go up relative to M-1B.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, without getting in a longdigression, do you have any feel as to whether Mr. Fauntroy's bill onmoney market mutual funds has any chance of passing in the nearfuture? That could have some bearing on the growth of M2.-53-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no particular sense that any billon money market funds is going to be passed in the near enough futureto affect anything before our next meeting.MR. SCHULTZ. Furthermore, both bills have been referred tothe Commerce Committee, which is a very unfriendly referral.MR. BALLES. Oh, really?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There conceivably could be legislation,but I don't think it's going to take place in a way that affectsanything before May 23rd, or whenever our next meeting is scheduled.MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Chairman, if we just go with 5-1/2 percentor somewhat less, doesn't that really give us the kind of flexibilitythat we need to take care of most of these [contingencies]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I just want an understanding of howwe adjust as we go along. The basic [M-1B reference] is 5-1/2 percentor less, but I think it is appropriate to give some weight to M2.That's what most people are saying.MS. TEETERS. How did we get to 5-1/2 percent? I thought wewere at 6 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to resolve that.MS. TEETERS. All of a sudden we've dropped 1/2 percentagepoint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are trying to find the center ofgravity here.MR. PARTEE. And it's falling.MS. TEETERS. Yes. It was 6 percent or somewhat less and nowit's 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pardon me?MR. ALTMANN. Peter Sternlight has a comment.MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, you referred to giving someweight to M2 judgmentally. In the recent period, there was anopportunity to do that because the M1s were running weak and we couldmodify the extent to which we would change the path because of that.But that [situation] wouldn't necessarily arise in the future. Youmight not have the opportunity to give weight to a strong M2 if, forexample, the M1s were running right about on path. Even if M2 wererunning very strong, I wouldn't see that same kind of opportunity togive discretionary weight to that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand. You would just reducethe nonborrowed reserve path.MR. STERNLIGHT. But we might be right about on path.-54-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You might be on the M-1B path, but youwould not be giving weight to M2. I don't understand how it differs.MR. STERNLIGHT. If M-1B were on target, we might be justabout on path. If that were the case--MR. FORD. Paul, the way I hear the sense of the Committee isthis: Whatever we want to argue about on M-1B, either 5-1/2 or 6percent, even if we're hitting M-1B at 5-1/2 or 6 percent, the fartheroff M2 goes, the more we want to adjust. I think that is what you'retrying to say.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is what I am saying, yes. Well, wehave to go to lunch. We'll see whether we can resolve this in a hurryor not. We have a proposal for 5-1/2 percent or lower.MR. PARTEE. Somewhat lower.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll just put down 13 to 18 percent atthis point on the federal funds rate.MS. TEETERS. If we have [only] 5-1/2 percent, we can takethat "somewhat lower" off.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me finish.MR. FORD. You may get a chance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm suggesting the level of borrowingsabout where they are, the implication being fairly rapid adjustment ofthe borrowing level if we exceed [the money supply growthspecification]. There would be an adjustment if we fell short, too,but it would be a little more sluggish. That's what the "or lower"reflects.MR. BALLES. Where are we now on the borrowings?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. About $1.1 billion or slightly above, Ithink.MR. AXILROD. Yes, we're aiming at that, but it is runningstronger. We're aiming at $1.16 billion. That's the point [target].SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible] decimal point.MR. CORRIGAN. That's $1.2 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $1.150 billion. And there's a degree ofconsensus that we're giving weight to M2 if it gets wildly off theassumption here, which is about 10 percent.MR. FORD. Are we leaving out M-1A altogether?MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's about 10 percent if you--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, [the "C alternative] is only 10-1/4percent [for M2], so we're at about 10-3/4 percent for M2 or someplace-55-3/31/81in there. If M2 were in the 11 percent area, it isn't going to getany weight. It's consistent if it's--MS. TEETERS. What was your fed funds range in the directive?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 13 to 18 percent. And the M-1B number inthe directive is 5-1/2 percent or lower.MR. BOEHNE. "Lower" or "somewhat lower"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either one you would prefer. "Or somewhatlower" probably better captures it.MR. PARTEE. "Or lower" is infinite.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A consistent number for M2 is 10-1/2percent, I guess, just looking here.MR. ALTMANN. You need a time period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the March-to-June period. Well, letme have a show of hands as to how many prefer this formulation? Ithink the obvious alternative is just changing M-1B to 5-1/2 to 6percent and leaving everything else the same.MR. PARTEE. You want voting members only, don't you?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess so. We're on the 5-1/2 percentalternative at this point.MR. PARTEE. 13 to 18 percent for the funds range and $1.150billion on borrowings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 13 to 18 percent on the funds rate and$1.150 borrowings with more of a hair trigger on raising it if itcomes in higher than lower.MR. BOEHNE. Is this prefer or accept?MR. PARTEE. Is anyone unable to accept it?MR. FORD. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Let's get it over with; somehow I'm able toaccept it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's accept it.MR. BOEHNE. Accept? I can accept it.MR. RICE. I would prefer 6 percent or somewhat less, but Icould accept that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm still bothered by something. Iwant to be sure that everybody understands something, which is this:My gut instinct is that if we set the borrowings low at $1.150billion, we're going to see a drop in the fed funds rate in the nextweek or two. I realize that we'd be able to adjust it. But do we-56-3/31/81want to see at this point a market signal that we are easing monetarypolicy?MR. PARTEE. The funds rate is not a signal.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, may I add on to that? I don'tknow what the funds rate will be with that borrowing. We hadborrowing of $1.145 billion in the week of [February] 18th and thefunds rate was 15.81 percent. The preceding week borrowing was $1.1billion and the funds rate was 16.51 percent. And in the more recentweek of March 4th, we had a borrowing level of $1.3 billion and thefunds rate was 15-3/4 percent. All this [suggests] that we can't bevery certain where we're going to come out on this. But I wouldassume it's somewhere above 15 percent, which would be above theexisting--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean with that $1.15 billion?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Holding it for a while?MR. AXILROD. Yes. I think from this day it would be above15 percent, but I can't be absolutely certain.MR. STERNLIGHT. There's a range of uncertainty on these.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's vote on this.MS. TEETERS. Did you take a vote on the 5-1/2 to 6?MR. RICE. Six percent or somewhat less.MS. TEETERS. Or 6 percent and somewhat less.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can explore preferences on that.How many people prefer 6 percent? Everything is the same except wewould put a 6 percent number in there.MS. TEETERS. I would prefer 6.SPEAKER(?). Yes.SPEAKER(?). I would prefer 6.SPEAKER(?). I would prefer it too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One, two, three, four, five.MS. TEETERS. Try 5-1/2 to 6.MR. PARTEE. No, we have to have a number for targetingpurposes.MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're in an area where the [difference] isextremely narrow. How many people prefer the 5-1/2 percent?-57-3/31/81SPEAKER(?). Or less?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before I ask how many would accept it, howmany prefer the 5-1/2?MR. WALLICH. Without accepting it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've got to sneak--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I prefer the 5-1/2 to 6.SPEAKER(?). You feel it has to be a single number?MR. SCHULTZ. Well, it doesn't really have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We already have "or lower" and it makesalmost no difference here.MR. PARTEE. [The path would be drawn on] 5-3/4 percent if wesaid 5-1/2 to 6 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, put me down for 5-1/2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, we're virtually equally divided asto preferences here. Let's go with the 5-1/2.MR. PARTEE. I have a feeling it's the Chairman's preference.MS. TEETERS. Well, if you're going to do that, it should be5-1/2 percent or somewhat more. At least take off the somewhat less.MR. SCHULTZ. It's only somewhat less, Nancy.MS. TEETERS. Yes, and you'd let it come out as a minus 3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is a--MS. TEETERS. How far are we off the target for the firstquarter? That was a 4-3/4 percent rate of growth or 3 percent orsomething. And we're coming in at what, minus 2 percent?MR. SCHULTZ. I voted with you, Nancy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's have a vote at 5-1/2.MR. ALTMANN. Or somewhat less, too?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, or somewhat lower.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz Yes-58-Governor TeetersGovernor WallichPresident WinnTen for, one against.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.finished before lunch. If we makealways finish before lunch!Thank you. Without much delay wethe lunch late enough, we canEND OF MEETING3/31/81-59-YesNoYes