Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 18, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., on Monday, May 18, 1981 at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker 1/, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford and Winn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns, Danforth, Ettin, Keir, Prell, Scheld,Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account1/ Left the meeting following the action to approve the minutes and returnedprior to the action to ratify System open market transactions in Govern-ment securities, agency obligations,and bankers acceptances.5/18/81Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. Doyle, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of ChicagoMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, Fousek, Koch, and ParthemosSenior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof St. Louis, Cleveland, New York, Atlanta,and Richmond, respectivelyMessrs. Bisignano, Cacy, Fieleke, Sandberg, and Syron,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of SanFrancisco, Kansas City, Boston, New York, andBoston, respectivelyMr. Lang, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofPhiladelphia-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 18, 1981CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The meeting can come to order and we canapprove the minutes.MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, the minutes areapproved. I want to propose a change in the order [of the agenda]this morning. I'm going to have to leave at about 10:00 a.m. forabout 45 minutes to an hour, unfortunately, so I want to start offwith the business discussion. I've had appointments with thePresident on and off and he came up with one this morning and Idecided I'd better grab it while I can get it. You can go back to dothe reports on foreign currency and domestic operations and so forthat that point. And then I can be back for Mr. Axilrod's presentation,hopefully. So, why don't we start off with you, Mr. Kichline?MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a situation continuing whereforecasted downturns by a lot of people haven't materialized. I guesswe ought to focus on how strong we think things are at the moment inthe face of historically high interest rates. Who wants to comment?Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I'll start briefly. I've been spending a fairamount of time out in the Third District, and I find an unusual amountof diversity in terms of what people think about the economy. It'sall the way from the brink of disaster for some manufacturing firms tostrong business for health care, pharmaceuticals, and services. Onaverage I think the "go slow" is probably right, but my hunch is thatthe economy is probably going to be stronger than we think it is,although there is this diversity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How strong do we think it is? That's justit.MR. BOEHNE. Stronger than we think it is. Also, I find afair amount of support for a balanced budget out there rather than taxcuts. The supply side approach I don't think has reached thecountryside yet. I might just add that there seems to be a lot ofgoodwill toward the Fed as an inflation fighter. But despite someintellectual appreciation for what we're doing, the high and volatileinterest rates are beginning to reach the point where it hurts. And Ithink the gut is overpowering the intellect in this area. That's allI have.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask JimKichline to indicate those areas where he thinks the first-quarter GNPwill be revised upward?5/18/81MR. KICHLINE. Inventories for one. The implied estimate wasvery low for March and the numbers have come in significantly higher.Business fixed investment we think could be revised up at least $5billion, as shipments were much stronger than their assumptions. Andin construction outlays, spending put in place was running higher thantheir assumptions. Personal consumption expenditures may be a littlehigher, given the upward revision in March [retail] sales, as may netexports, which is a major contributor here in terms of a low guessprior to the availability of the March data. So, it's pretty muchacross the board but, surprisingly, both inventories as well as fixedinvestment are very strong.MR. BLACK. What kind of percentage are you thinking it willchange to?MR. KICHLINE. We think the first digit should be 8. It's aquestion of how much higher. We'd say 8 to 8-1/2 percent or somethinglike that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably right.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, we are hearing much of what EdBoehne reflected. We feel that the economy is continuing fairlystrong. We really don't have any specific disagreement with theGreenbook forecast, but our fear is that the figures on both theeconomy and inflation will probably be revised upward. As for thecomments that we're receiving from our directors, bankers, andbusinessmen in the District, they are expressing concern over theplight of the small businessman with these continued high interestrates. They are expressing possibly some sense of frustration in thatthey really don't see any end in sight and they don't seem to have thefeeling that we're making very much progress.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, if one looks at the current datacoming in, one can't see any sign of weakness in the economy. Andwith inventories as low as they are, the prospect of any major sharpdecline seems fairly remote. But at the same time, I'd simply cautionthat there hasn't been time yet for the data to reflect the impact ofwhat we've done in the last couple of weeks. We've had a major changein interest rates and that, I think, is going to show up in the monthsahead. I'm not concerned about the economy running away from us atthe present level of rates, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a little troublesome because we hadhigher levels of rates than this in the fourth quarter and we had an 8to 8-1/2 percent increase in the GNP immediately following.MR. MORRIS. Yes, but most of that [strength] was early inthe period.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Last month the bond market had over$5 billion of [new] corporate issues. At the time not only were bondrates high but it was a very disturbed market. Except for a couple oftrouble spots, there just seems to be enormous pressure for everybodyto go ahead and engage in high levels of economic activity and justcontent themselves with Henry Wallich's point that after taxesinterest rates are not that high. That seems to be everything I hearup here in the financial markets.5/18/81MR. BOEHNE. Well, I didn't hear that in Pennsylvania, NewJersey, and Delaware. They may not be that sophisticated, but theythink these higher rates are hurting and hurting badly, especially thesmall and medium sized business firms.MR. SCHULTZ. That's where it is hurting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. It's obvious that there are very strongcrosscurrents around the country. We see this in the West as well.The lumber industry, because of the housing industry, is flat on itsback. On the other hand, we see the opposite extreme in officebuilding construction, for example, which is [experiencing] real boomconditions in San Francisco, Los Angeles, etc. Agriculture, ourleading source of income in the State of California--I guess it's nowthe biggest agricultural state in the country--is doing very well. Idon't hear of any signs of collapse there despite the high cost ofcredit to farmers. Aerospace, electronics, and so forth are stillgoing along very strong. In short, what continues to amaze us is theresilience of the economy despite high interest rates. I share yourfeelings that, looking back over the past couple of years, the oftenadvertised coming of a recession or slowdown more often than not hasnot materialized. And I suspect, if anything, we're underestimatingthe strength of the economy. I would look for a better 1982, forreasons I won't take time to go into at the moment, than forecast bythe Board's staff.MR. PARTEE. How is housing out there, John?MR. BALLES. It's about the same as around the country--poor.MR. PARTEE. I know, but you don't get any feeling of uplift?MR. BALLES. Not as yet, because all these variable rateproposals haven't really had a chance--MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. BALLES. --to take effect in terms of restimulating theindustry. But I think when those do get underway, that will have abeneficial effect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I continue to believe that theeconomy is stronger than the so-called consensus forecast, which Ithink would encompass Jim's forecast. In terms of the underlyingdemands, the suppressed demands, given that in the short run thecapacity to snap back very quickly in housing and other areas is sogreat, I can't see much of a significant downside risk. The majorimponderable in all of this is how much financial stress is reallythere that we don't see. We focus a lot on the thrift industrybecause we know a lot about it. But I suspect that there probably isa good deal more stress around on balance sheets and other things thanwe perhaps really perceive.-3-5/18/81The other point I would make is that, at least in the NinthFederal Reserve District, I have a hard time finding anybody whothinks that a three-year tax cut is a good idea. There's a certainhesitance for people to talk about that publicly. I'm not sure why.I guess so much hope is pinned on getting some spending cuts here thatthey don't want to compromise that. But certainly in privatediscussions I can't find anybody who thinks that a three-year tax cutis a good idea right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. One of the interesting areas is the steelindustry, which is running currently almost at capacity. How much ofthat is inventory building is not quite clear, but think about whatwould happen if automobile sales should pick up or--this is hard todetermine--if defense orders start to flow to a greater extent thanthey have previously. We'd have a really tight bind with respect tosteel. The second thing is that if you look at retail sales acrossthe board, and they have been very strong, [our sources] all reportthat it is for top-of-the-line merchandise. The bargain stuff isn'tmoving very well. This is not a feeling of weakness in my judgment interms of what is happening there. One has to watch this comparisonwith last year--which is how retailers report sales--because of thecredit crunch and the difference in when Easter falls and otherthings. But retailers thought sales would tail off after Easter andthey are continuing quite strong even through last week, which is arather strange phenomenon. The third point I'll make is that onJohn's point about office building and other kinds of activities wemay have a bit of a booby-trap in this area in that most of those havebeen financed on construction loans without take-outs in someinstances. And the question is: With the change in interest rates,what kind of take-out set-up are we going to have for some of thesethings? They went ahead with the buildings thinking that if theycouldn't find financing, they would sell them. We may have more forsale here suddenly than some people have expected. And this is afinancial booby-trap out there that may or may not snap at us.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. We sense a fairly strong base of economic activityin our area. There are two dramatically weak segments, home buildingand automobile manufacturing, and the latter is a big factor in partof our District. However, commercial building, as John said, is verystrong, as are chemicals, military equipment, and oil and gasequipment. Basically, we don't see many signs of weakness except inthose two specific areas I noted.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. In the South we have a mixed picture that reflectssome of the things you've heard from other areas. The touristbusiness is great. As for the steel industry in our area,surprisingly, after years of disaster around Alabama, U.S. Steel isplanning to put up a new plant of all things and employment is risingin that industry. In our high-tech belt that is developing aroundAtlanta and Florida, the high-technology industries are doing great.The defense-related industries are doing great. In housing and5/18/81construction, surprisingly, while activity is not great, on a month-over-month basis it is up and on a year-over-year basis it is up.Mortgage loan closings are up; we don't understand why, but apparentlythey are. The agricultural sector would be all right were it not forthe fact that everybody else in the country has gotten rain except usapparently, and there is still some concern about the lingeringeffects of the drought we've had.The big area of worry is in the financial sector where, onthe banking side, our banks are doing not just well, they're doingfantastically well. Big banks in Atlanta and Florida are up 25, 30,35 percent year-over-year, quarter-over-quarter, anyway you want tomeasure it. But there are areas of stress. I've been going out, asEd has, trying to get closer to the individual industries and some ofthe particular players to hear how it sounds to them. The thriftexecutives are counting [reserves]; they are all down. I've nowtalked to about 8 or 10 of them individually because I made themistake of making a public speech about their problems a month beforeeverybody else did, so I've been going around trying to heal thewounds and listen to them. What I hear is that they're all measuringtheir survival literally in terms of how many months of reserves theyhave left at the current rate. They all have it counted out that wayand they are in a near panic state, as [the Board] will hear when itmeets with its Advisory Committee later today or whenever.Consumer finances are starting to worry me in that we seemore and more isolated signs of stress on the consumer balance sheettipping upward. One of the biggest industries in our area is Equifaxcredit reportings, for example, and they say business is great. Thereis more concern than ever about the credit condition of the consumer.The collection companies are doing great, which is bad news in termsof financial stress. Another thing that worries me is that we'restarting to get some evidence of creative financing; as a concept, Ithink it is very worrisome and something we're going to have to focuson. A lot of financial balloons have been put up in the air wherepeople are disintermediating [from] the normal lending agencies andtaking back paper on homes. That is done on the basis of veryquestionable credit standards or none at all. And I'm starting tohear more and more people, as I talk to people about housing finance,talk about possible problems in the area of creative financing.Finally, all over the District I'm hearing from smallbusinessmen, especially dealers of U.S. built autos and various othersmall businesses, that they are actually paying 1 or 2 points over theprime rate. They support us tremendously philosophically, but theywish we would lower interest rates today because their survival is inquestion now. I haven't been able to verify how much of that is true,but every time I go out to a meeting or sit down at a rotary club talkor wherever people get me in a corner and I ask them: "Do you believein what the Fed is doing?" They say: "Terrific, you're on the righttrack; hooray for you and Ronald Reagan." Then if I ask how businessis, they say it's terrible. They say, for example: "It costs me moreto finance a car on the floor of my showroom for one month than I canever hope to make in profit, and I'm not selling it within a month."So, my big worry would be the overall stresses and strains in thevulnerable areas on the financial side. Overall, I would say theeconomy in the South is moving sideways. We have strong areas thatare booming balanced off by these areas of weakness. We don't see a-5-5/18/81big surge coming, but we don't think we're in a depression or arecession now at all.MR. SCHULTZ. I told you about going to a cocktail party acouple of months ago. A fellow who happened to have had a few drinkscame up to me and clapped me on the back and said "I want you to knowthat I'm with you all the way, you S.O.B."SPEAKER(?). That's the exact [sentiment].MR. FORD. That very much summarizes what I'm hearing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle, let's get the depressing sideof this.MR. DOYLE. Sorry to add to that, Mr. Chairman. Theautomobile industry is still in a very depressed state in our Districtand its influence is quite pervasive. Even though production has beenup quite a bit lately, largely associated with the introduction ofsome new models, no one I talked with really expects much of aturnaround in that area at all. There now seem to be increasedconcerns spreading somewhat to the rural areas. The banks are highlyliquid, but high interest rates are discouraging borrowers and we tendto hear more and more from this particular sector recently. Thedrought has ended in the Middle West and it has brought with it somerather interesting revisions in estimates of food price [increases]for this year, which are expected to be somewhat less than the USDAprojections--say, somewhere around 10 or 11 percent rather than up inthe 11 to 12 percent range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you get rid of your dry weather, Mr.Guffey?MR. GUFFEY. It largely has abated, yes. Just over the lastweek to ten days we've gotten very good rains and very general rains.There is some good and some bad news to that. Along with the rainswas some very severe weather; and much of the winter wheat, whichwould be harvested commencing in early June in the southern part ofthe District, was laid flat by the hail and high winds. So, thequestion is whether what wheat survived will result in a good crop,beyond earlier expectations; that which was flattened is a total loss.The USDA doesn't know what is out there and I don't think the farmerscan tell. Not until the harvest is completed will we know. The factof the matter is that the outlook for the agricultural sector probablyis better at the moment than it has been over the past sixty days,with the exception of the red meat industry, particularly the cattleindustry. There has been a continued liquidation of breeder stock,keeping meat prices down. As a result of that there is a loss in thecattle in the feedlot area. That has to end one of these days; andwhen it does, we will quite likely see an escalation of meat prices,which will roll into [consumer] food prices.On the other hand, the District is heavily engaged in theenergy business and that is going gangbusters. The unemployment rateranges someplace from 3-1/2 percent to 8 percent, depending uponwhether you're in Oklahoma, Colorado, or New Mexico. It's a verymixed picture.5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'd better run in a second. We haveheard from all the presidents; the governors have all been silent.We'll leave that to you. And you can go over these other [agendaitems].MR. GUFFEY. Before you leave, Mr. Chairman, I should saythat the green bug problem has been whipped with a red lady bug.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Good. By what?MR. GUFFEY. Lady bugs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Count on the lady bugs!MR. SCHULTZ. Let me ask a question, Roger. Are the cattlebeing slaughtered or are they being put back in the pasture? With therains you've had, I would imagine some are going back to pasture.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I can't answer the question of what mayhappen in the future. The rains have only occurred within the lastten days, so those judgments might be made in the future. But theycertainly haven't been up to now. Conditions have been very dry andas a result the cattle have been taken off of the range for tworeasons. One was that the prospect for keeping them through theupcoming summer was not very good. Secondly, those in the feedingbusiness were losing from $75 to $200 a head on fat cattle. So, theyare just liquidating their breeder stock. Whether or not businessjudgments will be made to maintain some of that breeder stock now thatsome green grass has come forth, I don't know. It doesn't bode well,however, for food prices for the period ahead.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We haven't heard from any governors,I don't think. Emmett.MR. RICE. I'll start off. Much of what I've heard from thepresidents confirms the feeling I've had about our current situation.If I had to characterize the current economic situation, I would saythat the economy is slowing from a very high rate of expansion but itis not by any means weak yet. I say this because it's hard to see anyunqualified indications of weakness. Even in retail sales we see,adjusting for autos, an increase. And the slowing in industrialproduction, while negligible, would actually be an increase if itweren't for the coal strike. So, most of the indications of weakness--for example in the payroll employment area--are not unqualified. Onthe other hand, there are some fairly good indications of enoughstrength still left in the economy. Business fixed investment isstill strong. And, of course, capacity utilization has increased.So, I would say on balance that there may be some slowing but it's aslowing from a very rapid rate [of expansion] and the economy is notat all weak at this point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I deliberately stayed out of the talking stageand in the listening mode because it seems to me that it's moredifficult than I can ever remember to know what is happening bylooking at the statistics from here in Washington and by using thetypical technology of forecasting, either models or judgmental-7-5/18/81forecasts. The economy just isn't behaving the way it used to. Ithink the staff is basically right, however, that we're looking at aneconomy that is quite strong. The areas of weakness that we do see--and we are seeing some weakness in the housing industry and the autoindustry, which is being reflected in the employment statistics and tosome degree in industrial production--are in credit-sensitive sectors.To the extent the economy is being restrained at all, it's beingrestrained by monetary restraint, by very high interest rates. Whatthe staff is saying, in effect, is that interest rates will simplyrise however far they have to rise to get nominal growth of GNP downto the 8 to 9 to 10 percent range or somewhere around there. And Ithink the only issue is whether or not the staff's forecast ofinterest rates is right. The staff's forecast of interest rates, incomparison with the major outside forecasters, leaves no doubt thatoutside forecasters aren't anywhere close to being correct if thestaff has the basics [right] on where the economy is going. The staffhas interest rates on Treasury bills continuing to move up through thelast three quarters of 1982, hitting a peak of around 17 percent; theyare moving up gently but continue to move up. The mean of otherforecasters has the peak of interest rates in the first quarter of1981 and coming down to about 11-1/2 percent by the end of 1982.That's why I think we're seeing a major difference in what forecasterssee for the outlook from now until the end of next year. The economyis very strong, and I don't think we are likely to make a mistake atthis point of overrestraining it unless we take very drastic action ontop of what has already been done.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Henry.MR. WALLICH. Well, I find the economy very hard to read, asdo others. Some things don't quite seem to fit together. Forinstance, we've had this strong surge in the first quarter, which maybe revised up. But it doesn't seem to have led to a great increase incapacity utilization; it may have in materials but not in other areas.And it hasn't led to a reduction in unemployment, as one would figure.Now, if we are looking at this first quarter, it really means that GNPfrom here on out will be about 1 percentage point higher than it wouldhave been had GNP grown at something like 3 percent or so--spreadingthe difference roughly over the rest of the year, or dividing it by 4.So, the whole picture is somehow tighter. And that I don't quite seereflected in the capacity utilization or the unemployment figures; butit must be there. I also am asking myself: Why, in an economy inwhich no single thing seems to be outstandingly strong, is there solittle room? Why, when we've got some distinctly weak sectors likehousing and automobiles, has the economy been expanding so rapidly?Is it because the saving rate is so low that we're now at a muchhigher level of consumption than we normally would be so that leavesless room in the economy for other things and is squeezing things out?I find all these things difficult to reconcile, but there seems to beno doubt that the economy is not going down even moderately as much asthought; it may not go down at all and is overall very strong.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't think there's much downside riskeither, except if there should be some unexpected financial difficultythat would lead to it. And that's always hard, indeed impossible, topredict or to time. I would agree with Lyle that the governor on the5/18/81economy is monetary policy. And with emphasis on the aggregates, whatwe're really talking about is how high interest rates will go. But,of course, as they go higher, if they should go higher, the smallbusiness problem and the problem with housing and with automobiles andso forth will get greater and greater. Indeed, that's the disturbingfactor about the economy. There doesn't seem to be too much effect inthe soft goods sectors and certainly no effect in the defense area.There is a strength that could end up in a bad crash, I think, innonresidential construction. I agree with Willis that there are a lotof problems that could develop there because there's an expectationthat prices will go higher and that the properties will appreciate.If they don't, then there is no basis for the financing being done onthem. So, the concern that I'm beginning to have is that to achievethe 9 percent nominal GNP that Lyle speaks of, we will have noactivity to speak of in some sectors and hardly reduced activity inother sectors. The differential impacts are going to be verydifficult to deal with. Henry made a good point a month or so ago, ina speech that I guess he didn't deliver, which is that there are twotiers in terms of interest rate effects. Those who don't pay 46percent tax rates are hurt a lot more than those who do pay 46percent. That's very consistent with the notion that small businessis complaining, because they [don't] pay 46 percent tax rates. And itwould be very consistent for any firm that is in a loss position to bebadly hurt. It reminds me of the [adage] that the worst thing a bankcan have is money--that the bank should get so that it doesn't havetaxable income. The same thing is getting to be true of debt burden.The worst thing you could have, if you have any taxable income, is notto have a debt burden because then you don't have any tax write-off.So, I agree that we're in a fairly narrow range with very littlechance of a sizable decline in the immediate picture and a goodcontrol over the expansion because monetary policy is well along theroad toward being restraining. But as to the effect that this willhave in the longer run, I'm certainly not prepared to say at thispoint.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't it likely from whateverybody is saying around the table that we're going to see monetarypolicy not being very effective as a general restrainer until some ofthe troubled areas have some dramatic failures? And then we would geta reaction in the rest of the economy.MR. PARTEE. Yes, we could get a sharp change inexpectations. The people who are expecting prices such as real estatevalues to rise will stop expecting them to rise. And then suddenlywhat didn't seem to be such a high interest rate before will seemextraordinarily high, and that could happen very quickly. But onejust can't predict when it will happen. By the way, though, Tony, Ido think that [our policy] is having a restraining effect on theeconomy. It's clear that housing starts are not going to stay at 1.2million; they're going to drop below it. And that's very restraining.That's one of the biggest industries in the economy, and it's largelydue to interest rates that housing activity is as low as it is. Oninventories, I agree with Frank. He said inventories are very, verylean. Why are they lean? It's because interest rates are so highthat everybody pays great attention to keeping inventories down. Theautomobile business, which in the last two or three 10-day periods hasbeen below 6 million in domestic sales, is 4 million off what theindustry has been accustomed to. That's a big cut in output in GNP.5/18/81So, interest rates are restraining the economy; and the higher theygo, the more they will restrain.MR. CORRIGAN. But even in terms of the residentialconstruction that is still going on, I don't know for sure, but Iwould venture a guess that a substantial fraction of the housingstarts we're seeing right now is being creatively financed. Everyplace you go you see condominiums, and the sign out front says 10-1/4percent mortgage money.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's for 2 to 3 years.MR. CORRIGAN. No, these are term loans. The way they'rebeing financed is that the builders go to the bank or the S&L and worka deal for a construction loan. They take out all the first mortgageson a term basis at 10 percent or something in exchange for $300 or$400 or $500 thousand in fee income, which the institution takes rightin, charges it as current income, and passes it right down to thebottom line.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But they don't give 10 or 11 percenton a fixed rate mortgage for 25 years.MR. CORRIGAN. Absolutely, yes they do.MR. PARTEE. It's the other way around.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The story that I've been hearing frompeople in the Midwest whom I know in the real estate insurancebusiness is that they have this "teaser" rate. I don't know what theycall it. You come in and get 10 or 11 percent financing for the first2 to 3 years, during which time the builder compensates the thriftinstitution. But thereafter the loan has to be renegotiated.MR. CORRIGAN. There are some of those, but there is an amplenumber of these deals that I've just described where people still canget a 20-year mortgage at 10 to 11 percent.MR. WINN(?). They add it onto the price, Tony. They justjack the price up.[VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON]. Nancy.MS. TEETERS. Well, I'm surprised at the first quarter, and Idon't really understand it. However, I am also getting very worriedabout the cumulative effect of this [monetary policy restraint]. Ifreal GNP revises up even to 8 or 8-1/2 percent, there literally hasbeen no real growth in the economy for two years. That to me saysthat monetary policy has been working quite well in restraining theeconomy from any growth. We've never had a period like this in whichwe had literally no growth on average for that [length of] time. Ithink we have to continue to restrain [the economy]. However, I amvery worried that we will restrain it to the point that we will getinterest rates that are going to be really damaging to all segments ofthe economy. Interest rates may be [low] after tax, or in real terms,but they are still contributing to cost and are creating, I think,some of the upward pressure on prices. You may be in a 46 percent taxbracket, but you still have to recoup that 18 or 20 percent interest-10-5/18/81rate in order to pay your taxes on it. This forecast has eightquarters of 18 percent interest rates. I just don't think the economycan survive that way. Either it's going [to blow] up on us in thesense that inflation is going to take off or we're going to have majorfailures and we are going to get a major recession from this someplacedown the line. And I urge caution when we come to deciding what we'regoing to make the interest rate because I think [the high rates] aredamaging. They can do a lot of damage if we are not careful.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. John Balles.MR. BALLES. Well, I will just piggyback on Fred's S.O.B.story with one I find extremely instructive. Twolumber companies.One is a great big one and one is a small one. And if there's anyindustry in the country, along with autos, that should be screamingfor relief from high interest rates, it seems to me it would certainlybe the lumber industry. Yet both of these guys are foursquare forsolid monetary restraint, enough to get the job done in bringinginflation down. When their quiz them on how they cansupport this kind of restraint in terms of what its doing to theirbusiness, the explanation is along the following lines: They have twochoices, both of which are bad, but one is worse than the other. Onechoice is to price people out of housing temporarily through highinterest rates; the other, as they put it, is to price them out ofhousing indefinitely and permanently through ongoing double-digitinflation. So, even looking at their own long-run self interest, theyfavor monetary restraint and are not ready to throw me out the windowor out of my job--if they could--because of what we are doing to theirbusinesses. I find that rather instructive.MR. PARTEE. They're not facing bankruptcy.MR. BALLES. No, but the small lumber company is surelymaking no money.MR. PARTEE. That's what I was wondering.MR. BALLES. It will be a while, but they're not facingbankruptcy.MR. BOEHNE. They probably have some independent wealth,though. I've run into some people like that, too, and they alwayshave some private means if the [business] goes under.MR. ROOS. I think it's important to recognize that there isabsolutely no way of reducing these interest rates, even short-terminterest rates, through the old traditional way of pumping money intothe economy. We did an analysis in St. Louis. [It shows that] evenwhen the weekly figures show an increase in the money supply, it ismeaningless; within a week interest rates rise. So, I don't know howwe can bring these rates down through monetary policy other than bycreating a credible track record where people will really believe thatwe are going to bring the rate of money growth down and stick with it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Either that way, Larry, or with anold fashioned crunch. My guess is that it's more likely to be an oldfashioned crunch. If there aren't any additional comments, we'll move-11-5/18/81on to Scott Pardee's and Peter Sternlight's reports. Does someonewant to make a further comment?MR. FORD. I'd just like to ask you a question on the pointyou just made with regard to an old fashioned crunch. I'd beinterested in knowing, Tony, how serious you think this business iswith the mutual savings banks up there [in your area]. I hear thatone of them already has a negative net worth and that a number ofothers are very close to that. What do you see as the scene over thenext three to six months?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I hear, and what my people'sanalysis suggests is likely, is that between two and four of them, ofwhich a couple are very important, are calculating that they will havea crisis early next year. They are also calculating the number ofmonths they can take this; and, of course, if interest rates were togo significantly higher, that [crisis] might be moved up a couple ofmonths.MR. FORD. That would mean early winter or late fall of thisyear.MR. PARTEE. I don't think the savings banks are reallyquite that close. It's 1982 and 1983 for the savings banks. It's1981 and 1982 for the savings and loans.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I'm talking about two to fourcoming in early '82.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's about what the FDIC feels.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there are a few others thatwould--MR. PARTEE. By '83, if rates stay up as our forecast hasthem, there are going to be quite a few. And they go beyond New Yorkand Boston.MR. BOEHNE. Add Philadelphia by 1982-83. We have at leastone and maybe two in Philadelphia. On the timetable for the S&Ls, Ithink Chuck's right. Beginning in the fall of this year, stretchingout into '82, you can just string them along a line, a long line.MR. WINN. But that's with no change in the rate of flows inand out. If we have any kind of increased disintermediation, thatwould precipitate it in a heck of a hurry.MR. PARTEE. Well, we would, of course, finance them.MR. BOEHNE. How?MR. PARTEE. At the window.MR. WALLICH. And how about the large CDs that might run off?If this calculation is that easy to make that you can string them on aline, as Ed says, then others would be doing that, too, and would becutting off their support.-12-5/18/81MS. TEETERS. Has there been any indication that theirdeposits are being withdrawn in anticipation of failure?MR. FORD. That's the biggest single worry I have heard frompeople in the thrift industry: That they have something on the orderof $50 billion in jumbo CDs that are subject to market confidence.They are being tiered on the rates right now, similar to what happenedto First Pennsylvania and other banks, as general recognition of aproblem approaches. I would recommend that we track that carefully onthe early warning indicator. I haven't personally verified thatfigure, but I'm sure Chuck's staff has good information--I hope you do--on how much jumbo CD money is subject to quick market judgments.MR. PARTEE. I don't think we have very good informationbecause the category is $100,000 and over. And the $100,000 notes arepretty secure. We don't know how much is in jumbo CDs.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Some of the big investment banks whoare financing some of the mutual savings banks with RP financing areforcing, quietly, a reduction in volume. First they tried to do it bysimply raising the price on charges. They weren't getting enoughresponse; the mutual savings banks were paying these higher and higherspreads. Now they have begun to exercise some "window guidance," youmight call it, cutting back on the line. But they are trying to do itslowly so as not to trigger [a crisis]--so they wouldn't get the blamefor any kind of financial problem.MR. SCHULTZ. Most of the commercial paper that thrifts hadout was in the California area, is that right? What has happened toit? Is there any indication? Does anybody know?MR. FORD. I know that a number of them have had theirratings lowered. I don't know about the volume, which is what youasked about. I remember seeing that a number of them had theirratings lowered on paper, which should lead to the answer being thatthere has been a reduction in the availability, but I don't know that.I hope somebody on the staff does.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe we'd better get moving along.There is one point I should mention. I'm told that if anybody has anyquestions regarding the Board's examination of the System Open MarketAccount, Clyde Farnsworth and Dave Robinson are prepared to answerquestions. Otherwise, we won't bother with that and we'll just acceptthe report. Does anybody have any questions on that? If not, we'llgo to Scott.MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Any comments?MR. RICE. Scott, does the Federal Reserve have anyindependent authority to operate in foreign exchange markets apartfrom the Treasury--or possibly, in parentheses, in violation ofTreasury policy?MR. PARDEE. We've reviewed this and reviewed this andreviewed this, and ultimately when it comes down to policy the primaryresponsibility rests with the Treasury. We can work on a consultation-13-5/18/81basis and all of that, but if the Treasury objects, then the FederalReserve, since I've been in it, has acceded to the Treasury's wishes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The comment is simply that Congresshas been fairly consistent in its attitude and that there is statutorylanguage which says that the principal responsibility forinternational monetary policy is with the President, operating throughthe Secretary of the Treasury. There are no legal constraints on ouroperating with our resources but it would create a political problem,I think, if we were clearly doing it against the wishes of theTreasury.MR. RICE. I understand the political problem.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are no legal constraints.MR. RICE. Legal constraints were what I was asking about.MS. TEETERS. But you'd be prepared to move as you did theday Reagan was shot if there's severe disorder in the market, wouldn'tyou?MR. PARDEE. I'm not prepared to move at all until I get anauthorization from Washington.MR. RICE. Do you mean from the Treasury?MR. PARTEE. You would let disorderly conditions develop? Asyou see it, you just wouldn't move until Washington said yes?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Those are the instructions. Volcker,Sprinkel and I had a conversation. Scott was there, and [theTreasury] made it very clear that they want prior consultation beforea dollar is spent. They wouldn't give us any flexibility even on, Imust say, relatively minor routine countering of a disorderly market.Even though Sprinkel put in his testimony "countering disorderlymarkets," which is our responsibility under the amended articles ofthe IMF as well as internal policy, in practice I don't think thepolicy has changed any from one of no intervention except in anemergency. We'll just have to wait. Henry was at that meeting alsoand he said: "We'll see. [We'll wait] until such time as a foreigncentral bank requests the kind of cooperation that requires using ourown resources to some degree or until the dollar itself turns aroundso there's a change of view." It's hard to resolve this as anabstract policy issue. I don't think there will be any change until aconcrete incident or situation comes along that seems to indicate theother way.MR. BOEHNE. What about this talk of selling off reserves andreducing swap lines? Is that serious talk in private and could thatbe done if the Treasury so ordered it? Or is that a joint decision tobe made with the Federal Reserve?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My own view is that they won't insiston that.-14-5/18/81MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that they can block, in effect,the use of the swaps for intervention, but I don't think they cancompel us to eliminate them.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think they will try. My ownfeeling is, even thoughthat this is being looked at--and it hasan impact on the exchange markets--that they are unlikely to go tothat extreme. The only way to get rid of the balances withoutupsetting markets would be to do an off-market deal with a few centralbanks. This would still alarm them and I think there would bepolitical reactions. The State Department does not think along theselines at all. I think the State Department would go to the mat withthe Treasury as it became more of a political issue. I don't thinkthe Treasury is likely to go as far as actually insisting on this.MR. SCHULTZ. Does the State Department have its economicteam in place yet?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. Myer Rashish.MR. SCHULTZ. I know, but he hasn't been confirmed.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes he was.MR. SCHULTZ. When?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Tom Andrews hasn't been confirmed,but Myer was confirmed and so was Bob Hormats. That was myunderstanding. It was approved by the Committee. Jesse Helms did notsay anything, but continued to object. I assumed, since it wasapproved by the Committee about three weeks ago, that there was flooracceptance. It is normally routine that within 24 hours the wholeSenate--MR. SCHULTZ. I thought [unintelligible] told me last weekthat Rashish had not been confirmed. Did I misunderstand?MR. WALLICH. I think he was confirmed after 260 questions orsomething like that.MR. PARTEE. The way we would get rid of the foreigncurrency, I assume, is on a declining dollar market. That is, itwould seem usual, wouldn't it, if the dollar were dropping to sellmarks to support the dollar? And in the process we would get rid ofbalances and just wouldn't rebuild them. That would be a practicalstrategy, if we didn't want to--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. After all, that's what the balancesare there for--to cushion if we ever [wanted to]. I'm sure that theCommittee and the Treasury would not want to support the dollar atthese levels; if the dollar started coming down, we probably wouldwant to do something, but not in any significant amounts. And that'squite a ways off yet.MS. TEETERS. But what is there in the outlook that wouldbring the dollar down?-15-5/18/81MR. PARTEE. Well, it's awfully high. I would think exportswill fade.MR. WALLICH. And the current account deficit. We're alreadypredicting that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Roger.MR. GUFFEY. Further along [in his report] Scott mentionedthat the French had inquired about the use of the swap line. Is theTreasury position such as to prohibit us from filling a request forthe French if we otherwise chose to do so?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it's our normal routine totouch base with the Treasury before a swap line is drawn on by aforeign central bank. On the other hand, the Chairman feels, and Ithink he is absolutely right, that we don't want to put ourselves inthe position of not having any judgment in these matters and creatingmore of a situation where the Treasury is giving us day-to-dayinstructions. So, Volcker is planning to tell [unintelligible] thatthese swap lines are available. I don't think that we will run intoany resistance from the Administration as a whole. Whether there willbe some initial demurring by the Treasury I don't know, but I'm surehe also will advise the Secretary of the Treasury. I don't knowwhether Ted wants to comment in this area.MR. TRUMAN. I think that's right. That's the way theprocedures have worked in the past in the long run.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Where there's no large political orpolicy [reason] that would cause us to oppose a foreign central bankdrawing on a swap line with us, I think we ought to play it in thetraditional way that we've always played it. And that is that yes,it's available if the need is there; if a country explains at the timethat it comes in formally [with a request to draw on the swap] andgives us good convincing reasons, obviously we will go along. Thatbrings up the Swedish situation. Did you comment on that?MR. PARDEE. No, I was holding that for my recommendations.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What does that mean?MR. SCHULTZ. That comes next.MR. WALLICH. When we have a swap drawing, we usually want toknow where it is going to lead. With the Swedes we knew that therewas a big European loan coming, which might take us out. With theFrench, one doesn't know where that's going to lead, and I think onehas to look at the situation at the time it develops. The swaps arenot exclusively for the purpose of intervention anyway. They can befor the purpose of a balance of payments financing in a broader sense.I think one can say that with regard to the Swedes, who have a fixedpeg. One can't so easily say that the French have a fixed peg withthe EMS, too. So, again, it becomes more a matter of financing adeficit than arbitrarily intervening in the market. I think thatmakes a pretty good case for the continuance of the swaps.-16-5/18/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Mitterand group is unlikely topermit a devaluation before the elections, which will probably bearound the end of next month. There's an increasing feeling, ofcourse, among knowledgeable people--and even those who are not tooknowledgeable--that this level of the franc is not sustainable andthat if [a devaluation] doesn't come before the election, it will comeafter. And there are implications that this will put a finish to theEuropean monetary system or that even if it's preserved in its facade,it won't have very much meaning. If there are no other comments, youmay turn now to your recommendations.MR. PARDEE. I have no recommendations as far as any actionby the Committee, but I want to inform the Committee that on the 23rdof May the increase from $300 to $500 million in the swap line of theSwedish Reichsbank that we put on last year for one year will mature.The Swedes asked if it could be extended but felt they had nocompelling reasons at this point to justify the extension of thatincrease. They did use the line for $200 million and repaid, asGovernor Wallich just mentioned. But in recent months they have had arather substantial inflow of funds as a result of policy measures theytook early this year, so it's difficult to argue for a continuation ofthis increase in the current environment. It's a hypotheticalsituation rather than an actual situation. Discussions with Mr.Solomon and Mr. Volcker suggested that perhaps we should let theincrease lapse. I informed the Swedish Reichsbank that it wouldlapse, as it was proposed that it would last one year. I told them,should they have further needs down the road, that the availability ofthe swap line is there and that if they want to discuss an increaseagain, we'd be happy to discuss it when they feel they have acompelling case. They accepted that, so I am just informing theCommittee rather than making a recommendation that the increase beextended.MR. PARTEE. It will drop back to $300 million.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And they were not unhappy about it.They recognized that in some circles that might be interpreted as asign of strength. When I told them it was unlikely we would [extendit], they didn't seem to mind at all. Bill.MR. FORD. I just wanted to ask Scott if he could explainsomething. I'm interested in this list of a total of $30 billion inswap lines. I'm just curious to know how you judge, for instance,that the Swiss should have a $4 billion line, and Italy, which hasmore people and I think bigger [unintelligible] should have $3billion. How do you make a decision as to how big the swap lineshould be?MR. PARDEE. Back in 1967 we had an elegant paper that waspublished in the Federal Reserve Bulletin on the criteria for the swaplines based on financial data, reserve position, balance of payments,size of country, and so forth. That was when we were in an activephase of adding countries to the list. We haven't added anybodysince. I think the criteria are more what the problem is that we arefacing at the time and what the financial interest is to the UnitedStates. Our interests are much greater--certainly they were back in1978 when we had the last increases--with the deutschemark, the Swissfranc, and the Japanese yen. Those swap lines were increased at that-17-5/18/81time. So, it's more in response to the situations we face. We dostill review them; and the Board staff remember the criteria and bringthem up from time to time when we are reviewing the size of the swaplines. In the case of the Swedes, it turned out that on these earliercriteria, if we had continued at $500 million, then there might havebeen justification for some of the other Scandinavian countries tocome in and ask for increases. So, we still keep the criteria inmind, but the size reflects more the pressures at the time we aredealing with them.MR. TRUMAN. [We look at the pressures] on both sides. Whenthe Italian swap line was raised to $2 billion in '74, if I remembercorrectly, it was largely to help them out under the circumstances.In fact, as I remember, they made some drawings. And the Mexicanshave also been a case where they wanted an increase to show, as theSwedes did last year, solidarity.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For the currencies that we think weare going to use when we're in trouble we took action to raise theswap lines as part of the November 1, 1978 dollar support package. Inthe others I guess we've been more or less passive.MR. TRUMAN. The British and the Italians and the Mexicansare cases where the shoe has been on the other foot.MR. FORD. Is this $30 billion total here a historic high?MR. PARDEE. Well, it would have to be the high; it will godown from the high by $200 million.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It went to $30 billion on November 1,[1978]. I gather we have to take action to ratify the transactionssince the meeting on March 31.MR. PARDEE. Collecting interest on our balances.MR. PARTEE. Have there been any transactions?MR. BLACK. It will be interesting to see if we get anydissents, given the nature of the decision!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Legally we don't need a resolution, Iassume, on any transactions we do for foreign central banks.Therefore, this particular action is going to be inoperative. Ifthere's nothing else, we'll turn to Peter.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Comments?MR. BOEHNE. I have a question. I have the impression,talking to market types and bankers on the funding side, that there isstill a fair amount of confusion about what the Desk is up to. I wantto inquire--it's probably just schizophrenia--in that we make money on[high] interest rates [when] we follow reserves and so on. Do youhave the impression in New York that the confusion over the change inour [operating] procedures is decreasing or increasing? Do you have asense of that?-18-5/18/81MR. STERNLIGHT. I think a better understanding of ourprocedures has been developing. There was some renewed confusion oruncertainty when the February policy record was published in earlyApril because there seemingly was a different significance to themeaning of the federal funds rate constraint. But with the recordlaid down there and some further comments that were made by theChairman around that time there has been a better understanding of thesignificance of the funds rate limits as well, mainly as checkpointsrather than tight constraints.MR. GUFFEY. There's confusion arising [even] within theCommittee.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I have no comment on that!MR. SCHULTZ. Let me ask you a question. You recall the lasttelephone conversation. I expressed some concern about the marketperception along these lines and wondered whether we might not be ableto say things a little better in a way that might help the market.When we get to the directive today, I think some alternative ways oftalking about the federal funds rate are going to surface because I dohave a sense that some confusion still remains out there. On theother hand, I also have some concern that it is probably important notto change the wording very often because just a change of wording hasa tendency to confuse people. So, there are pros and cons on this.Peter, do you have a sense at this point as to whether there might besome better way to explain what we are actually about in order toclear up any confusion they may have? Or is a change of wording goingto add to it?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I said, I think there is a bettersense of what we are about that is permeating the markets. It's amessage that [could use] further repetition or elaboration asopportunities [arise] in testimony or speeches or interviews to conveyjust how the procedures work and our approach to the funds rate as aset of checkpoints. I've heard the question from market people: Ifit only has the significance of a checkpoint, why do you have it inyour directives at all? I think that's certainly a legitimate pointfor the Committee to want to discuss.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, that's what I keep hearing: If it's justa checkpoint, why do you put it in or why don't you just say that moreclearly? They get confused about the way we say it.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the directive does, in effect, saythat [it's a checkpoint] now.MR. PARTEE. I think we have to have it. Otherwise, how dowe know what the checkpoint is? We could say that that's what it is,although technically that's what the paragraph says.MR. SCHULTZ. I know, but it seems to confuse them for somereason.MR. BLACK. Peter, you say the [concept of a] checkpoint isthere, but I don't read it quite that strongly.MR. PARTEE. Why is that?-19-5/18/81MR. SCHULTZ. Maybe I started a conversation that best oughtto be done later on. I withdraw the question.MR. STERNLIGHT. It seems to me that the change in language--I think it was at the December meeting--[clarified it]. Up to then Ithink the wording called for it more as a real constraint, whereas Iread the current wording as more of a checkpoint. That's because weare instructed to maintain reserves along a certain path consistentwith the growth path for the aggregates that the Committee voted forand, if it appears that over a period of time the funds rate is notgoing to be consistent with maintaining reserves on that growth path,then the Manager is to notify the Chairman, and so on.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Whenever we come [to the end of ourcomments] in this area, there's coffee available. These transactionshave to be ratified.MR. WALLICH. I have a question.MR. PARTEE. I have a question, too.MR. WALLICH. Peter, knowing only what we've learned from theincoming data, had we responded very strongly to the upsurge [in thegrowth of the aggregates] in April would it have been possible to makemuch of a difference in the course of the aggregates? What would haveto have been done to do that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think we did respond promptly. Wedidn't get the rate effect until well along in April. Knowing how thewhole month turned out, if we could have been omniscient at thebeginning of the month, I suppose we could have been even morevigorous early in the month. I'm inclined to be skeptical as towhether it would have made a great difference on how the April growthrate itself would have turned out.MR. WALLICH. But not being omniscient, just getting thenumbers as they came, I presume we could have acted more immediately.We could have relied not just on the automatic mechanism that movesthe funds rate; we could have dropped the nonborrowed path and raisedthe discount rate and so on.MS. TEETERS. We did.MR. STERNLIGHT. We didn't during that first four-weekperiod, Governor Teeters; we did in the final three weeks. As Iinterpreted it--and Steve may want to comment--I thought perhaps therewas not a need to do that in those first four weeks because there waslighter-than-expected borrowing in the very early part of April. Andbecause of that we were going to be imposing on the banking system ademand for even greater borrowing as we got further into April, whichin itself looked as though it was going to be exerting significantlyincreased reserve pressure without the need to make thesediscretionary, if you will, downward adjustments in the nonborrowedreserve path. We were looking for borrowing to have to rise up to the$1.6 or $1.7 billion area, well above that initial $1150 millionlevel, as we got further along into April.-20-5/18/81MR. CORRIGAN. But the fact is that in the first four weeksyou actually moved the nonborrowed path up.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, those were just technical adjustmentsdue to the multipliers.MR. PARTEE. I'd ask the question more historically thanHenry did. We had a 13.9 percent increase in M-1B shift-adjusted inApril. We had evidence fairly early on that the month would be strongbecause one of those early weeks came in strong. What would it havetaken to have achieved, say, a 10 percent rate of M-1B growth for themonth of April? Is it within the realm of possibility?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it would have taken [steps] thatwould have had to be done in March.MR. PARTEE. Before we knew that there was an increase.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. That would be my view.MS. TEETERS. But we were well below our money growth path,weren't we, for the first three months? And to a certain extent weexpected a rebound in the money supply in April in order to bring theGNP numbers and the money growth into line.MR. AXILROD. Right. Governor Partee, worrying about how topresent alternatives and so forth, we did look at the elasticities inthe money market model to see if truly we could get an effect within amonth, because in these alternatives we do have effects even in Mayfrom decisions taken in the last light almost--a little beyond themiddle--of May. And if my memory is right--it may be off a little--itlooked as if a one half percentage point increase in the funds rate[would be needed to effect the growth of money in a month]. You could[get the same effect by] working through the borrowing and nonborrowedpath, but it comes down to this: that 1/2 percentage point on thefunds rate seemed to [have an effect of] about 0.3 percent a month ongrowth in the money supply.MR. PARTEE. Right away?MR. AXILROD. Within the month. So, if you wanted to get [aneffect of] 3 percentage points, multiply that by 10; it's probably notlinear but it might be on the order of 5 percentage points [on thefunds rate]. [So, if the funds rate were 13 percent at the beginningof a month] and you made it 18 percent pretty promptly during themonth, according to the monthly model it would produce some genuineeffect--on the order of 3 percentage points or so--in the moneysupply. That is all we really have to work on. But then you'd reallyhave to know pretty early in the month what is going to happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where you are [on theagenda]. I understand that you have to ratify the transactions.Maybe you don't want to, after all of this!MR. PARTEE. I have one other question Paul, if I might,before we do that. We did have a large increase in rates in themonth. [The increase in] short rates was historically very large andlong rates [went up] quite a bit. One assumes that there must have-21-5/18/81been losers and well as gainers in that market shift. In fact, thearithmetic suggests it, so it must be so. In that last comment inyour statement, Peter, you said the big dealers are in no trouble thatyou can see.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I said I'm not aware of disastrouslosses. There were certainly losses taken, mainly in early Aprilbecause they had some big [positions] at the end of March. But ourimpression is that losses were taken by big, well capitalized dealers.They were unhappy, clearly, but they were not put into a state wherethey couldn't function. There were some smaller [problem] situations,not among the major primary dealers but, as I said, among fringeoperators. I can really think of just one smaller dealer operationthat was put out of business.MR. PARTEE. Yes, the one that was in the paper.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's almost standard practice for allthe dealers now, unlike a year ago when only half of them did it, tohedge in the futures market.MR. PARTEE. Right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now, they [can] hedge purposely.MR. PARTEE. Right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But they can hedge pretty well undergovernment securities.MR. PARTEE. Well, the question I have in my mind is that thedealers hedge in the futures market and the futures market protectsthe dealers, then, against a very sharp rise in rates. Who is on theother side of those futures transactions and why don't we hear fromthem? They must have lost as much as the dealers were able not tolose.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] dentists.MR. PARTEE. It may be that it's just very widelydistributed.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are a lot of dentists in thearea.MR. PARTEE. You haven't heard of any problems?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, no. The dealers did have some lossesin March. In general, it's true that to some extent they were helpedout by hedging in the futures market. Obviously, there were otherparticipants on the other side of the futures market who have lost,but it just seems to be well diversified. We have not heard ofterrible calamitous problems there.MR. BALLES. I wonder if I can just ask one more technicalquestion of Peter. Can you bring me up to date [on your procedures]when you find borrowings departing from assumptions? As I recall, thelast time I heard this discussed you said that in the following period-22-5/18/81you adjust by only half of the undershoot or overshoot, which doesn'tseem to be working out all that well, as far as I can see. Is thatstill the practice?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, in the current three-week subperiod,we went beyond that kind of adjustment and moved the nonborrowed pathmore in relation to the overshoot. Initially we appeared to berunning about $550 million above on total reserves, and the initialdownward adjustment in the nonborrowed path was $250 million. Then aweek later, it looked as if we were running over by $375 or $400million and a further downward adjustment was made in the nonborrowedpath because of that. There was also another adjustment; in the May6th week we had deliberately accepted some shortfall in nonborrowedreserves because borrowing had been running higher than expected. Itwas kind of the aftermath of that super tight week at the end ofApril. So, another $100 million or so downward adjustment was made inthe nonborrowed path for that reason. In total, the downwardadjustment in the nonborrowed reserve path relative to the totalreserve path was $485 million, which in this case was somewhat morethan the amount by which total reserves were running above their path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We still have to ratify the transactions.MR. PARTEE. So move.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they will be ratified.When I came back, I thought you had finished your coffee break. I seethe coffee is there. Do you want to hear from Mr. Axilrod so you canchew over a doughnut and his comments? Maybe we'll do that, if youdon't take too long.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that all there is?MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, he brought us right to the brink and thendropped us, didn't he?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't quite prepared for you to stop sosoon, but why don't we have the coffee break.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have several alternatives laid outbefore us. They take as their low point where we were last time asconverted [for] the remaining part of the period, due to theunexpectedly high [M-1B] growth rate in April. We are, as you know,at the midpoint of the range for M-1B adjusted. The only comfort Ifeel about M-1B adjusted is that we estimate these shifts about threedifferent ways and they all [produce] more or less the same [results].They are probably all wrong, but the different ways of estimating comeout more or less the same. In the last meeting we picked what is theequivalent of "C" this time, which I believe [involves growth that] islow in the range. However, if I recall correctly, the actual M2 camein a little less than we projected the last time, right?-23-5/18/81MR. AXILROD. In April it didn't on average, but the data inlate April and thus far in early May suggest that in May M2 will comein quite low.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And as you see, bank credit has sneakedjust inside the range and M3 remains above its range. While there isa lot of week-to-week change, I suppose that is the trend on theabsolutely most recent money supply figures, if there is such a thingas a trend for about 3 weeks or 4 weeks [of data]. That's where westand. Alternative A would leave us theoretically running in themiddle of the range for M-1B adjusted but would leave us above,although closer to, the ranges in the case of the broader aggregates--only slightly closer, I guess, in the case of M2. That seems to me tobe the range for our discussion. Who would like to start?MR. PARTEE. Any of those outcomes is acceptable in terms ofwhat might happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to say the range ofoutcomes is likely to be somewhat wider than the ranges presented tothe Committee. So, as usual, we are moving in a direction of bias andrisk averseness or whatever. I agree that any of these results wouldnot be disturbing in and of themselves. But it's a question of whichway we should lean.MS. TEETERS. Steve, you show M2 for May at 6.6 percent. Isit below that now?MR. AXILROD. We don't have weekly data, except for certaincomponents. But the weakness in the weekly data on money market fundsand what we have seen in small time and savings deposits have led usto project M2 for May generally around that rate. So, it reflects thelatest data for those components for which we have weekly data.MS. TEETERS. The 6.6 percent does?MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Let me start out with a very quick story aboutthe fellow who went to Dublin and asked directions to a castle outsideof town. He said: "Can you tell me how to get there?" And thefellow he asked said: "Of course I can, but you can't start fromhere." I'm afraid I have that same kind of feeling as we go around.The last time I expressed a lot of vague fears, which I guess have allcome true, that we have gotten higher interest rates and a strongereconomy and everything seems to be going in different directions dueto that. Money seems to affect interest rates, and interest ratesaffect money; but neither one seems to have much effect on theeconomy. So, I have some real questions about how we should go aboutdoing this. In addition, I have the same thoughts that were expressedhere a little earlier: That we are putting a lot of pressure onvarious parts of the economy and that it's going to be hard to get outof this without some kind of financial crisis. The one really strongfeeling I have is that monetary policy alone won't do the job for us.But we don't have much choice. Over the weekend I looked at theBluebook and I thought about "B" tending toward "A." But the more I-24-5/18/81listen to the reports that things are pretty strong out there, itseems fairly clear that we don't have any option but to continue torestrain this economy. What we've done so far isn't having too mucheffect. So, I guess I would now come out somewhere between "B" and"C," keeping borrowing around $2 billion and perhaps shading that upif necessary.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, unless the President told youthis morning that he's willing to change his fiscal policy and have abalanced budget in fiscal 1982 by forgetting about tax cuts andcutting back on defense increases--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question answers itself.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Unless you could tell us that, I feelthat we have to go even further this way. I feel we should takealternative C, but not the initial borrowing assumption of $3 billion.I'd start off with a $2-1/4 to $2-1/2 billion borrowing assumption. Ithink that we have to have a fed funds range going up to 22 percent.And even that will be skewed; in other words, we are likely to be nearthe ceiling fairly quickly unless we are very lucky and we see muchlower growth in May. I recognize, if we do get something on the orderof 5-1/2 or 6 percent [M-1B] growth in May, what this would require inJune and that, therefore, pressure is likely to continue mounting overthat period until the end of June. It seems to me that we are betteroff to be very firm and vigorous in our responses early in the game.I'm influenced not only by the strength of the economy--and there is awidespread feeling around the country, and certainly in the market,that with the exception of the troubled sectors the economy is verystrong--but I'm also influenced by the fact that if the President'sprogram goes through, even with a compromise on the tax cut package,the fourth quarter is likely to be much stronger, and the thirdquarter probably somewhat stronger, than the present quarter. And inthose circumstances we might have major problems [achieving] ourfourth-quarter targets. I feel we are better off trying to nip thisnow than trying to be more gentle in our approach; the latter approachis going to store up a lot of problems toward the end of the year.That's all I'll say right now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interrupt, I have a feelingthat this relative buoyancy in the economy against expectations isimportantly affected by the psychology of the Administration's programitself, the tax reduction.MR. SCHULTZ. And the way they talk about it.MR. PARTEE. It's the [tack] of the Administration.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In the financial markets, privatelypeople will say that they don't see the difference between a Keynesiantax cut and a supply sider tax cut; it's going to be the same. We arecalculating internally within the New York Fed that the budget deficitthis year will be above $65 billion and that for fiscal '82, if thePresident's program is enacted, it will not be $45 billion or less butit will be $75 billion. I would say the majority of the big firms inthe financial markets also are forecasting budgetary deficits very-25-5/18/81much higher than the Administration or even than the CBO estimates.So, that's a factor. I think there would be a remarkable turnaroundin psychology and attitudes if we had a more traditional conservativeapproach to the deficit question by the Administration.MR. SCHULTZ. I think the way they say it is of criticalimportance. The President is essentially an upbeat kind of fellow; Ithink he wants to talk that way. But the talk has been essentiallythat we can get out of this almost without any real pain and withoutany real problems. I just don't think that that's the right way to betalking at this stage of the game because, heaven knows, it's prettyhard to see how that could be possible. If they would talk in alittle more practical way, I think it would help.MR. WALLICH. I think they believe this. I have heard thisnow for a week from Beryl Sprinkel: Everything will be easy, if theFed just keeps the money supply--MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I was going to add to that. They say wecan get out of this with no problems unless the Fed screws up. If wehave problems, it's the Fed's fault.MR. WALLICH. That's exactly it.MR. ROOS. I don't know. In all fairness, an awful lot of uswho have been advocating monetary restraint over the years have saidrepeatedly that we can't get over a binge such as the one we have beenon without suffering pain. Whether it's Beryl Sprinkel or Joe Jonesor whoever, those who have advocated restraint have also warned thatthere is no easy way out of it. So, I'm not sure that there hasn'tbeen some recognition of the pain that inevitably will be required tobring an economy out of the excesses that this economy has beenexperiencing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't mean to get off on a discussionof pain. Governor Partee, what do you have to say?MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree that we have to be restrictive.But I would say in response to Tony that what we should do is to setour money growth course the way we would like to have it. If itdeviates from that, then we'll automatically become more restrictivein terms of interest rates if we need to be tighter, or lessrestrictive if we need to be easier. So, I don't really see movingall the way down to alternative C in terms of the specifications.What would we like to have develop in terms of the aggregates? That'sreally the question we are being asked. And in my view "A" holds usright along the mid-section of the M-1B range. It's a little ample onM2 and M3 and, therefore, there might be a case for alternative B inorder to adjust for having been over on the broader aggregates. Asfor the numbers for the aggregates, expansion of 3 percent in M-1B forApril to June is quite reasonable; it's a very modest expansion andwould be a quite acceptable outcome. Now, we don't know what interestrates might be associated with the 3 percent increase. And if Iunderstand the meaning of the funds rate range now as the points atwhich we're to have a consultation rather than points within which theManager operates, I think we might want to raise that range in "B" to16 to 22 percent. I can certainly imagine the rate going to 22percent with no trouble at all, and I don't know that it would be-26-5/18/81fruitful to have an exchange [of views] until it gets to about 22percent. But that's just a test point, or guidepost, or whatever yousaid earlier, Peter, rather than a specification to the Manager.There is one other point that I want to make now. I think wewill be in as much difficulty politically if there is weakness in theaggregates as if there is strength. We could quickly get quite areaction from very weak growth in the monetary aggregates, and that isnot unprecedented. Starting in the spring of both '75 and '76, therewas a surge in the aggregates that was subsequently reversed. Thefact that the last couple of occasions haven't [produced that result]doesn't mean it won't occur again. April is still an odd month; ithas a lot of tax transactions in it. So it seems to me that we oughtto be in a posture where we can give a little if the numbers come inweak as well as tighten up a little if the numbers come in strong, andwe ought to do it from a neutral position. So, I could accept thespecifications of alternative A, but I lean rather strongly to "B" asa conservative posture.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And would you take the associatedborrowing assumption of "B" of $2-1/2 billion?MR. PARTEE. Well, $2-1/2 billion seems a little strong. Iwanted to ask Steve why he [raised] that. I would say $2 billion isabout where we are now, isn't it?MR. AXILROD. That's right. We thought with our projectionsthat to stay with unchanged money market conditions we'd expect anoutcome more like "A" than "B." So, with added restraint from "B," itlooked as if we'd have to have a higher funds rate, on the order of apercentage point or so higher. It is hard to relate that exactly tothe level of borrowing, but that tends to push up the level ofborrowing by $450 to $500 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are below $2 billion of borrowing rightat the moment.MR. AXILROD. It was $1.8175 billion on Friday exactly.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the average of the last threeweeks was about $2 billion.MR. PARTEE. I would say $2 billion, Tony, and then if M-1Bcomes in strong, that would soon develop additional tension andadditional borrowings, as it did in this last episode. I'd favor moreof a neutral start.MS. TEETERS. That implies a negative rate of growth in M-1Bduring June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon what happens late inMay. The staff is assuming an increase late in May.MR. AXILROD. It might be helpful to add, Mr. Chairman, thatthe May estimate of a little over 6 percent in M-1B growth does assumean increase from the preliminary data of the 13th to the end of themonth of around $5 billion. If an increase of that magnitude doesn't-27-5/18/81develop, May could turn out to be unchanged or be at a level that haschanged around 1 or 2 percent. It could go almost either way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I feel this May-June period is verycrucial in our efforts to convince the market that we are bound anddetermined to hit these targets that we've set. And given the largebulge we had in the April numbers, I feel we simply can't tolerate anymore than a modest expansion in M-1B. Along with the fiscal stancethat the market perceives, the behavior of the aggregates is going tobe the most important thing determining the business outlook ratherthan all those things we hammered through in our go-around earlierthis morning. So, I think we really ought to try very strongly to hitthese March-June targets that we established at our March meeting,which would incline me to favor alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, this kind of economic environment isone where most people see strength in the economy and where I wouldcharacterize the economy as indicating a pronounced lack of weakness.It seems to me that we may continue to see money growth coming inpretty strong. And in this environment, it seems to me the reallybasic question is how rapidly we want to bring M2 and M3 back towithin their target ranges--whether we want to bring them back by theend of June or whether we are prepared to wait somewhat longer. Myown view is that we should try to get M2 and M3 back within theirtarget ranges as soon as possible--that is, by the end of June. Andalternative C, of course, is the alternative that will do that.Alternative C, if we get the results projected, would result in allthree of the aggregates being within their target ranges: M-1B at thelow end, and M2 and M3 at the top. I think that is important toachieve. If we had an economy that we could be fairly sure wasweakening and if money demand was slackening, we could take a longertime to try to bring these aggregates back to within their targetranges. But in the current circumstances, with recent money growthhaving been so strong and with every possibility that strong moneydemand will continue, I would see less risk in trying to get theaggregates back [on track]. Of course, to pursue alternative C wouldimply, as has been pointed out, substantially higher rates than wehave now and somewhat higher rates than we would anticipate if wepursued alternative B. That is, we would have these higher rates inthe short run, or at least during the month of June and possiblylonger. However, by the fourth quarter, if I read Appendix II [of theBluebook] correctly, alternative C would yield lower short-terminterest rates and alternative B, if pursued, would yield higherinterest rates. So it's a question of whether one wants to takehigher interest rates now or in the fourth quarter. I would opt fortaking them now. And that would lead me to favor alternative C. Afinal reason for favoring alternative C right now is that we reallyare not too sure what we are working with when we rely exclusively onM-1B. In these circumstances I think we ought to attach moreimportance to M2 and to getting M2 back within the target range, so Ifavor alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.-28-5/18/81MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I line up with Governor Partee onthis one. I think we ought to follow a middle course here. We havehad a major change in policy, as defined by interest rates, in thepast four weeks. We have seen the federal funds rate move up by 300basis points. There hasn't been enough time for us to see what impactthat is going to have on the economy and monetary growth rates. Ithink there's a tendency as we get near the peak of activity always tofeel that we are not accomplishing anything--that the economy somehowis not sensitive to interest rates. I think back to March, 1980 whenthat feeling was clearly dominant in this Committee. We didn't knowat the time that the economy had already been climbing for two monthsas we were sitting at the table and as Fred Schultz was about to leadus into a vigorous credit control program.MR. SCHULTZ. What a friend!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In defense of Fred Schultz, that's notwholly apparent to me, [even] with the benefit of hindsight. Had wenot had the credit control program we might not have had the decline.MR. MORRIS. Well, I think the evidence is that the declinehad already started.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ex-post people say that. I don't know.MR. MORRIS. It seems to me that one could make a case here,at least for the next few weeks, not to set too restrictive a coursein the aggregates until we can assess the effect of what we havealready done. So, "B" looks pretty good to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. There are a couple of things, Mr. Chairman, thathave led me in the same direction as Mr. Solomon and Governor Rice.We're beginning to wonder--and it's obviously speculation rather thanproof yet--whether we aren't witnessing some downward shift in thedemand for money, along the same lines as occurred in the 1975-76episode, because of the institutional changes affecting businessdeposits with this surge in money market mutual funds. Somesimulations we have been doing over the past five months show thatM-1B is now well below the level that would have been indicated byhistorical demand relationships, and I'm really beginning to wonderwhether there hasn't been a downward shift. I don't know what studiesyou have been doing on this, Steve. But if that is going on, and Isuspect it might be, the shift-adjusted range that we have set forourselves could actually give us more expansion than we counted onwhen we picked out the range at the beginning of the year, even thoughwe are now, as of April, in the middle of that shift-adjusted range.And that leads me to lean more toward "C" than "B."One thing that gives me real pause about coming out there iswhat Governor Gramley as well as Steve and the staff remarked onearlier today: Namely, it seems to indicate that we'd have to keepinterest rates at a very high level for a very long time. We needsome real weakening in the economy in order to hit even the midpointof our shift-adjusted M-1B range. But, again, our staff has beendoing some work on the differences between the liquidity preferencemodel of interest rates and the more traditional loanable funds theory-29-5/18/81of interest rate determination. And the net of that is that, exceptfor the very short run, interest rates are going to be determined moreby credit market conditions than pure money demand equations [wouldsuggest]. This leads us to conclude that it's distinctly possiblethat we can get a slowdown in money growth this year from last year,along the lines of the midpoint of our shift-adjusted range, withoutkeeping interest rates that high that long, and to a point where wewould see somewhat more real economic growth in '81 than the Boardstaff [has projected] and almost about the same real economic growth,close to 3 percent, in 1982. Admittedly, a lot of this is conjecturaland one might even say speculative; but taking both of those reasonstogether tilts me toward alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, when you were out, GovernorGramley spoke of some frustration in terms of trying to figure outwhat the economy is doing. We have more than our share offrustrations in policy here, too. We just got through revising up themoney supply a little in the first quarter, convincing ourselves thatthat made more sense. But now we find that the GNP may be revised upmore, so we're further away than we thought we were.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait 'til next year's revision!MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.MR. CORRIGAN. We have a little frustration, too, withrespect to this question of how quickly the banking system responds towhat we do. We saw a classic illustration of that in this periodhere, apropos to your comment earlier, Governor Partee. We seem tohave a situation where, even when we begin to firm up, what happensfor a couple of weeks is that the banks sit there and wait untilWednesday and cover their whole position on Wednesday. And the fundsrate doesn't change except on Wednesday and then everybody discountsthe change. And then for a week or two after the banks run down theirexcess reserves and end up with deficiencies. Somehow or other, inways that are not clear to me, it takes a couple more weeks and werevise away all those deficiencies with "as-of" adjustments. Thenfinally, after all of those processes have run their course, we beginto see some pressure either in terms of borrowing or the funds rate,or both. I will also confess to a little continuing sense offrustration about the construction of and subsequent adjustments tothe reserve paths, which comes up again in this forthcoming period.The Bluebook indicates that, looking out over the April-June period,any of the alternatives contemplates a substantial acceleration inreserve growth while at the same time about the same or less growth inmoney. I don't know what all that means except that maybe we don'tknow as much as we think we know.As I suggested earlier, there are some risks here, and Ithink we have to be prepared to take some risks. In the currentcircumstances I come out somewhere around "C," too, partly because Ithink the economy, if anything, is stronger, and partly because Ithink money growth is likely to be stronger in the short run than weexpect. And finally, like Governor Rice, if we have to take a bit ofa slowdown or a decline in the economy, which we may have to do, I'drather do it now than later, partly because I think it makes more-30-5/18/81sense in the context of hitting the annual targets but partly becauseit forestalls an even more serious problem that would occur if we let[money growth] continue to build up. Given all of that, I come outsomewhere around "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I see the economy lifted to a higherlevel of [activity] and, with a given rate of money growth, we have ahigher level of velocity than one would have expected. Certainly, wehave to [get money growth to] come back [toward our] midpoints. If wedon't do that, I think we will have continuing pressure from highinterest rates for a long time, with the economy being held down byalways bumping [up against] the admittedly very tight-fitting moneysupply ceilings. I find that uncomfortable to contemplate for thefuture. So, if we could create a little breathing space in the realsector, letting out some of that steam that built up during the firstquarter, I think we would operate more comfortably with our existingtargets and in the long run we'd probably have less high interestrates. Conceivably, maintenance of these high interest rates wouldgive us this [result] anyway through some sort of financial crunch.But we don't want to provoke that. So, I would lean toward exerting agood deal of pressure now in order to get [rid of the imbalances in]the economy and [in] the relationship of the aggregates to theeconomy. That suggests that "C" is the appropriate alternative. Tothe extent that one can [anticipate] these things, if "C" will allowthe funds rate to come down later even though it may mean a higherfunds rate immediately, that's what I think we should aim at, i.e.somewhat less pressure in the economy for the longer run.I would say one other thing. Given the way we were surprisedby events in April, we ought to examine whether we couldn't respondmore flexibly to such developments. I realize that means respondingto the weekly data in a way that the data themselves don't reallyjustify. Nevertheless, it has happened again and again that we wereovertaken by events and, in the light of hindsight, probably wouldhave wanted to move faster. I don't recall so many instances in whichwe did move fast and then regretted it or didn't move and then foundthat that would have been the right thing to do. On balance, I thinkour failures have been on the side of actions [that were] too littleand too late.MR. SCHULTZ. But you want to be asymmetrical about that,don't you?MR. WALLICH. On the down side I do have my reservations,yes. In short, I would lean toward "C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm primarilymotivated by a desire to hit the targets that we set earlier, notbecause they're magic but because that would tend to avoid the samekind of thing that happened in June, July, and August of last year.That is, things got away from us after one month [of] fairly large[monetary growth]. We say that isn't terribly bad, but when we startpiling one month after the other, we then have a very small chance ofhitting our targets for the year. Therefore, restraint at the moment-31-5/18/81is attractive to me, but I'm not sure that I would go as far as "C."The staff's estimate of growth in M-1B of 6 percent or a little abovein May under alternative B probably is subject to being off by atleast 100 percent. That is, I think we could get 3 percent or 9percent in May as easily as 6 percent. Thus, my prescription would besomething between "B" and "C," with a borrowing level initially ofabout $2.1 or $2.2 billion and with the rather specific instruction tothe Desk and to the staff that if money growth as it develops in Mayis running above 6 percent, the borrowing level should be adjustedupward promptly to $2-1/2 billion, [the level] I believe the staffwould say at the moment is consistent with "B." So, I am choosingnumbers for growth in the aggregates between "B" and "C," with aninitial borrowing level of $2.1 or $2.2 billion but I would beprepared to move borrowing up rather rapidly if growth in M-1B startscoming in above 6 percent in May. A federal funds range of 17 to 22percent would be acceptable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think the current economic situation and thegeneral climate that we're in call for restraint. And we really haveto hit our targets. I'd be prepared to err some on the side ofrestraint, but it seems to me that alternative B does that. I findgoing all the way to "C" to be too much in that direction. So, Iwould come out in the neighborhood of "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I would opt for "C" for most of the reasonsalready stated. There is one further reason, and that is thepossibility that the new seasonal adjustments are a bit unrealistic interms of the degree to which they've adjusted the aggregates downward.I'd like to throw in one other thought, too. If we are interested inachieving the greatest degree of confidence that could reasonably beexpected in the financial markets, I wonder if in the directive--andthis piggybacks somewhat on some of the things that Fred Schultz hassaid--we ought to consider eliminating any reference to our federalfunds rate checkpoints. It seems to me that there could be a lot ofreasons why the Chairman would consult at a critical phase. It isconceivable that growth of the aggregates, for example, could be asource of concern that might lead to adjustments. I do know thatthere is still a degree of uncertainty in the minds of marketparticipants as to why we include a reference to checkpoints on thefed funds rate and not on some of the other [factors] that couldinfluence our [need to] consult. So, I think some considerationshould be given to clarifying that with a statement, perhaps by theChairman, that we consult for a lot of reasons and that under our newprocedures fed funds checkpoints are no more meaningful than othercheckpoints that would lead to consultation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll get to that subject a little later.Mr. Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the mood of theCommittee is becoming very clear. This is a Committee that follows atough policy. It's only a question of how far we go. I share thegeneral view that I believe prevails here that we're dealing with avery strong economy and that our problem this year in terms of the-32-5/18/81monetary aggregates is primarily making sure that we don't overrun theupper ends [of our ranges] rather than the other way around. But Iwant to call the Committee's attention to the fact that we haveessentially one alternative that implies no change in money marketconditions and that's "A." The other two are both tougher. And if mysense of relationships is correct, the borrowing numbers we'reassociating with "B" and "C" are not by any means associated with themidpoints of the federal funds ranges that we're talking about here.The present level of borrowing is less than $2 billion. Under "C"that would go all the way up to $3 billion. And if we go that far, Ithink we're going to end up having a telephone consultation by nextMonday, if not earlier. We have done a lot of tightening recently,and I think we ought to try to keep that degree of tightness andperhaps go somewhat further. But I wouldn't want us to get into asituation in which if some temporary weakness in the aggregates doesdevelop, as Governor Partee suggests it might, we would end up runninginterest rates back down again. That would be quite unproductive, ifthe Committee's diagnosis of the economic problem is a correct one.So, I think the better alternative would be to stick with "B" and thencome back a month from now at the next meeting and go further if weneed to.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. I come out pretty much on the consensus of between"B" and "C," leaning toward "C." I share the concern about the greatrisk to credibility and the overriding need to meet the targets and tostart now rather than to wait until later. We've been fortunate thatthe seasonal adjustments, if I read the staff work right, had theeffect of making the more recent aggregate numbers look lower. Theyare below some of the others, which were adjusted upward, is the way Iread that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It makes April lower, but May and Junehigher.MR. FORD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. February is higher and April and Januaryare [lower].MR. FORD. Depending on how different Fed watchers interpretthat, there may be a little vulnerability about some of the downwardmovement from pretty high numbers to quite low ones, even though inother timeframes they are offset. Overall, I would say we'd have togo with a reasonably tight policy so as not to pay later, hoping it istrue, as I think Governor Rice said, that we'll get slightly higherrates now and receive as our reward lower rates later in the year thanwe would otherwise have under "B" or "A." However, I'm very concernedabout the fragility of the marketplace. Fred Schultz in his commentsmentioned the words "financial crisis" and it almost sounded casual tome, Fred. I don't mean to insult you but I don't think that'ssomething that we should--MR. SCHULTZ. This is not my day!MR. PARTEE. Casual?-33-5/18/81MR. FORD. You said there might be a financial crisis and Ithought everyone would blanch. I blanched, but nobody else did.We're obviously not going to put that in the policy record, but Ireally do hope that we redouble our efforts to watch very carefullyfor possible problems arising in the most vulnerable sectors, thehousing-related sectors, and try every device we can think of to helpthe thrifts that is not a bail-out, which would [subvert] monetarypolicy. I'm referring to advocating right now federal preemption ofthe limits on due-on-sale clauses in 17 states, including some of thebiggest ones, and things like that. That would help them to reliquifythemselves better without an outright bail-out, which would simplyexacerbate our monetary control problems. That's the only thing Iwould like to add to this process as we head toward this obviousconsensus of "B" to "C"--that we have to redouble our efforts in thearea of monitoring and doing whatever we can that is not inflationaryto help the [institutions that] bear the brunt of it. I don't knowthat there's an answer, Chuck. I know what you're going to say, butwe had better be searching.MR. PARTEE. Due-on-sale doesn't help them this month or nextmonth, that's for sure.MR. FORD. No, but if you do the calculations on the amountof money they can recycle, that makes a big difference.MR. PARTEE. It might next year or the year after.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, I'm shocked by the consensus that isemerging. I don't think this economic outlook, which is based on "A,"is at all encouraging. It means another year or maybe two years of nogrowth in the economy. I find the unemployment rates projected, withno growth, rather unbelievable also. More importantly, it seems to methat the level of borrowing is now becoming very crucial here. Atjust under $2 billion we have already put a great deal of pressure onthe market. We have shot [short-term interest] rates up 3 to 5 fullpercentage points, depending on which ones you look at. If we moveborrowing up another $1 billion, the [proposed fed funds upper end of]22 percent isn't going to hold. It seems to me that we really shouldbe somewhere between "A" and "B" and perhaps move the borrowing fromthe present $1.7 or $1.8 billion to just over $2 billion and let thatbe the deciding point here. I'd set the [top of the funds rate] rangeat certainly no more than 21 percent, which I find difficult toaccept. We're putting a lot of pressure on the market now. Wehaven't had enough time, as Frank said, to assess what that suddenchange in interest rates is going to do. I think it's foolish to runrates up another 5 percentage points in such a short period of time,which I'm convinced "C" would do at this point. I can live with "B,"but I don't like it. I'd much rather have the borrowing halfwaybetween $2 and $2-1/2 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't sound like such a weakapproach.MR. PARTEE. No, no.MR. SCHULTZ. That borrowing [level] is pretty good.-34-5/18/81MR. PARTEE. That's a $400 million adjustment right off.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're above--MS. TEETERS. Yes, but it's better than the [$2-1/2] billionthat everybody else is talking about.MR. SCHULTZ. [I don't think] that's right. I was startingat $2 billion and moving it up from there.MR. PARTEE. Yes, me too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I come down pretty clearly for"C." The arguments for that position have been stated and I will nottake the time to restate them. But just by way of summary: Thestrength of the economy worries me; I wonder about the recent rapidgrowth in money and that it may not be temporary; also theexpectations issue looms rather large in my thinking. I think it'simportant to have a continuously firm policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, there are several things we haven'treally talked about this morning, including the internationalsituation, the Middle East, and a number of other things thatcertainly could alter the outlook very quickly. A second point isthat I'd be very happy if somehow we could get away from the checkwriting privileges on these money funds, because I think we areexposed there with the funds investing in issues that could go sour onthem. We may have more volatility built into this than we arethinking about. The third is that we talk about targets as if theywere fixed and we forget base-drift and a whole lot of history thatgoes into them. I'm not sure that hitting the midpoint of our newrange is what we really ought to be doing. A little miss on the lowside might be more helpful than misses on the high side. I'mdisturbed by the M2 and M3 figures, which tend to go on the high sidein this set-up. On the other hand, I have some sympathy with Lyle'spoint of view in that I'd hate to see us run the rates up and then runthem right back down again. That would not be very helpful in termsof our longer-run objectives. To take a stance at this time, I wouldbe content to be able to hit somewhere between "B" and "C" rather thanto set a target and then be all over the lot in terms of ourperformance. I, too, would be inclined to raise the borrowingobjective to help move in that direction; I'd go to $2.1 billion orsomething in that neighborhood as a first move.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle.MR. DOYLE. Mr. Chairman, it's very difficult for me not tobe influenced by the state of the economy in the Seventh FederalReserve District, particularly the credit-sensitive industries, whichare extremely depressed. Every day the feeling seems to be growingthat the risks are greater that some of these industries may notrecover their former strength. Hence, I would favor alternative A butI could reluctantly support alternative B.-35-5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess that is everybody, unless somebodyhas not been heard from.MR. PARTEE. We haven't heard from you.MR. SCHULTZ. We're about to!MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll reveal my forecast on where theCommittee would come out, which by coincidence or otherwise doesn'tmake me feel uncomfortable. We have had a 5-1/2 percent [M-1B] targetfor the quarter, and the alternative that's consistent with that is"C." But we had a big increase [in M-1B] in April. My forecast wasthat it might not look too good or that people might not want to saythat we should go all the way to "C," which implies about 1 percent[M-1B growth for April to June] by the time we state it in thedirective. Stated flatly, we're certainly around the "B to C" area;both the Committee and the non-Committee members, looked atindividually or collectively, are split someplace between "B" and "C"with a little flavor of between "A" and "B." The question I wouldraise is whether we can reconcile that part of it, and I'll get to theborrowings and the other issues in a minute. If you look at the waythe record has been stated historically, the most consistent way isthat [at this point in the quarter] we'd put in a growth rate forApril to June.MR. WINN. Is it through June or to June, Paul? I'm worriedabout the lack of [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it means through June. We next meetat the beginning of July, don't we? I wondered, when I looked at it,whether we could even put in a growth rate through July. I thoughtabout it after the Bluebook was prepared. But generally we go on thetheory--maybe it's not a good theory--that we set something for thequarter and then review it at the middle-of-the-quarter meeting. Wecan get some of that flavor--I don't know whether this captures someof the [concerns] or not--with a slight rewriting. The draftdirective says "In the short run the Committee seeks behavior ofreserve aggregates consistent with a substantial deceleration ofgrowth in M-1B from April to June"--and that's shift-adjusted--"to anannual rate of ___ percent". This language is all the same so far.Consistent with this approach, we presumably could put in somethinglike the "B" number or we could put in [the "B" number and] "or lower,as may be consistent with the objective for M-1B adopted by theCommittee on March 31" and then repeat that number. If we want to gothat way, I think it says that we are between "B" and "C." And thenwe'd put some M2 number in there. We could go that way or we couldjust put in a lower number--we can't put in a much lower number--andsay "or lower." To get absolute consistency with what we did lasttime, we would [have to] say "C" or lower. Last time the directivesimply said "5-1/2 percent or somewhat less," so theoretically wecould do that. I confess to my own bias of rather liking some feelingin the directive that we are not going to hit a precise number,because we are not going to anyway, and giving some flavor of whichway we want the errors to go.-36-5/18/81Well, let me just get a very preliminary reaction tosomething like that. Let me say specifically that we are putting in 3percent but with the period April to June. In any case, we want asubstantial deceleration--I'm just talking about M-1B--to an annualrate of 3 percent or lower, as may be consistent with the objective of5-1/2 percent for the quarter that we adopted last time.MR. GRAMLEY. What is the purpose of putting the rest of thelanguage in there? If we say 3 percent or lower, what function doesthe rest of this language serve?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just ties it back to what we saidbefore as to what [M-1B growth for] the quarter should be; it's anelement of continuity and it's not really a lower limit. I don'tthink we can control M-1B that closely, so its purpose is to give someidea of what we mean by a little lower, I think.MR. ROOS. Is there no reference to NOW accounts? That'sbecause it's shift-adjusted. I get you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it's shift-adjusted. We are alltalking about the shift-adjusted number--or I am--at this time.MR. GRAMLEY. To get [a growth rate of] 5-1/2 percent orsomewhat less for March to June, we are going to have less than 1.3percent for April to June. That bothers me; it seems to me that weare putting in figures that are really not consistent with oneanother.MR. BLACK. I think that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I disagree with that. Butit's a question of approach. My [point] on this is that we are notgoing to hit a precise number anyway, so it's useful to give thedirection in which we would like to go from whatever precise number isput in. Or we could be completely neutral. If if we put in somethingas high as 3 percent as the center of gravity of the Committee, Iwould interpret that as not neutral; we'd rather come in lower thanhigher. And that's what I'm--MR. GRAMLEY. But that first "lower"--the phrase "an annualrate of 3 percent or lower"--connotes that. I wouldn't have judgedthat the Committee's view is that [M-1B growth of] 1 percent or lessis what we are really shooting at. And 1.3 percent or less is whatwe'd have to get if we are going to get 5-1/2 percent or less fromApril to June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is the question. The questionobviously was not asked this way, but let me ask the question.Suppose we have a happy day and those late May figures come in ratherlow and it looks as if, indeed, we may come in lower than 1 percentfor May and June with interest rates not rising and maybe fallingunder those circumstances. Would the Committee consider that anunhappy result or a happy result? I myself would be rather happy.And, therefore, I would not want to be pushing out money if the growthrate happened to come in, let's say, at zero in May and June, ifinterest rates were already stable or declining.-37-5/18/81MR. GRAMLEY. I don't have any objection to that, but whatthat postulates is that we hope to have another downward shift in thedemand function for money. And if we do, that is fine and the moneynumbers will look better. Unless we get a very marked turnaround inthe behavior of the economy in the near term, what that would imply isthat the money demand function is not behaving as the staff hasassumed. I don't know why we would want to wish for something likethat. That really doesn't do any good; it just makes the numbers lookbetter.MR. PARTEE. There's some advantage to that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I follow your concern. Iwould argue that without some wording of this sort--not that thewording is all that critical--the Committee would begin gettingworried that money growth was coming in too low and would want toraise it a little. And I'm not sure we want to do that.MR. BOEHNE. Perhaps what Governor Gramley is getting at isthis: Suppose we aren't so lucky and growth in May and June comes in,say, at 3 or 4 percent. Then how would that 3 or 4 percent beinterpreted as being consistent with 5-1/2 percent or less?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it wouldn't be. But in that caseit's not consistent with the 3 percent either.MR. BOEHNE. Well, suppose it's just 3 percent?MR. PARTEE. Maybe the problem is the [wording] "as may beconsistent." Perhaps we should indicate the direction of the move not"as may be consistent" but "in order to be more consistent" orsomething like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can look at this language if you want.MR. PARTEE. As I read this construction, Paul, I would havesaid that the Committee would strongly resist growth above 3 percentand that it would be more or less indifferent between, say, 3 percentand zero. That's the way I look at it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that is what it is meant toconvey, if we put the number 3 percent in there. There is nothing tosay we have to put 3 percent in there; we can put in a differentnumber.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way I read it, though, is that wewould also be resistant to [M-1B growth] below 1-1/4 percent orwhatever the number is, as long as it was consistent [with the targetfor the quarter].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but then it says the previous targetwas 5-1/2 percent or less.MR. PARTEE. And that's why I said that. Well, any positivenumber would be all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would read it the way you did and maybeeven add one of the negative numbers.-38-5/18/81MR. SCHULTZ. Suppose we said "3 percent or lower unless itbecomes inconsistent." What happens if we do that?MR. BLACK. But wouldn't 3 percent itself be inconsistent?MR. PARTEE. That moves us toward consistency, but it doesn'treally make it consistent. That's the point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what's consistent? We are talkingabout a very small number for two months. That's the problem I alwayshave with these things. One thing I'm sure of is that in one meetingout of about twelve we may be within 1 percent of one of thesenumbers. There shouldn't be a comma after "percent" anyway. It wouldbe " percent or lower."MR. AXILROD. The comma after percent is meant to indicatethat it's only the lower part that is consistent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we discuss the central issuefirst, maybe this clause will fall into line more easily. If we say 3percent, we are going squarely for alternative B. It's only if luckcomes along that we are going to accept lower [growth]. The consensusof the Committee was clearly for between "B" and "C." Some people had"C," some people had "B," and no more than one or two were between "A"and "B." I think 3 percent doesn't reflect the Committee consensus.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How we set this up depends upon where theborrowings go. But I do not read this at all the way you are nowreading it. It says 3 percent or lower and it refers to theconsistency. I read it the way Mr. Partee reads it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It means, though, that the setting ofour reserve path would be based on 3 percent, wouldn't it?MS. TEETERS. Is that what sets the reserve path? It'sborrowing, isn't it, that sets our reserve path?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, initially.MR. PARTEE. Yes. If we raise that initial level ofborrowing by anything like what the staff has proposed, thatabsolutely swamps the difference in the reserve path between, say, 2and 3 percent, doesn't it, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Sure.MR. PARTEE. You must be talking about a lot more money overthe two months with a $500 million adjustment of the initial borrowingthan you are with the difference between 2 and 3 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Forget about the language at the moment.My interpretation of this language, as I say, is very much the wayGovernor Partee suggested. There's no point in saying that we are notgoing to permit something above 3 percent. We don't know. Maybe itwill come in above 3 percent. We may set the borrowings at $3 billionand it could come in above 3 percent. Forgetting about the language,is this where we want to be? Will we resist pretty darn hard growthabove 3 percent but be quite relaxed below 3 percent down to zero or I-39-5/18/81would say even below zero, depending upon how things develop in themarket for this 2-month period? Is that what we are trying to say?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would hope that we are trying tosay that we'd [strongly] resist growth above, say, 2 percent orsomething like that, if we want to start somewhere between "B" and"C."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must confess that I don't know what theoperational meaning of that is for M1-B [growth]. All I have areforecasts that are right within [a range of plus or minus] 10 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there's a value in showingthat we are determined and are trying to be very closely consistentwith our previous short-run target. It just adds to our credibility.And, as various speakers have said, I would rather see the ratepressure now than later in the year. It's obviously not a matter oflife and death when we are talking about [a difference of] somethinglike 1 percent, since we don't control it that closely. In terms ofwhat our target is, it seems to me better to be in a fairly tightposition even if we are a little more relaxed on the initial[unintelligible] assumption.MR. CORRIGAN. From my vantage point, if we had 3 percent inthere as you suggest, Mr. Chairman, and in fact ended up there, thatwouldn't bother me too much because I don't see an enormous differenceeven between the 6-1/2 percent [of "B"] and the 5-1/2 percent [of "C"]for March to June. My concern is this: I'm inclined to the view thatwhatever we set we are likely to exceed in this immediate situation;and given the lags in the reaction process both by us and by thebanks, if we start out saying we would live with 3 percent, we couldeasily end up with a quarterly growth rate for March to June of not6-1/2 percent but even more than that. I'm not sure what [directive]construction allows us to deal with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think any constructionallows us to deal with that. What allows us to deal with that iswhere we go on the borrowing assumption right now. I don't see peoplebeing all that gung ho on the borrowing assumption that the staff saysis consistent. I'm not sure it is. The staff estimate may be toohigh. I think we ought to get some understanding of what we aretalking about here, but the only difference it makes in the real worldis what number the outsiders read six weeks from now or when it's allin the past anyway. We can obviously put in 2 percent here. Thatgoes squarely in between.MS. TEETERS. What kind of borrowing are we putting in?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will get to that in a minute.MR. FORD. Paul, in your statement a moment ago you asked usif what we are trying to say is that we don't care how far down [M-1Bgrowth] goes. My reaction to that is that we shouldn't have it open-ended at the bottom. I think "somewhat less" is the right tone. Iwouldn't want to see the aggregates collapse again as they did a yearago and be at the floor [of the long-term ranges] once again.-40-5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can write this more straightforwardlyperhaps by just using a sentence that has a number in it and then goon to say that a shortfall in growth for the two months from the ratespecified above would be acceptable. That's saying the same thing intwo sentences.MR. GRAMLEY. If we are going to say "or lower," that secondsentence is already implied, it seems to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is partly a question of whetherwe want to tie it back to the objective for the quarter that we setearlier. I don't know whether it's a good idea or not. But if wefollow this idea that we set a target for the quarter and we shouldn'tforget about it six weeks later, it's useful to make a reference.MR. FORD. Stick to your guns.MR. BALLES. I think it would be less confusing if wefollowed what Tony suggested by putting in 2 percent and dropping thewords "or lower."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we can do that here with therest of this. We can't say 2 percent, which is higher than theprevious target, and say it's consistent.MR. PARTEE. We could make it a range. We haven't used arange.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can put in a range. I have thought ofthat, too.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or we can say "2 percent or somewhatlower."MR. CORRIGAN. What's wrong with a range? I guess theproblem is that it doesn't let us deal with the bottom side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only fear I have of ranges is that wecan put in a range of 2 to 3 percent and we won't be within it anyway.And people attribute special importance to a range as a whole. That'smy only objection to a range.MR. CORRIGAN. For the sake of discussion: If we set a rangeof 1-1/2 to 3 percent so as to be generally consistent with thequarterly objective and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're going to get all excited if it'sless than 1-1/2 percent?MR. CORRIGAN. I'm not. That's the problem.MR. PARTEE. It really ought to be zero to 3 percent orsomething like that.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I don't know if it would behelpful, but part of the reason for wording such as this or the otherwording you suggested is technical. I understand that if theCommittee put a number in there of 2 or 3 percent, we would construct-41-5/18/81the target on 2 or 3 percent or whatever the number is; and atwhatever point the Committee felt they were willing to have ashortfall, as money was coming in short we simply would lower thenonborrowed targets commensurately, if that's what the Committeeintends this kind of instruction to mean. Under that assumption wewould really need to know pretty much in a general way what the lowerlimit is below which the Committee doesn't want the nonborrowed pathlowered any more. That was why we felt it might be useful to tie itto the March-to-June target the Committee had already set.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The effort is to get some sense of a rangewithout saying we have a range that's only one or two percent [wide].That [kind of range] sounds more rigid than I think we can afford tobe.MS. TEETERS. What Steve is implying is that the lower limitwould be the 1.3 percent rate of growth.MR. AXILROD. Or whatever by saying "somewhat less." It'sliterally what the Committee set for itself at the previous meeting.That's what this kind of wording would imply: That it's somethinglike the lower limit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am inclined to feel that we ought to getsomething in there [that gives some definition to the] "or lower."It's something of an experiment, but I think it may be usefulexperimenting to see whether we like referring back to the quarterlyranges in these interim meetings. We may get in trouble becausesometimes we may not want to refer back to them. But if we don't, wedon't. In this case I think it may be useful [to do so]. This otherlanguage may be better, saying whatever growth rate we want to use--perhaps an annual rate of 2 or 3 percent--and maybe putting in an "orlower" and whatever the consistent number is for M2. I don't know.[We could say]: "A shortfall of growth in M-1B from the 2-month ratespecified above would be acceptable in light of the rapid growth inApril and the objective adopted by the Committee on March 31 forgrowth from March to June at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent or less."This other way tried to compress it into one sentence; maybe thatisn't wise.MR. FORD. Are you going to leave out the fed funds range?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'll get to that. Let's take it onething at a time.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Speaking for myself, I feel thatthere is some value in referring back; I don't think it's enormous.Either formulation, as spelled out here or with a separate sentencetalking about accepting a shortfall in the more straightforward way isokay. I think pretty much everybody would want to have X percent orlower at a minimum, and I think there's some slight advantage inreferring back to that target for the period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as nearly as I can see at themoment, I think we are only left with whether we take this or make ittwo sentences. The question is whether to put in 2 or 3 percent tostart with. It doesn't bother me much either way.-42-5/18/81MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the way you have separated that andmade it into two statements to my view and Lyle's--he and I werechatting--eliminates the problem he raised of the 3 percent not reallybeing consistent. If you say the Committee would also accept a lowerfigure, which in a sense would be consistent with the 5-1/2 percent, Ithink you have eliminated the problem--assuming that you can getpeople to vote for the 3 percent.MR. PARTEE. "3 percent or lower" is what it says?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, now the way it's written here itjust says 3 percent and then the next sentence goes on to say ashortfall would be okay.MR. PARTEE. I see.MR. BLACK. Which would be consistent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, we could say "3 percent or lower" andsay that a shortfall would be acceptable because of--MR. BLACK. Yes, that's what I was thinkingCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we are close to this two-sentence version. The question at the moment is the borrowing. Noteverybody mentioned it; a minority mentioned it. Of those who did thelevels suggested ranged from $2 billion to $2-1/4 billion. The latterwas the highest. We had some at $2 billion and some at $2 billionplus--$2.1 to 2.2 billion. A lot of people didn't say anything. So,I think it's clear that we start out at least at $2 billion, which isabout $150 million above where we are. The question is how much, ifany, to go above the $2 billion at the start, with the recognition--particularly if we start around $2 or $2.1 billion--that if [M-1Bgrowth in] the latter half of May comes in high, we are going to raisethat.MR. SCHULTZ. Starting out with $2 billion is starting out$250 million above where we are.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not quite clear where we are atthe moment. I thought we were at least at $1.8 billion.MR. STERNLIGHT. The borrowing that we are aiming for--theborrowing consistent with this week's nonborrowed [path]--would beabout $1860 million. Borrowing for the 3-week subperiod would beabout $2 billion. But if you want to take where borrowings actuallyhave been this week thus far, it's $1.7 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We know where it has been this week sofar. We only have two numbers. What we were aiming for this week atthis moment on our present track is $1860 million, I take it. And wehave been averaging $2 billion, so $2 billion really isn't all thatmuch of a change. It's a little higher than where we are aiming rightat the moment, but not higher than where we have been. I don't think$2 billion implies all that much of a change, so we may want to makeit just a shade higher than that. But a lot of people haven't beenheard from. Whom do we have for something between $2.1 and $ 2.2-43-5/18/81billion--$2.15 billion, I suppose, just to split that--which is about$300 million higher than this week's figure.MR. SCHULTZ. Doesn't that have something to do with the factthat there aren't any excess reserves out there?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's swinging up and down.MR. AXILROD. Well, we tend to adjust to that, so if [thedemands for] excess reserves turn out high, we tend to supply them.MR. SCHULTZ. But the point is that if we move borrowing up,we ought to get a fairly quick effect, shouldn't we?MR. AXILROD. Well, I think $2150 million probably would beconsistent with a higher federal funds rate than we have experiencedthus far, [which is] in the 18-1/2 percent range.MR. GRAMLEY. What would you guess that would be?MR. AXILROD. I would say between 19 and 20 percent, give ortake some.MR. PARTEE. Which is right at the very top of the range thatwe have specified here.MR. SCHULTZ. It sounds strong to me. That's why I startedout with $2 billion. But I certainly would be interested in moving itquickly, depending upon what kind of reactions we see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just try $2.1 billion and seewhether there's a consensus for that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're down to voting members?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm asking for a vague consensusnow. How many are happy with $2.1 billion?MR. PARTEE. Would accept or would make one happy?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wasn't getting that precise. Iwas trying to get to some kind of consensus. I take it there's nooverwhelming happiness at $2.1 billion. I don't know which directionto go from the $2.1 billion.MR. PARTEE. I could accept it. But try $2 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll try it. Does $2 billion make peopleunhappy? I have a lot of no hands raised here. Does $2.2 billionmake people happier?SPEAKER(?). How about $2.1 billion?MR. PARTEE. I think you hit the right number, but it'swhether it's preferred or acceptable.SPEAKER(?). $2.1 billion is acceptable.-44-5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is $2.1 billion acceptable? We'll remainvery tentatively there at the moment. Let's [discuss] the federalfunds range. First of all, the question has been raised whether weshould have it at all, I guess. Did you hand out these other--SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a series of reworded sentences. Ihave one reworded sentence that assumes we keep it; let me see whatthe change is from what we now have. Maybe Mr. Axilrod can explain itto me.MR. AXILROD. The essential sentence that you have there saysthat if it appears during the period before the next meeting thatfluctuations in the funds rate, taken over a period of time, within arange of __ to __ percent are likely to be inconsistent, etc., theManager will inform the Chairman, who will then decide whether thesituation calls for supplementary instructions. That sounds as if thefederal funds rate is an objective within the [context] of theinstructions. The proposal, in line with some of the [points] raisedby Committee members, essentially has the same beginning but it triesto make the federal funds rate seem more like a consultation pointthat involves a little more flexibility. It says that if it appearsduring the period before the next meeting that pursuit of the monetaryobjectives and related reserve paths is likely to be associated with afunds rate range persistently outside a range of _ to _ percent,then the Manager will inform the Chairman--the same sort ofinstructions as before--but then it says "who will then decide whetherconsultation with the Committee is necessary."MR. SCHULTZ. When I was looking at this before, the onething I didn't like about it was the use of the word "necessary." Isthat a good word or is "advisable" a better word there? If we sayit's necessary, are we not then implying that again the fed fundsrange is part of the--MR. PARTEE. That's a good point. This construction with"advisable" would be better.MR. AXILROD. Well, it reads to me literally as saying thatthe Chairman could permit the funds rate to go almost anywhere.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think that's a mistakeanyway. If we are all saying that the purpose of the funds range isto trigger a consultation, then we should not imply so clearly thatthe Chairman can veto a consultation and in effect abolish the FOMCand run a one-man FOMC.MR. ROOS. Why wouldn't the same wording apply to theborrowing assumption and to the aggregates? In other words, isn'tthis an implicit prerogative of the Chairman on any of this? He cancall us any time as long as he doesn't call collect!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we ought to discuss whetherwe want this at all, which I guess is the question you're raising.I'm obviously at the hands of the Committee, but I don't find anydifficulties myself, and I see some advantages, in saying if interestrates move extremely enough the Committee at least wants to review-45-5/18/81what the heck it's doing. I think that's the question. If we reallythink that, then I'm inclined to feel that we ought to say it. If wedon't think that and genuinely don't think this is anything to beworried about, then we [could] leave it out. Now, we could write thisto say that if either the money supply is moving well outside itsrange or if the federal funds rate is moving well outside its range,we would consult. And I think that is true in a sense. Thedifference in the implication is that if the money supply is runningoutside its range, we know what to do if it doesn't involve conflictswith these other things. We know what to do in the sense of thegeneral direction.MR. SCHULTZ. I think if the money supply is running outsideits range, you will consult [with the Committee]; and if the fed fundsrate is running well outside its range, then you may consult.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so sure we would consult ifit were running outside the range; it depends upon how far. It'slikely to run outside the range in the short run, so we would make allthese adjustments in borrowings and stuff that we talk about.MR. SCHULTZ. All right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, if it went far enough.... What Ithink disturbs people is that we would want to look at [our decision]again if it implied a very large change in financial conditions thatwas not necessarily contemplated at the time of the meeting.MR. CORRIGAN. If we use some language like this, is itabsolutely essential that the language be right in the directiveitself? Let me explain where I'm coming from. The advantage to afederal funds rate consultation guideline is that the federal fundsrate, whatever else it is, is the only thing we have in the short runthat is fairly unambiguous. Borrowings and the money supply andreserves and those things are all over the lot. The funds rate atleast is unambiguous. I certainly agree with the idea of trying toget the markets and everybody else to recognize the de facto role thatit plays. But I'd like to see something [about the federal fundsrate] preserved, and I wonder whether it can't just be part of thegeneral discussion and not right in the directive language itself.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could. It can be anything we want. Atthe present time, I am somewhat allergic to making that big a changein the directive because it will then give more significance to itthan I think it's worth.MR. WALLICH. Couldn't we perhaps say specifically that theManager's operations are not to be constrained by the funds rate butthat if the funds rate moves outside etc., the Committee will consult?Then it is clear that it is not a constraint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we can say that. But theexplanation you gave I'd be perfectly happy to put in the generaldiscussion as background for this.MR. BLACK. I like this, Mr. Chairman. It's a logical stepin the process of moving where I think we eventually ought to be, ifwe can get the aggregates under control, of not having any limits. It-46-5/18/81fits in with the step where we define the limits as a consultationpoint and it allows the Desk to move a bit before we have thatconsultation rather than delaying it maybe for a couple of days.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it's for more than a couple of days, Ithink, under the current directive; we've done that historically.MR. BLACK. I mean that if you decided to have aconsultation, you might notify us a day or so ahead, and meanwhile theDesk might go ahead and go outside [the funds range].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think they've been doing thatanyway, but I agree with you.MR. BLACK. But this makes it clearer to the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. I think this comes pretty close.We can quibble about the language, but the intent of this is to beconsistent with what we've been saying.MR. BLACK. I think that's right.MR. SCHULTZ. I rather like the other alternative we weretalking about, which is that a Committee consultation may be calledfor by the Chairman if it appears during the period before the nextmeeting that the federal funds rate is likely to be significantlyoutside a range of _ to _ percent for an extended period.SPEAKER(?). I think that's pretty much the same.MR. SCHULTZ. I thought that was pretty straightforward.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll tell you. What I don't likeabout that--and we're talking about nuances--is that it has noconnotation that we're following a reserve path. That sentence in andof itself can be interpreted to mean that we really set this federalfunds range as a range.MR. PARTEE. Also, it seems to me that there ought to be aprofessional judgment on the part of the Manager that it's going torun well outside the range rather than that the Chairman is makingthis decision. If we want it to be a technical question, it seems tome it ought to be a Manager's question.MR. ROOS. If any mention of this were totally omitted, wherecould the problem conceivably arise in the markets? If we just stopreferring in any way to a federal funds--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are two questions. Forgettingabout the market, there is just the question of what the Committeewants to say and whether it wants to have a consultation. If we do,then I think we ought to put it down. But so far as the markets areconcerned, I think that it will be read as--SPEAKER(?). As an underlying focus.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --a further step in the direction towardignoring this, and they would expect more instability rather than less-47-5/18/81in some sense. They'd feel we had changed in some more fundamentalway than this discussion seems to imply.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I like the way it was in theoriginal here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you mean the way it was last time?MS. TEETERS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way it has been?MS. TEETERS. The way it has been, where the situation callsfor supplementary instructions from the Committee. I think that'swhat it is we want. I'd rather not have all that stuff aboutnecessary and persistent and the rest; I'd just leave it alone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can live with it the way it is. This isan effort to say what we've said more informally.MS. TEETERS. I think we can just say it informally and leaveit that way. It has caused a useful consultation for everybody; ithas marked a point at which we make a decision as to whether we'regoing to do it or not do it.MR. SCHULTZ. But, unfortunately, the way we have said it hasled to the feeling on the part of a lot people in the markets that westill do have a fed funds rate target.MS. TEETERS. But, Fred, we've violated the range practicallyevery time, with only one exception.MR. SCHULTZ. I understand what we've done. It's just that Ithink there still is a misperception in the market, which it seems tome we might be able to clear up with some rewording. I do have somereluctance about changing it, just on the basis on the fact that everytime we make a change there is some confusion in the market. So,whether it's worth making the change is a question. My feeling isthat it would be good if we did change it. I would hate to see usgive up some kind of fed funds range because I think the uncertaintiesthat we're dealing with here and the relationships between theaggregates and the economy are so difficult that the fed funds ratetells us something. There can clearly be a situation in whichsomething is happening out there and we ought to be consulting. Butthat's what we're doing. We keep telling people that that's whatwe're doing and they don't believe us very well because this rangeappears in the directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Altmann reminds me, and I will remindyou, that in what we're going to publish Friday or whenever we publishit, we have a paragraph in the general discussion that says: "Withrespect to the federal funds rate,"--it probably should say thefederal funds rate range--"it was stressed that the Committeespecified an intermeeting range for fluctuations over a period of timeto provide a mechanism for initiating timely consultation betweenregularly scheduled meetings whenever it appeared that fluctuationswithin the specified range were proving to be inconsistent with theobjectives for the behavior of reserve and monetary aggregates. Thus,-48-5/18/81the limits of the range were indicative of the conditions under whichthe Committee would wish to consult to reexamine its short-runobjectives and were not intended as binding constraints on Systemoperations pending such consultations."MR. GUFFEY. When will that be published? Is that in thedirective?MR. ALTMANN. That's in the policy record for the Marchmeeting, which will come out this Friday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take it that there is a general feelingthat we should continue to specify something. Is that correct?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a majority. One can make anargument that in the light of all we have said the present language isincreasingly well understood and that we always run some danger of arenewed misinterpretation by changing it at all. So, we can justleave it as it was. That's one option. The other option, if I'mreading it right, is something very close to what was distributedhere, which is not a very drastic change anyway. Which of those twooptions commands the greatest support? Let me try the option of notchanging the language at all. Who is for that? Do I conclude fromthat that there is positive support for at least a modest change inthe language by the other 15 people sitting here? If that is right,then we are down to the particular wording. You have one version infront of you.MR. GRAMLEY. I have a suggestion, which incorporatesGovernor Schultz's thoughts and I think gets around the points thatboth you and Governor Partee raised. It reads as follows: "TheChairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to theManager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetaryobjectives and related reserve paths during the period before the nextmeeting is likely to be associated with the federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of __ to __ percent."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if you say "persistently" thendon't you have to say that the Chairman will call for a consultation?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't think we ought to deny theChairman the opportunity to make a decision on his own.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you can be sure that the Chairmanwill [do so], whatever the language says. So this is just a nicety ofwhatever language it is.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh yes, I know that. I'm not talkingabout substance; I'm talking about images.MR. PARTEE. It says "may," but it certainly implies thathe's going to do it.MR. SCHULTZ. I prefer "may" because "will" implies thatthere is a target there.-49-5/18/81MR. PARTEE. I think that version is considerably better thanthis one.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in substance, it seems to me to saythe same thing.MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. Exactly the same, but it leaves in the reservepath and the monetary aggregates, it lets the Manager for DomesticOperations make the technical decision, and it says the Chairman "may"call a consultation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Read it again.MR. GRAMLEY. "The Chairman may call for Committeeconsultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations thatpursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths duringthe period before the next meeting is likely to be associated with afederal funds rate persistently outside a range of _ to _ percent."MR. PARTEE. That certainly puts the reserve issues first;there's no question about it.MR. GRAMLEY. And I think it's a clear statement of whatwe're trying to accomplish and what is available presently.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Very honestly, I don't detect asubstantive difference, but it's perfectly all right with me.MR. BLACK. I don't think there's a difference, but I thinkit's worded a little better.MR. GRAMLEY. It's just a matter of wording, really.MR. GUFFEY(?). Mr. Chairman, for the moment, I'd like to tryto make a case to keep the language as it is presently. The marketsand the public have not seen the March change in the language, which Ithink is rather specific and good.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not a change in the directivelanguage; it's an explanation.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, it's an explanation. But if we then comealong a month from now and publish a directive, which may mean thesame thing to us but changes maybe 60 words, that will give rise tothe analysts publishing from now until at least the end of the yearall sorts of interpretations. I think that's what we don't want. Itseems to me that consistency would best be served by leaving thelanguage as it has been published in the directive, with an informalunderstanding in the Committee with the Chairman that it is aconsultation point as described in the record.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the argument for notchanging it at all is that it may be more confusing to change it.We'll see whether your comments changed to more than 4 votes thenumber who want not to change it.-50-5/18/81MR. PARTEE. I must say that I think that's incorrect, Roger.I wasn't at that telephone conference call and I read with someamusement the paragraph that was just [quoted]. I think it isstretching things to say that the earlier instruction could beinterpreted in the way it was interpreted in that meeting. And Ithink what is now being proposed is consistent with the interpretationin the telephone conference call. It was a stretched interpretation,which now needs a different instruction, I think, if we're going tostay with it and use it. So, I do believe a change is necessary.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have you convinced anybody, Roger? Do youhave more than 4 votes for not changing it?MR. GUFFEY. I'm more convinced myself, but it--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Roger has a point that thereis a danger. We will, of course, publish the policy record from theearlier meeting and it has this language, which I think exactlysummarizes our feeling about it. Then if we come out with anotherdirective, there is a danger that some of the Fed watchers may believethat we mean to change the significance of this paragraph on page 9[in the March] policy record.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any change we make may be confusing. Idon't disagree with that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. And since the policy recordparagraph on page 9 expresses exactly what we're trying to do, then itseems to me, even though I guess this may be too unorthodox, that wecould simply refer here to that policy record paragraph.MR. PARTEE. Always? At every meeting refer to that policyrecord interpretation?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, we can attempt to handle thatproblem. I think there is some danger, which we can't get around,that with any change in wording somebody will look at it and say: Dothey really mean what they say? We can put in the policy record whatwe mean: That what we really have done is to change this languageslightly to make sure it conforms with what we said last time.SPEAKER(?). Sure.MR. GUFFEY. But we'd be taking a risk if we do that.MR. PARTEE. That's the way to do it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But couldn't we simply say, takingLyle's language, for example, "as called for in the policy record ofsuch and such a date" so it makes quite clear that this is simply asummary version of the larger explanation in the policy record?MR. GRAMLEY. But this is supposed to be the operatingparagraph of the directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's only a formal point as to whetherit's desirable or not to be in the directive.-51-5/18/81MR. PARTEE. Well, you don't mean to put it in the directive.You mean to have in the policy record entry for today's meeting areference to the previous policy record saying that the Committeeadopted this language in furtherance of its determination in theearlier meeting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, I had meant--MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I raised the question of whether itwould be appropriate to have a reference in this one-sentence summaryto this larger explanation in the policy record as consistent--MR. SCHULTZ. I don't like that much, but I think what Chuckis suggesting is fine.MR. PARTEE. We could reference it again in the record fortoday's meeting.MR. ALTMANN. An interpretation of the funds rate range?MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. ALTMANN. You mean reiterate it in this--MR. PARTEE. Then that becomes an explanation for why wechanged this wording, so that people don't think there's somethingmore that we did, because after all it will come out [later]. Theywill know about this wording and then they'll have the explanation ofthe wording at the very same time.MS. TEETERS. But that explanation goes to what's here now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless people are ready to change theirminds, I think there are these problems. I'll just return to myquestion: Has Roger convinced anybody that there is greater danger inchanging the words at all?SPEAKER(?). No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's always a danger of some confusionhere. There may be a little but I think we can handle it withoutundue risks. I could certainly live with it the other way. It's nobig deal to me. If the issue had never come up in the first place, Iwouldn't change it. But I--MR. SCHULTZ. This is not my day!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, Roger has my vote.MR. PARTEE. But he had it before, didn't he?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He didn't? Let's try it again: How manypeople would vote for no change [in the directive wording]? We're upto five; we have one more. That still is a minority.-52-5/18/81MR. WALLICH. On [some] grounds I'd vote that way, though notbecause I like what we have now. But I don't like the change to whichwe're going, and I suspect we're not going to change it again soon, sowe're losing an opportunity to improve it permanently.MR. SCHULTZ. What would you do? Would you go further thanwhat we're suggesting?MR. WALLICH. I would stress the deviation from theaggregates and then come in from the funds rate.MESSRS. PARTEE and SCHULTZ. But that's what Lyle's versiondid.MR. WALLICH. No, I don't think he mentions the deviationsfrom the paths.MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, he did.MR. PARTEE. Yes, those are the first words.MR. SCHULTZ. That's exactly what he did.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a consensus on Mr. Gramley'sreworded version which, if I can read it, says: "The Chairman maycall for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager forDomestic Operations..." I don't know what happens if it appears tothe Chairman, but not to the Manager.SPEAKER(?). Then you better talk to the Manager!MR. SCHULTZ. I have a feeling the Chairman can talk theManager into--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...that pursuit of the monetaryobjectives and related reserve paths during the period before the nextmeeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of __to __ percent." Do I have aconsensus on that? I hope I have more than 5 votes anyway. Allright, let's assume that. Now we have to put figures there, it sohappens.MR. PARTEE. 5 to 50 percent!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You still don't have a consensus on 3percent.MR. PARTEE. We don't want to have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will come back [to that]. Actually,very few people specifically commented on [the funds rate range].Among the people who specifically commented, we have one mentioning aceiling of 20 percent and three a ceiling of 22 percent. My notesonly have that many comments.MR. PARTEE. I said I would accept 16 to 22--MR. SCHULTZ. With a "B" specification.-53-5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. Well, I think it's probably achoice between 16 to 21 percent and 16 to 22 percent. I think thereis an implication--these people may be wrong--that the upper end ofthis range is much more likely to be binding than the lower end duringthis period. And the range isn't absolutely symmetrical [around thecurrent level]. I'm not sure it's so far from the [expected rate],depending upon what reserve number we put in there. But I would alsopresume that there is a bias; people recognize that it may be a bitasymmetrical, but they want to consult if it gets above whatevernumber we now put in, which seems to me to lie between 21 and 22percent. How many 22s do we have?MR. CORRIGAN. This is strictly as a consultation point,you're saying?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right. It looks as if that'sthe prevailing view. How many would prefer 21 percent? It looks likewe put the upper limit at 22 percent; 16 to 22 percent, I guess.MR. GRAMLEY. Have we ever had a 6-point range before?SPEAKER(?). Yes.SPEAKER(?). Yes, we have.MR. PARTEE. Yes, we've backed away from--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Now we have this rewordedsentence and we have that range tentatively settled at 16 to 22percent. Let's come back to the borrowing. Is $2.1 billion theconsensus?SPEAKER(?). Ask for a vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many people are willing to put in $2.1billion immediately? That looks pretty good at a quick look. Now wecome back to the [wording of the] paragraph. What I am suggesting is:"In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregatesconsistent with a substantial deceleration of growth in M-1B fromApril to June to an annual rate of __ percent..." The question iswhether we put in "or lower" there. The sentence continues with acomma and then: "after allowance for the impact of flows into NOWaccounts, and with growth in M2 at an annual rate of about __ percent.A shortfall in growth of M-1B from the two-month rate specified abovewould be acceptable, in light of the rapid growth in April and theobjective adopted by the Committee on March 31 for growth from Marchto June at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less." Is thatgeneral language okay? I think that's where we arrived before. Wehave to fill in the blanks and decide whether to put in "or lower".As nearly as I can see, it's a simple choice between 2 or 3 percent.How many 3 percenters do we have?SPEAKER(?). If it's "or lower."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Let me assume it's 3 percent orlower, if we take the 3 percent.SPEAKER(?). Okay, I'll go with that rate.-54-5/18/81MR. ALTMANN. Five voting members.SPEAKER(?). Well, what's the alternative--"somewhat lower"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The alternative, I think, would be 2percent without the "or lower," but the "lower" appears in the nextsentence.MR. FORD. We're going to say "lower" not "somewhat lower"?How far are you going with this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What the next sentence says is that ashortfall in growth would be acceptable. It refers back to theearlier [decision on the quarterly growth rate]. The choice isbetween "3 percent or lower" in the first sentence, which we just hadan indication of views on, or 2 percent in which case I think we leaveout the "or lower" but the [concept of] lower appears in the nextsentence in the form of a shortfall.MR. PARTEE. Do you want hands?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, for the 2 percent without the "orlower."SPEAKER(?). Just voting members?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether we're gettingclose here. Let me just take the voting members and go over it again.How many--just the voting members now--prefer the 3 percent or lower?MR. ALTMANN. Five.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Five, okay.MR. BLACK. There's an exception.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was your hand up or down?MR. CORRIGAN. I accept this.SPEAKER(?). Do you prefer it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I asked for preferences at this point.Now, let me just make sure. Who prefers the 2 percent period? Six.MR. ALTMANN. Six.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's great. Six and five.SPEAKER(?). [Not] including you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're down to splitting hairs.MR. PARTEE. How about 2-1/2 percent?MR. SCHULTZ. How about "2-1/2 percent or somewhat lower"?MR. FORD. Or "slightly."-55-5/18/81MR. RICE. Why don't we find out what people can accept.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try. Who would accept the 3percent or lower? Ten.MR. PARTEE. All but Tony.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're within very narrow grounds. I'minterested in maximizing the happiness at this point. I biased thisthing now. A lot of people will find the 2 percent unacceptable now,I presume. How many will accept the 2 percent?MR. SCHULTZ. Accept 2 percent? I'll accept either one.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eight. I'm afraid I succeeded in biasingthe thing.SPEAKER(?). No, I was going to vote--MR. SCHULTZ. I just really can't get awfully excited overthis thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks like 3 percent or lower. Andmaybe we should just start the second sentence by saying "Theshortfall...," which refers back to the "lower."MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. SCHULTZ. This is becoming a theology session!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, now we have 3 percent or lowerwith this two sentence approach. We have 16 to 22 percent and we haveborrowing at $2.1 billion [without] an allergy toward raising theborrowing if [money growth] comes in high.SPEAKER(?). M2?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, M2. Where are we on M2?MS. TEETERS. 6-1/2 percent.SPEAKER(?). M2 is 6-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. For conforming purposes, we'veput in 6-1/2 percent. Because we said "or lower," we can put in 6percent; that's [about] halfway between "B" and "C" and it's a niceround number.MR. BLACK. 6-1/2 percent is [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, put 6 percent in there.MR. PARTEE. Six percent looks about right, doesn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just squares the thing. Okay, so we'vegot 3 percent or lower, 6 percent, 16 to 22 percent, and $2.1 billion.MR. SCHULTZ. And we'll be lucky to hit any of them!-56-5/18/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Is it clear what we're voting on?MR. WALLICH. No.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, may I call your attention to thesecond line of the general paragraphs, which I think is not entirelyconsistent with the views of the Committee on what is happening in theeconomy. It says: "...suggested that real GNP will probably growlittle in the current quarter." That sounds like an awfully flateconomy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.MR. GRAMLEY. This is a fairly optimistic group. I wouldsay: "suggested that GNP will grow more slowly in the currentquarter."MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, or not [unintelligible]. That gives usmore room--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where does this all appear?MR. GRAMLEY. It's in the second line of the generalparagraphs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's perfectly safe to say that itwill grow more slowly.MR. PARTEE. Than 8-1/2 percent or something like that.MR. GRAMLEY. Or even, if you like, "will grow slowly.""Grow little" sounds as if the economy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I agree. "Grow more slowly" isperfectly all right. We'll make that change. Okay, you all know whatyou're voting on. Mr. Secretary.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesPresident Winn YesMR. SCHULTZ. My word!MR. PARTEE. I think that's the first unanimous vote--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can go grab a sandwich.MR. SCHULTZ. That's pretty good.-57-5/18/81 -58-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. Wait a minute, do we haveanything else?MR. ALTMANN. Only the date of the next meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to confirm the date of the nextmeeting. Let me just say that I assume we can confirm that. But it'sa meeting where we have to review the annual targets, so I think it'squite likely we might want to come in here the afternoon before.SPEAKER(?). What's the date?MS. TEETERS. July 7th.SPEAKER(?). The 7th is Tuesday, but we may start Monday.END OF MEETING