Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 17, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 17, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. KeehnMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford, and Winn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris andReserve Banks of KansasrespectivelyRoos, Presidents of the FederalCity, Boston, and St. Louis,Mr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General Counsel 1/Mr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns, Ettin, Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld, Truman,and Zeisel, Associate Economists1/ Left the meeting prior to the action to adopt the domestic policydirective.11/17/81- 2 -Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Gemmill and Siegman, Associate Directors, Divisionof International Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Fousek,Keran, and Koch, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City,Boston, New York, San Francisco, and Atlanta,respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus and Syron, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Richmond and BostonMr. Supel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank ofMinneapolisMs. Clarkin, Senior Trading Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 17, 1981CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need approval of the minutes.SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. There's a short reporton foreign currency operations. There weren't many operations.MR. CROSS. I've had to suffer a lot of comments on that![Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments or questions?MR. RICE. What was the second occasion when you consideredintervention?MR. CROSS. It was an occasion when the dollar was moving upvery rapidly toward the 2.30 to 2.32 level. It occurred at a timewhen questions were being raised about the German situation after theChancellor's health problems and after some money figures here hadsuggested that interest rates might be required to go up again at thatpoint. The dollar spurted up from about 2.28 to 2.32 and that causeda considerable amount of consternation. But [the advance] lasted onlya matter of hours and the dollar then began to retreat.MR. RICE. There was no one particular event except theChancellor's health?MR. CROSS. I don't think the rise could be associated with asingle event at that point; it was certainly not comparable to theassassination of President Sadat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a recommendation for us?MR. CROSS. Yes I do, Mr. Chairman. All of our swaparrangements will be coming up for renewal before the end of the year,and I would request the Committee's approval to roll them over foranother year in the normal way. Since last year [there have beenchanges] in three cases. The central banks of England, Canada, andMexico have specified the investments against which the interest ratesshould be calculated in the event that the Federal Reserve were todraw on those swaps. For good order we would propose that the changein the arrangements with these three central banks be incorporated inthe language at the time we renew them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we symmetrical in all these now interms of that?MR. CROSS. Yes.MR. ALTMANN. Yes.MR. CROSS. Well, symmetrical--11/17/81MR. TRUMAN. The change was made last year for all the caseswhere we would draw at the foreign rate. When we did it for theGermans, we did it for all of them. The problem was that not all thecountries were ready to come forward with a rate at that time, so theswaps for those cases were rewritten to say "an appropriate domesticrate" which in our case--MR. CROSS. And these three do not correct all of them.There are still some in that unspecified category.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We had a long negotiation, youremember, with the Japanese; it was not so long with the Germans.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's a question of the interestrate. There's also a question of the exchange rate, which I nowforget--MR. TRUMAN. Well, that was eliminated, too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The exchange rate was different when oneside was drawing than when the other side was drawing.MR. TRUMAN. That has all been put on a symmetrical basis.On the one hand, it's on a symmetrical basis; on the other hand, theinterest rate was adjusted at the same time.MR. CROSS. Some of them are not specified.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Our biggest problem with theJapanese, which we finally solved, was not getting a market ratebecause their Treasury bill rate was But we finallyworked that out. I had to put a lot of pressure on the Ministry ofFinance as well as on the Bank of Japan. There are two differentversions; but they're completely satisfied now with the arrangementsover at the Treasury.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we seem to be in reasonable shape onthese arrangements regarding the terms. Do we have a motion?MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, I think you're remembering therisk-sharing, and that is what was dropped in all the cases. Thesubstitution that was made was that we would at the same time take--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm remembering the risk-sharing. I don'tremember the specifics of it at this point, but I won't--MR. TRUMAN. For the five that we had drawn upon in the post-1973 period, they had a provision that they would share the risk onour drawing. That was the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, 50-50. Well, do we have motion?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So moved.MS. TEETERS. Second.11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I hear no objections, you areauthorized to negotiate these on substantially the same terms as theynow exist.MR. CROSS. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Statement--see Appendix.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?MR. ROOS. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Peter, at these meetings weset desired rates of growth for M-1B. In the last 7 or 8 months [M1-Bgrowth has been] significantly below the lower end of the targetranges that we've set. As I listened to you, I got the impressionthat one of the reasons for that is that borrowings, as they actuallyevolved, were at a lower level than the assumptions we had made at ourmeetings. Under our procedures, when borrowings are below what weanticipate they will be, do you adjust the nonborrowed path or thetotal reserve objective to compensate for that reduced level ofborrowing?MR. STERNLIGHT. The decline in borrowings over the past sixmonths was a consequence of the lower-than-path money growth. Moneygrew less than was targeted, [but the target] was the basis forsetting path patterns for total and nonborrowed reserves. Inparticular we pretty much stuck with our path for nonborrowed reservesas money grew more slowly and the banking system needed less reserves.Because of that slower money growth borrowing came down, and that hasbeen reflected in a considerable decline in rates.MR. ROOS. Well, I was under the impression that we settargets and then we do whatever we think is [necessary] to achieve theM1-B target, for example. So, if money growth is coming in below, andif borrowing comes in below, don't we take some action to counter thatsituation so that we can achieve the target that we've set forourselves? It seems to me that if we adjusted upward the nonborrowedreserve path, we'd get total reserves at a higher level and therebywe'd be able to achieve, or at least come closer to achieving, ourM1-B targets. Or am I [wrong]?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there have been adjustments of thatkind. There have been adjustments in the other direction when moneygrowth ran way ahead of desires. There was a small adjustment of thenature that you've described within this last period; the nonborrowedpath was raised because we were falling below in money growth as theperiod unfolded.MR. ROOS. But as I listened to your report, I got theimpression that these adjustments were very small and slight. Whyaren't they made to the extent necessary to achieve the targets thatwe set?MR. AXILROD. President Roos, the Committee also had an M2constraint.11/17/81MR. ROOS. Well, had we adjusted nonborrowed reserves toachieve our M1-B--. Let me put it differently. You're suggestingthat we did not respond as might have been necessary to achieve ourM1-B target because we would have overshot the M2 target?MR. AXILROD. If the Committee had only an M1-B target andwas determined to achieve it no matter what was happening to M2 oranything else, then, of course, we would have had to push reserves inand raise the nonborrowed reserves path enormously, with a resultingdrop in interest rates and presumably more marked expansion in M2 andother things.MR. ROOS. So, Steve, we're almost back to where we were whenwe had incompatibility of achieving interest rate targets andaggregate targets. Now we have two aggregate targets that sometimesare incompatible. Is that what you're saying?MR. AXILROD. Well, yes, in some sense maybe they areincompatible. You can choose one or the other; you can't choose themboth. But given the [recent] changes in financial technology and theway people are behaving, the Committee inevitably has to make thejudgments it has been making: That it's going to take this attitudetoward one in case the other goes off and vice versa.MR. ROOS. Could we set those, if we really wanted to, andlock the doors? Could we set those two aggregate targets so that theywould be compatible so you could accomplish both of them?MR. AXILROD. Only if God were sitting at this table! Let metell you, it'd be--MR. SCHULTZ. Would you care to designate him?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now that Mr. Axilrod has consulted all ofus--MR. ROOS. It depends on whether you're a smoker or a non-smoker.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Steve, do you believe pretty confidently that ifrates had come down M2 would have speeded up in view of the ratesensitivity that's so much in [evidence] now?MR. AXILROD. Well, in the short run our experience is that[growth in] money market funds tends to speed up with rate declinesbecause of the lag in [the adjustment of] their rates. As ratesdeclined this time, we found a rather unusual experience in thatsavings deposits at banks accelerated. I assume it was just some sortof cautionary inflow. But all the evidence we have is that, yes, asrates decline we still tend to see growth in M2 as deposits become alittle more attractive relatively speaking. Now, this doesn't holdquite to the extent it did before because we do have components of M2that move with market rates.MR. BLACK. That would be interesting to watch over time.I'm not sure that that will [continue].11/17/81MR. AXILROD. Well, it is atrophying a little, that's quiteright.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Just following up on your comment, Steve:Earlier in the year, of course, we did have that M2 constraint as weall know, but at the October 6th meeting that proviso clause on M2 wasdropped and we set sort of independent paths for M1-B and M2. It wasmy impression, and you probably have more recent data than I've beenable to look at, that in this latest period since the October meetingboth M2 and M1-B have fallen below the path we set. Is that true?MR. AXILROD. The M2 figure for October has fallen below byabout a couple of percentage points; our expectation at the time thatwe [constructed] the path was [a growth rate of] 11.8 percent and itwas published at 9.3 percent. In very recent weeks, the latest datashow an upturn in M2 because of the persisting strength in moneymarket funds and, as I mentioned to President Black, some strengththat we've observed in savings deposits at commercial banks. So wethink we're on a trajectory that gives us a very high November.Again, most of that is just extrapolating the trajectory of the lastcouple of weeks.MR. BALLES. Well, in view of the fact that we apparentlyhave fallen below the paths set at the October 6th meeting on both ofthe Ms, I was a little curious about Peter's remark about the verysmall upward adjustment made in nonborrowed reserves. I think it waspretty darn small. Do you happen to recall the amount, Peter? Wasn'tit about $60 million?MR. STERNLIGHT. $55 or $56 million or something like that.MR. AXILROD. It was $100 million for a week; in terms of a3-week average it was $56 million or something like that.MR. STERNLIGHT. If I could add one other point that seemsrelevant to me: As you know, there has been a considerable decline inrates as money growth has weakened relative to the longer-run paths.I think we've gotten away with that in the market in the sense thatthe basic credibility of the Fed's longer-term restraint policy hasnot been seriously questioned. A minority of voices--maybe one ortwo--has been heard here and there on the fringes raising a question,but by and large the Fed's credibility has not been questioned. Ithink a very vigorous response to achieve an M1-B target when it wasfalling considerably short would have very much endangered that[credibility] to the point where it would have been questioned in thisperiod.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions? If not, we canratify the transactions if you are prepared to.MR. SCHULTZ. I move it.MR. WALLICH. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection; that wasn'tenthusiastic on the [motion] and the second. Mr. Kichline.11/17/81MR. RICE. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. Is it too late to askMr. Sternlight a question?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Excuse me, Jim.MR. PARTEE. It certainly isn't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's one short question.MR. RICE. Well, I'd like Peter to expand on that laststatement. What makes you so sure that the credibility of the Systemwould have been called into question more vigorously had we tried tokeep money growth closer to the targets? Isn't that just yourimpression? You don't have any hard [evidence].MR. STERNLIGHT. It's judgment, Governor--I can't prove it--just from the way that our responses are watched so diligently by anarmy of Fed watchers in the markets. They are watching to see whatour response will be and there are suggestions from various quartersthat money is falling short and we ought to be doing this or that torepair that situation. I had the impression that we were gettingclose to the point where credibility could be questioned each time wemade some overt move, whether it was on the discount rate or puttingin reserves at some particular funds rate level or something. We'vealways run little risks of that kind. We came through it withoutreally setting off any significant reaction but I don't think we werethat far from that on various occasions as we came through thisdeclining rate period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might add that we always have the luxuryhere of looking at these things ex post. As I remember thisintermeeting period--and I may have my timing off a little--we had abig increase in M1-B early in October. And the reason October turnedout to be low was the figures late in October that we didn't knowabout until we were in November. Now, in the middle of November, welook back and October looks low. When we were in the middle ofOctober, it looked high.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Also, pumping in more reserves whenthe economy is weak to compensate for a [shortfall] will notnecessarily result in an increased money supply. What one may find isthat it just causes a further drop in borrowing and more downwardpressure on interest rates. We may end up not being any closer to ourmonetary target and it may bring about a more precipitous [rate]decline.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's what interest rates do. They getyou closer to your monetary target if you move--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but there's a delayed effect.MR. PARTEE. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It may not show up for quite a fewmonths.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline.11/17/81MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we go ahead with Mr. Axilrod andthen we'll call it all open [to questions].MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, both statements gave us a littlemenu of concerns. I think the time has come for comments on theeconomic scene and related comments you might want to make on thefinancial scene.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What's your peak-to-troughprojection, Jim?MR. KICHLINE. About 2 percent if one were to go from Q1 1981to Q1 1982, and that compares with a mean of postwar contractions ofabout 2-1/2 percent.MS. TEETERS. One question, Mr. Chairman: The third quarterinflation rate turned out to be quite a bit higher than we hadexpected and I wonder if there are any special factors there or is itsomething that's likely to continue? What are the risks on that side?MR. KICHLINE. It was a couple of special factors. Onerelates to the inventory deflator and a technical problem that wethink will be reversed. Another was actually a positive feature thatturns out to be negative in the short run. We had a much steeperdecline of import prices and in that quarter, since they'resubtracted, it tended to boost the inflation rate. But we think onaverage the changes that we've made to the third and fourth quartersdon't represent a fundamental change in the inflation outlook,although I would say some things, such as service prices, have beencoming in higher than in our previous forecast. But it's not a bigproblem at the moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I have a question, Steve. As I understood yourrationale, you're concerned that if interest rates fall more quicklythan somehow would be warranted by present economic conditions, thatwould have adverse consequences. Am I not correct in saying that theonly way to stop interest rates from declining at what anyone mightthink is an excessive rate is to withdraw money, which has adepressing effect on M1-B? Is that correct so far? The only way tokeep interest rates from dropping by what anyone might think is aprecipitous amount is to be frugal in the way we supply reserves?MR. AXILROD. That's one way, assuming GNP. GNP could bedifferent.MR. ROOS. All right. Let me ask this then. If we believe,and maybe we don't, that there is some relationship between economicactivity and the rate at which the aggregates grow, especially thenarrow aggregate, and if in order to keep interest rates fromplummeting we keep the aggregates below what we think is [anappropriate] targeted range, can't that exacerbate the recession? And-7-11/17/81if the recession is more pronounced, won't that cause interest ratesto be low anyway? In other words, where does that string of reasoning--if you can dignify it by calling it reasoning--break down, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, the context that I had in mind was thatthe Committee is making a short-run decision for, let us say, the nextsix weeks. And whether that decision is for 5 percent growth inmoney, or 6 or 7 percent--if money growth turned out to be any one ofthose [rates]--and then the Committee went ahead and attained its 1982tentative targets or something like them, I simply didn't think thatthe difference in those growth rates would matter very much.MR. ROOS. Nor do I.MR. AXILROD. And they won't affect the year as a whole--theresult for the year 1981--because in large part that's given. Or atleast the year isn't much affected by those growth rates.MR. ROOS. Yes, but I thought it--MR. AXILROD. So, that drove me to worrying about what kindof volatility might be promoted in credit markets with effects onexpectations from short-run efforts [to increase growth], given thefact that I assumed the Committee was going to phase down into its1982 targets, or phase down as the year began. That drove me intothese muddy areas of how people perceive what happens in creditmarkets. And I felt that if rates dropped sharply before anyone feltthat a sustained economic weakness was in train, that would start aspeculative bidding on commodity markets, use of credit for thosepurposes, and things like that.MR. ROOS. Well, I would share your thinking that what we dotoday in the short run isn't important. But my question--and maybe Iwas premature and it should be considered when we make our longer-termplans--was on this whole question of the relationship of [declining]interest rates and the aggregates. I think that should be consideredat that time, though maybe not today. I thought that you were reallyaddressing the longer-term game plan and--MR. AXILROD. I was trying to say, President Roos, that anelement in today's short-run decision probably should be how theCommittee wants to phase into the targets for next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. In looking at your calculations of the effectsthat the different alternatives we're considering would have on rates,I noticed that you're projecting that from today until our nextmeeting in December, which is a period of 5 weeks I believe--andcoming into this meeting I thought Peter said that the fed funds rateis running a little over 13 percent right now--MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.MR. FORD. So, you're saying that were we to choose to expandM1-B over the next 5 weeks at a rate under 9 percent, we could have a100 basis point drop per week in the fed funds rate potentially. Thatis the worst we could have, is that right?11/17/81MR. AXILROD. Well, that isn't the worst. That's our bestguess of what these relationships are.MR. FORD. Is that right?MR. AXILROD. Best estimates until--MR. FORD. Well, that did happen for a while. As I recall,when we put on credit controls over a year ago, we did have the ratedropping 100 basis points a week.MR. STERNLIGHT. Even more for a couple of weeks in April.It was between 100 and 200 basis points a week for a few weeks.MR. FORD. I'm wondering what is in your modeling. That wasa very unusual period. If we were trying to achieve some step-up inM1-B to get back to our announced targets for this year, I'd besurprised, in the absence of credit controls, if we were to getanything like the kind of precipitous drop in rates that we had undercredit control. Wouldn't you? How does your model generate this?MR. SCHULTZ. It depends on where we put the borrowing. Ifthose borrowings get too low, then rates can drop pretty fast.MR. AXILROD. Well, the model would have generated muchbigger drops in rates than--MR. FORD. Do you mean, in other words, that this is anadjusted number [from what the] model--?MR. AXILROD. Well, no. The credit control program[produced] drops in money supply well below what was targeted at thattime. So, in order to hit the target, the declines in rates wouldhave been even more--much, much larger. So, this sort of assumeshitting the targets. Moreover, it does it with only 6 weeks to go; soyou have to get a lot of movement in it.MR. FORD. On the credibility question that you mentioned,Peter, are you concerned also about our credibility in terms of theaggregates and whether or not we're trying to keep reasonable the[deviations from] the long-term paths we've set? Isn't that also acredibility problem in addition to the worry about what happens if therates drop?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think so, sure.MR. FORD. In making your judgments, then, how do you judgeone kind of credibility against the other?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, carefully.MR. FORD. We had some builders circling the statue in frontof the Atlanta Fed and they were thinking about hanging Mr. Volcker ineffigy. Their argument was: What are you guys doing? You're nottaking care of things. You ought to stop worrying about these ratesand let them come down. We are dying.11/17/81In that connection, I noticed in the Greenbook that yourhousing forecast for the fourth quarter, Jim, shows 870,000 starts onaverage. That must mean there's a bottom below that, which we'regoing to face either this month or next month, where housing startsare going to be reported at under 800,000 units. Is that what you[expect]?MR. KICHLINE. No, not necessarily. We have 918,000 orsomething like that in October. So, it's below 900,000 on average forthe next--MR. FORD. It has to be. If you have an average of 870,000and you have 918,000 for the first month, where is the bottom? I'mworried. They came circling our statue of the eagle when starts were900,000. What are they going to--?MR. ZEISEL. 840,000 is our low in [the quarter].SPEAKER(?). We'll have a bald eagle!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Having resolved that piece of arithmetic,we'll go to Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, it disturbs me to sit here and letus contemplate what is really a fiction, which is these numbers thatwe're going by. I'm watching the volume of our check clearings inColumbus suddenly shoot up, which is an unusual phenomenon at themoment. If you look into that, it's unbelievable the money fundtransfers that are being put through by one our Columbus banks. Iwonder if the numbers we are dealing with here were closer to thereality of transactions balances if we'd have the same kinds ofreactions we're having to these numbers. To play these numbers outseems to me to be a serious mistake in terms of transactions balancesagainst the economy. I think these are too low in terms of reality ifwe adjust for the money funds, which are growing very rapidly [basedon] the push being made, at least in our District, not only in termsof large corporations but of individuals moving into these moneyfunds. The pressure is really very great to get individuals toconvert into money funds, which are transaction balances. It seems tome that it would behoove us to move promptly to find out whatproportion of these money funds is in fact transactions balances andto start to factor that into our thinking about these aggregates, ifthis becomes a guide in terms of our policy.My second point is that it seems to me we're stuck not onlywith arbitrary numbers but that our perspective is too short. If wethink a bit longer term about what we're trying to do, we get awayfrom some of these extremes in our thinking concerning this 5-weekperiod. Third, to try to get away from this damn base drift problem,which is going to kill us on the one side as it did last year on theother, I'd put this in perspective by going back to the fourth quarterof '79 and then making some growth rate projections out into theseperiods for what it takes to get us on a reasonable path from thatlevel until the March figure gives us somewhat different numbers thanhave been presented to us here. So, this is a series of things thatwe need to think about in our policy considerations.-10-11/17/81On the economic front, I have a concern which is not sharedby my colleagues, I must confess. I think we've kind of gotten overthe interest rate bulge temporarily here in terms of pressure oncorporations. But I have a feeling that the profits squeeze issetting in and that some managements are going to throw in the toweland that we're going to have more financial problems in the monthsahead than I think are factored into some of these forecasts. I don'tknow what the fallout of that is going to be in terms of psychology[and the effect on] this turnaround that is projected in the monthsahead. This really is causing me concern because of the fallout thatwould have for financial institutions that think they're in prettygood shape and could suddenly wake up with some rather sick loans ontheir hands that really aren't [known by] the public.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a couple of comments onyour comments. On that one, I am somewhat encouraged in a perversesort of way that the bankers I have been talking to recently realizethat they may have some credit problems on their hands, if realizationis the first step toward appropriate policies.MR. WINN. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On your first point on money market funds,I agree with the general direction of your comment. It's very hard tomake statistical analyses. We've tried to make some. I forget allthe assumptions, but on what I think would be considered the mostconservative assumptions that adds somewhat over 1 percent to M1-B interms of transactions balances. But that kind of calculation allowsnothing for indirect effects, for example that an individual minimizeshis transactions balance simply because he has a money market fund andknows he can draw upon it even if he doesn't draw upon it frequentlyor at all. [The problem] is a matter of continuing concern. Butthere's no figure that comes out that says this much of the moneymarket funds is transactions balances and that much isn't because--MR. WINN. Can't we go back and take a look at some of theseaccounts and see to what extent they really have--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these calculations derive--and Idon't know how good the basic data are--[from information] that saysthere's this much turnover or this much check usage on these moneymarket funds. [That is, if] they had a normal kind of velocity and ifthey were NOW accounts instead of money market funds, they'd be thisbig. And that accounts for a relatively small fraction of moneymarket funds. But still, they've been growing so fast it does make animpact.MR. AXILROD. We also had an informal Michigan survey wherewe asked people what percentage of the money market funds weretransactions accounts to them and what were such and such? A verysmall percentage was transactions.MR. WINN. What strikes me is the number of people one talksto who are becoming aware of them and now starting to use them. Thatreally is accelerating.MR. AXILROD. Well, this survey was conducted a few monthsago.-11-11/17/81MR. WINN. That's the thing. I think in the last few monthswe've seen a really marked shift into this sort of account.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have the figures with me to lookat these things in a longer-term perspective, but I'd like to look atthat. I should get those figures, Steve.MR. FORD. I have it in a chart.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The year-to-year changes are quiteorderly.MR. FORD. If you took the '79 base that [Mr. Winn] mentionedand [drew] a cone out from '79--in other words, if there were no basedrift--the growth of M1-B that we've had would put us inside therange, just below the middle according to my chart.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, as a matter of interest, I've putthe 1981 average over 1980 in the Bluebook.MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, it's there in the back of the Bluebook.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where?MR. AXILROD. It's on page 6; it's the last line for M1-B.This happens to be a year where the difference between the Q4-to-Q4figure and the [yearly] average-over-average is a lot bigger than itis ordinarily. The difference is ordinarily more like 1 or at themost 2 percentage points. As you can see, it's close to 2-1/2 or 2-3/4 percentage points. That is, M1-B looks like it will grow about 4-1/2 percent year-over-year whereas for Q4-to-Q4 it's only growing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are adjusted figures?MR. AXILROD. Yes, this is shift adjusted.MR. PARTEE. That's because we got [growth] early in theyear; so far it has been high.MR. AXILROD. Yes. I'm not sure in this calculation whetherwe ended up shift adjusting 1980, but that would lower it from 4.5 to4.4 or 4.3 percent; it wouldn't be that much of a difference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We started high?MR. PARTEE. Yes.MS. TEETERS. This would reverse next year, Steve. If itstarts low, then it will end up--MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. It averages out that over [the two]years they both come out the same, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might also say that I have no confidencein this shift adjusted figure anymore. I think it was an appropriatething to do earlier in the year. But at some point it loses me, interms of significance. I think we have already passed the point whereit loses me, but it's not---12-11/17/81MR. PARTEE. It's having very little effect now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it had a quarter of a percentagepoint or more [effect] in the second half of the year, I think.MR. AXILROD. Well, it's not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's nothing drastic.MR. AXILROD. It's not unreasonable to say, Mr. Chairman--Ihesitate to mention it--that the staff, and in a sense all of us,underestimated the offsetting downward shift we would get [along with]the upward shift in M1-B from shifts in savings accounts. There weredownward shifts in movements of demand deposits into other things.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's the money market fundquestion.MR. AXILROD. That's right. In some sense we have twooffsetting errors here.MR. CORRIGAN. But it seems to me that it all works in thesame direction. If you go back to the beginning of the year and lookat the spread between the M1 and M2 targeted growth rates, it wasgoing to be 2-1/2 percentage points. But we had fudged that; it wasreally something like 3-1/2 points. Now, if you look at where theyear is probably going to come out, that spread that we thought wasmaybe 3-1/2 is going to be 7-1/2 percentage points. The 4 percentagepoint difference in the observed spread versus what we thought thespread was going to be suggests to me that the weight of the argumentis overwhelmingly in the direction of M1-B being understated, whetherit's because of money market mutual funds or whatever. While I'munder no illusions that we knew exactly the relationship last Januaryeither, that alone leads me to the conclusion that I simply am notnearly as preoccupied with what the statistical measure of M1-B isversus what I think the reality is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I just wanted to point something out--noton this subject--[though] I agree that the velocity of M1-B hasincreased because of the money market funds. After all, we'llprobably have a 9 percent increase in nominal GNP this year withgrowth of only a couple percent on M1-B, which is unprecedented. Thathas to mean a considerable shift has occurred.But what I wanted to point out was that when Steve speaksabout the trajectory--plotting a course that would take us through thewinter and into the spring--he has been very careful every time he hasreferred to it in a statement to say "assuming the economicprojection." And I would argue that this begs the question, because Ihave a certain amount of sympathy with Larry's first question. I heldmy hand up when he asked it, though it has been some time since Larrymade his comment. There could be a circularity here that in effecthas a trajectory to no place, or as we say in regard to the discountrate "a bridge to nowhere." That's because, in fact, we may find thatthe nominal GNP numbers fade as we move ahead. We've had a little ofthat, certainly, in the fourth quarter [with GNP] being quite a bit-13-11/17/81weaker than we were anticipating all year. I have a sense of a littleshortfall from our projections as we've gone through the year. We'vecertainly had big shortfalls in relation to our expectations on M1-B.I looked at it and we have been below our expectations of M1-B atthese meetings for six consecutive months, and the average shortfallhas been 7 percent over that 6-month period. We've even been short onM2 compared to our expectations, the paths that we selected when wewent into the period. In the case of M1-B, that's partly because ofthis velocity problem. But I think it's partly because of shortfallsin economic performance, too.It's hard for me to believe that there will not be aneconomic recovery commencing in the second half of next year, giventhe size of the deficit that we'll have and the further cut in taxesthat will occur as of July 1st. But it's a fair piece until themiddle of next year, and I'm not at all sure that we can say withgreat confidence that the economy might not decline a good dealfurther below the projection, [say, by] the end of the first quarter,which could give us quite a serious problem as it occurs. If that istrue, and if we hold up interest rates, then we will get thecontraction in transactions balances that will make possible acontinuation of poor business. So, I just wanted to point out thatSteve has been very careful every time he referred to the longer-runplanning always to assume as a caveat that the economic assumption wasright.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I keep hearing, particularly from smallbusinessmen, that there is a lot of pent-up demand both in terms ofconsumer spending and investment demand, if only interest rates wouldcome down. They're referring mostly to bank rates and mortgage rates.I wonder, Jim, if there's any reason why that should be more true thistime around than in previous recessions--that there would be moreinterest rate sensitivity on the demand side. One can say that mayberates were so high that people backed off. But if it's true thatthere is this pent-up demand, that seems to me to argue for a shorterrecession of a more traditional V-shape. But I haven't been able tocome up with any really convincing reasons why it's necessarily truethat there ought to be more pent-up demand waiting on more interestrate [declines] this time than other times.MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think it's a mixed picture. A coupleof years ago we had what were really fairly strong forecasts, giventhe interest rate assumptions. Our thinking there was largelyconditioned by the inflationary experience and a rough calculation ofreal interest rates. We didn't think real rates were that high and wehad relative to the model forecast--at least our own model--a fairlystrong GNP projection. Looking at it now, the argument is a bitdifferent. Our inflation forecast, looking ahead, is coming down. Inthe mortgage market there is a good deal of underlying demand that'srelated to demographic factors, and the interest rate is a constraint.But I'm not sure I'd frame it in terms of the interest elasticityhaving changed; we've just choked off a lot of potential demand in thelast two or three years. In the auto area, our view is that interestrates are probably a small factor in the depressed state of themarket. It is prices and incomes but not interest rates so much. So,I don't perceive the notion that rates coming down a bit--say the11/17/81mortgage rate goes from 18 to 16 percent--as a dramatic factor. Now,if you talk about the mortgage rate coming down into the 12 percentarea, for example, then I think big things will happen. So, ratherthan focus solely on the interest rate effects, we believe there aremany things going on in various markets. It's not just that theinterest rate elasticity is so high that we're going to get a bigbounceback, given where we're starting.MR. BOEHNE. One other comment on the inflation front: I hada number of meetings with groups of 15 or 20 people and I asked themwhat kinds of assumptions on inflation they were building into theirbusiness budgets. I didn't find an overwhelming number of people whowere reducing their own internal assumptions on inflation. Out of agroup of 15 or 20 people, maybe 2 or 3 people were actually loweringtheir budget assumptions. But I did find a difference in businessesthat are unionized and those that aren't unionized. Unionizedbusinesses tend to see noticeably less feistiness on the part of theunions in terms of wage demands, but in the nonunionized areas I don'tfind that happening.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you find to be the typicalinflation forecast in these planning budgets?MR. BOEHNE. I would say most are in the 9 to 10 percentrange, with a few outliers down around 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That accords with my experience, but Ifind more outliers above than below.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I hear people who talk about [inflation]above 10 percent. Probably more people say they see it above 10 thansee it at 8 percent; but most of them are around 9 to 10 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The people say that they'replanning on a 5 to 6 percent wage increase next year. But they arenonunion. They pay relatively low wages; they [start with] theminimum wage, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, at the last several meetings I'vebeen saying that the economy was sluggish, bumping along somewherebetween no growth and very low growth. I thought that was a goodthing in terms of a desire to reduce inflationary pressures and Ithought it would be good if we could keep the economy in that mode.But now we see that the economy has not remained in that pattern.Nearly all of the indicators point to a recession. And, as theRedbook indicates, pessimism is widespread among businessmen. Itappears to me that the only question really is how deep the recessionis going to be. My own judgment is that the staff forecast is aboutright. I would differ only slightly as to the timing of theturnaround. The staff sees a mild upturn in GNP in the second quarterof next year. I do not see a turnaround appearing as early as thesecond quarter. I do not see the mild pickup in housing and inautomobiles and in inventory that the forecast is based upon. I thinka turnaround has to await the tax cut of midyear and that it probablywill be toward the end of the third quarter before we see any realsigns of recovery. So, I would put the recovery further back in time,-15-11/17/81which means that we're likely to see very low economic activitycontinuing longer. In other words, the duration of the recessionwould be longer than is projected. I'm also more optimistic about theinflation picture for next year. In my view the course of inflationwill be somewhat less. The staff is projecting an average inflationrate of something like 8.8 percent, and I would expect it to beslightly lower than that.I was interested to hear Mr. Axilrod say he saw significantdifferences between this downturn and the one that occurred in thespring of last year. I certainly agree with that. This is a muchmore classic recession. I don't think it will be V-shaped; I don'tthink there will be a very quick snapback because the conditions aredifferent and the basis for a quick snapback in consumer and businessspending seems not to be present now. The main issues that seem to bebefore us then are: (1) How much of a drop in interest rates would wefind acceptable in the current circumstances; and (2) How much ofshortfall in the growth of M1-B from its target range would we findacceptable. And related to both of these questions is, of course, thecredibility issue. What happens to our credibility if we allowinterest rates to fall below whatever level we find acceptable andwhat happens to credibility if we continue to allow money growth tofall substantially below the target range? I see our credibilitybeing called into question much more when we are seen as letting up ina situation where inflation is gathering momentum and when interestrates are rising [than if] money is tight and we appear to be lettingup--and I emphasize appear--in a situation when interest rates arefalling and the economy is weakening. In current circumstances it'smuch more important to be perceived as sticking to our objectives andtaking our monetary growth target seriously. Therefore, at present--and I refer now to the period over the next six weeks to two months--it's important to be seen as not contracting the narrowest monetaryaggregate, M1-B, further than we had intended to six weeks ago. Iwould think that our credibility depends a great deal at this time onwhether we are willing to appear to move in the direction of trying toachieve our target for M1-B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, one comment about what Mr. Boehne said:As far as latent demand is concerned, we've had a policy of monetaryrestraint for a couple of years now and it does stand to reason thatin the interest sensitive sectors, which have been under pressure forthat length of time, there would be some latent demand--certainly, forexample, in housing. The auto sector would seem to have some latentdemand because of scrappage on the one hand and because of the recentvery rapid rise in used car prices; one would assume that would havesome connection. I happen to feel that auto sales may be a bit moreinterest sensitive than the staff does, as a psychological factor, ifnothing else. I recognize the sticker shock phenomenon. Anotherinteresting thing to note is that in the quarterly survey of theNational Association of Small Businesses a large percentage ofrespondents say that their biggest problem is interest rates. Butonly a portion of those people say that the problem is that they areunder terrific pressure. A lot of very solid small businesses saythat they'd like to expand if interest rates would come down, so Ithink there's considerable latent demand in that area as well.-16-11/17/81MR. BOEHNE. I think you're quite right about that.MR. SCHULTZ. Let me speak to what Bill Ford had to say,because I think that's the crux of the matter at this point in time.I believe that the very high interest rates have been a primary causeof the recession we're in. If that's the case, then we certainly needto have lower interest rates before the economy begins to pull up.And I think we clearly do need lower interest rates. There are threethings, though, that bother me a great deal about the speed and depthof that drop [in rates]. The first is that if we let borrowing go toolow--I'm not sure about Steve's frictional level of $50 to $100million because I have a feeling it may be a little higher--we getinto a situation where the funds rate could drop very precipitously.And if the funds rate were to drop to a negative real rate, that wouldbe an indication to the market that would not be very favorable. Youasked Peter what his judgments were about expectations. The fact isthat the army of Fed watchers out there has history on its side infeeling that we are going to cave in. We have in the past and theycontinue to expect history to repeat itself. So, I think a very sharpand precipitous drop in the funds rate could have seriousexpectational consequences.The second part follows on that expectational point. It isimportant that we get mortgage rates down if we're going to get somerecovery in housing. Now, how do we go about doing that? Well, if weget more savings flows into the thrifts, that helps. If the rates onall the other alternative investments come down, then the mortgageswill look better. But the fact is that the thrifts have been killedby investing in mortgages over the years, so the expectational factoris very important for them in terms of when they're going to startmaking mortgage loans again. The California thrifts keep coming inand telling us that they're not making any mortgages at all even withthese very high rates. So, how do we get them to [make such loans]?I'm not sure that a very precipitous drop in short-term rates is thekind of thing that would make the thrifts feel that they'd want to goout and start making mortgage loans again. The expectational factorsare important there. I don't really know how to assess that, but it'ssomething to be considered.The final thing that just scares the devil out of me--itgives me some nightmares--is what will happen if we do get thisrecovery in the first or second quarter and then the tax cut comes in;I just have to feel that interest rates are going to start back upagain at some point in time. Now, 1982 is an election year. Whatkind of problems will this country face in its anti-inflation effortsif we are in a period of rising interest rates in a politicalcampaign? On the question of how rapidly interest rates come down andhow rapidly they come back up, in talking to small businesses of alldifferent kinds, my sense is that there are thousands of them outthere that are hanging on by their fingernails and they're going tocontinue to hang on when they see interest rates coming down. Butwhen they see those interest rates start to turn back up again, Ithink a lot of them are going to let go, and we could be facing areally, really serious problem. Willis Winn brought in a letter thismorning which he says is typical of what he has been getting frombusinessmen. In effect it says that the Fed is being too tight andit's causing the recession and not letting the President's programwork. It's that kind of argument. Now, what happens if we get into-17-11/17/81the summer in a political campaign under those kinds of circumstances?I just have a feeling it could wreck the whole anti-inflation campaignand then we're in deep trouble. I think we do need to get interestrates down. It's important. But the speed and depth of that drop andthe potential for the rebound is something that we really have to keepin mind.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, some of the things I'm going to say echowhat Fred has just said. As I listen to the staff, they are tellingus, I think, that we are in a classic recession now. It is quitepervasive across sectors; it has cumulative characteristics, but theeconomy is by no means falling apart. We are not looking at a 1974-75; we're not looking at a second quarter of 1980. I find myself inbroad agreement with that, and I think that is what the tone of theRedbook is saying also. But, frankly, I don't like what we're goingthrough. I would much rather have seen a continued more or lesssideways path instead of heading into a recession. If we look back atwhat has been happening in the last two years, we find that theeconomy got too weak in the early part of 1980 and it got too strongin the last half of 1980 and then it was too weak again. In allcandor we have to acknowledge that the behavior of financial variableshas been principally responsible for that. I don't think we ought tocast any blame. If I had been responsible for running the whole thingmyself, I don't know that I could have done any better and I may wellhave done worse.I certainly agree with Willis Winn's comments that we'relooking at the behavior of a measure of transactions balances that wehave not the foggiest notion of how to interpret. But I don't thinkthe answer is simply to recast our statistics, because what we'regoing through is a wholesale change in ways of portfolio management onthe part of both businesses and individuals. And it's going to take along, long time for this to shake down until we finally understandwhat these monetary aggregates mean. I think what we have to do is totake into account what is happening to interest rates, at least tosome degree; and there just isn't any doubt in my mind that interestrates have gone through much too wide swings in the past couple ofyears. In retrospect, I come to the conclusion that when we let thefed funds rate get up to the 18 to 20 percent range, the behavior ofthe economy subsequently has become too weak. And when we let it getdown into the 8 to 10 percent range, the economy has become toostrong.. Now, those are rather wide limits, but somewhere betweenthose two limits is where we want to be.I agree with Mr. Axilrod's comments that the economy isdifferent now than it was in the second quarter of 1980, so we're notgoing to see the same kind of response that ensued upon removal ofcredit controls when interest rates on short-term securities wereslightly below 10 percent. But let us remember also that we have anenormous amount of fiscal stimulus coming along in the latter half ofnext year, and that's going to work the other way. And I agree withEd Boehne that we have a lot of pent-up demand out there that couldbegin to affect the economy if interest rates come down a lot further.The most important policy question we need to focus on as aCommittee today is how far and how fast we want interest rates to fall-18-11/17/81from here. I would remind you that interest rates are already lowerthan the trough level of interest rates that underlies the staffforecast. The staff forecast has a trough level of Treasury billrates--that is, on short-term securities--of 11-1/2 percent in thefirst quarter of 1982. We're already below that. I think we will seea significant further reduction in important rates of interest likemortgage rates if short-term rates stay where they are for a while.It may well be that some further decline in short rates isappropriate, maybe even desirable, but we need to be extremelycautious in how far we let them go because inevitably if the economybegins to recover strongly, with a combination of a relaxation offinancial constraints and fiscal stimulus, the rates are going torocket back up again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how many people we canget through here, but let's try a couple more. Mr. Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, in every recession there is a periodwhere one becomes alarmed if it looks worse than one had expected.And that is the period that I think we're passing through now. But Ithink the staff is right that there is a foundation under the economy.It's partly the tax cut next year. I think the pent-up demand inhousing, automobiles, and investment, as it gradually comes alive,will prevent a very deep drop. So, I think concern of a very severerecession isn't justified. If the economy is worse than it seemed afew months ago, so is the inflation outlook, or at least it hasn'timproved.If I may go back for a moment to the targeting problem thatLarry Roos raised, the way I understand this is that the Committeesets the money supply path and the borrowing assumption. The staffderives from that a total reserves path and a nonborrowed reservespath given the borrowing assumption [and] we then target thenonborrowed. And a change in the nonborrowed [path] would simplyamount to going back to total reserves targeting. A change in thenonborrowed [path] is the analogue of a discount rate change. It's amajor decision and it should be made by the Committee, not just maderoutinely because we're not hitting the money supply target. The samecould be said about changing the total reserves target. That too, itseems to me, can miscarry as a result of excess reserves building upor being drawn down, and the target should not be changed without aCommittee decision.On the aggregates, I share what has been said about M1-B.It's not a sacred number; it's a very profane number. It has beenmisspecified. There's a member of the Shadow Open Market Committee inNew York who has an adjusted M1-B that is growing at a 10 or 12percent annual rate. All he does is put in 50 percent of money marketmutual funds and overnight Eurodollars and RPs. You can--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, he's not complaining about theshortfall?MR. WALLICH. He's not complaining. He has been complainingabout our excessive reserve expansion, you see. Everybody can findsomething wrong with us.MR. SCHULTZ. Who's that, Heinneman?-19-11/17/81MR. WALLICH. Heinneman. I think that Willis is perfectlyright that the bank in Ohio is in effect making it possible to have azero balance checking account. And I think we're moving further inthat direction. So, M1-B is highly suspect. Well, I guess I won'tsay any more on the aggregates. Just a word on interest rates: Whathas been said here is exactly what I think. If we stick firmly to anaggregates target, we're going to have very wide swings in short-termrates. After a while long-term rates will cease to follow this raterace and will probably remain high because people have the experience,if they ever buy bonds, of losing money as bond prices rise. If weget a V-shaped interest rate [move], we'll lose credibility. I thinkour credibility is really much more linked to interest rates; manymillions of people are more interested in them than in the monetaryaggregates in which, at least in Washington outside of three buildingsnot including this one, there isn't all that much faith.MR. RICE. It depends on what phase of the cycle we're in,Henry.MR. PARTEE. Three buildings?MR. WALLICH. I'll tell you the addresses in a minute. Thereare two buildings on each side of it. I'm simply trying to say that Ithink we ought to aim at a saucer-type movement of interest rates. Irecognize that we need to have some compromise between not completelyletting go of our aggregates targets and avoiding excessive moves ininterest rates. That's what we need. And in that process, we oughtto avoid getting to negative real rates, as Fred said. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe we'll go drink coffee and thenget through the list. I won't blame it on you at all, GovernorWallich. It's a rather long--[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's welcome Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Out our way we happen to have a big worldwideengineering outfit called Bechtel Engineering and they've just hadsome publicity about a brand new kind of business they're gettinginto. They think there's a great future in it. It's calleddecontamination and decommissioning from nuclear power plants.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought they were decontaminating the M1figure. That's what George Schultz said!MR. BALLES. Maybe we should have George's boys take a lookat our problem with the Ms and see if we can get some decontaminationand decommission! I was kidding Dave Lindsey that if I were his boss,I'd give him an assignment to answer the question: "Will the realmoney supply please stand up?"What I have to say today is that I'm torn between Lyle'spoint that we don't really know what these Ms mean anymore--and I amvery sympathetic to that--versus my feeling that we want to avoid aprocyclical monetary policy. As I look back over the last couple ofyears, we took very positive action in focusing on a gradualdeceleration of monetary growth. I think that was a bold action and-20-11/17/81we had a lot of guts in letting interest rates rise to unprecedentedlevels in carrying that out. And I guess I would be a littleuncomfortable if we weren't symmetrical on the down side. But giventhe recession we're now in and our guesses as to how long it willlast, it wouldn't bother me to see interest rates come down somewhatfurther. I'm considerably influenced in that by the real risks I seeof this downturn getting more serious than the staff projects,although I can't really disagree with their forecast. But the risksare there; we all know about them. There are very serious risks inthe thrift industry, extremely serious recessions--and that's the onlyword for it--in the forest products industry and the auto industry,and there is a cost-price squeeze going on in agriculture. To theextent that we can give them some near-term relief, lower rates, itwould simply head off the risks coming from those sectors ofconverting this present recession into a major contraction. I'mhoping that we'll avoid an actual shrinkage in the money supply suchas we had in the mid-1970s. And while I certainly wouldn't want tosee the extreme fluctuations in interest rates that we witnessed in1980, I don't see very much risk of that happening in late 1981 andearly 1982. Maybe I've been brainwashed by being too close to theforest products industry, but I recently appeared on a paneldiscussion along with Henry Reuss and they were ready to hang me ineffigy, Mr. Chairman, instead of you, maybe as your proxy.MR. SCHULTZ. That gives [unintelligible] more important. Ifthey hang them all, that's all right.MR. BALLES. To Henry's credit, I'm glad to say that hesupported what we have been doing. He said it was necessary and waswhat just had to be done. That was a pleasant surprise; I didn't haveto fight with him. But I'll tell you, I do have to fight with thebuilders and the forest products people who say they are bleeding todeath or hemorrhaging. They say: What can you do for us? And do itsoon because if you don't do it soon, it's going to be too late.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. End of story?MR. BALLES. End of story.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Just to comment on the situation in the ChicagoDistrict, the problems, of course, have been serious all year butthere certainly has been further deterioration since our last meeting.And it's clear that [just about] all of the sectors have now beenaffected, with very few exceptions. Turning to the auto situation,October can only be classified as a disaster. Any hope for 1981 atthis point, of course, is gone. The optimism that some of them havefor 1982 is significantly eroded and I think the automotive situation,therefore, is very serious. Capital expenditures in our area havebeen further curtailed, particularly in the automotive industry, withsignificant cutbacks. The Christmas shutdown schedules, which werealready going to be heavy, have been extended considerably. Thisrecession is a little different in the Midwest than other recessionshave been. In the past the agricultural sector has offset theindustrial sector. This time that is not the case. Because of highproduction, farm incomes are down and, as a result, the agriculturalarea is also in a very serious predicament. And that has impacts on-21-11/17/81people who manufacture products for that sector, several of whom havegotten themselves into very weakened, precarious positions. In turn,the banks that extend credit to the farms are beginning to see someslowdown in payments, and I think it is inevitable that there will besome problem loans developing among those banks as they go through aforeclosure procedure.I am considerably more pessimistic than most with regard tothe outlook for '82. I admittedly come from an area where there is avery heavy concentration of industries that have been most affected.But I am beginning to wonder if the consensus view that we will allcome to work on the first of July and find that someone has turned thelights on is really going to come to pass. I think we're placing anawful lot of hope that the tax cut will produce significant benefits.I think the recovery will begin to take place as we see a permanent ormore lasting impact on inflation. And until we get into the contractsettlements next year, I don't think one can forecast how that willcome about. I don't want to imply that any of this should indicate asignificant change in policy for us. On the contrary, we continue tohave the broad support of the business and financial industry and Ithink they would encourage us to stay with the general direction ofour current policy. But my hunch is that with the economy as weak asit is rates will continue to come down and we can continue to maintaina fairly restrictive stance on the aggregates without necessarilyhaving a negative impact on the recovery prospects. So, I would urgethat we continue with this. But I do want to report that thesituation in the Chicago District continues to be serious and isdeteriorating.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, until the last two peopletalked it seemed that I was perhaps one of the few people in the roomwho wasn't confident that I knew what we ought to be doing. But I dosense a clear trend around the table that we're fighting last year'swar, which of course is always a danger. It seems to me that thelatest Maginot line is that if the federal funds rate drops below 10percent, the economy is going to turn on the dime and shoot uprapidly. That seems to me, at least for the first half of 1982, to behighly unlikely. Quite the contrary, I think there is a risk that ifwe're too rigid in following this particular [policy] line, we couldwell end up with a much deeper recession than we're projecting. Idon't have the confidence that that would be the case, but that riskis clearly there. With that background, I tried to read some of theeuphemisms that Steve Axilrod is now developing for the Bluebook. Iagree with him, looking at the options, that we're not going to affectthe monetary growth rates in the last weeks of this year. But hetalks about a more restrictive policy producing a "smoother transitionto targets for 1982" and that's the euphemism that I've been trying tointerpret. What I think it means--I'd like to ask Steve--is thatwe're going to have some very low monetary growth rates early in theyear, which would be helpful in offsetting very rapid growth rateslater in the year. But if we set out to produce overtly very lowmonetary growth rates in the first half when the economy is very weak,we could generate a larger recession than any of us would think wasconstructive in the situation. Have I interpreted you wrongly, Steve?-22-11/17/81MR. AXILROD. Well, what I meant was that that alternativewould reduce the odds of the funds rate going to 5 percent between nowand year-end and rising back up to 15 to 20 percent early next year asan effort was made to hold the aggregates next year down to, say, inthe 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range tentatively adopted. That'sliterally what I had in mind.MR. MORRIS. Finally, looking at the options for thismeeting, two of the options call for a more restrictive policy than weannounced at the last meeting. It's hard for me to envisage whateconomic data have come in over the past five weeks that would lead usto support a more restrictive policy than we did the last time. Icould certainly buy "B" because we could still say that we're shootingfor 7 percent growth through the rest of the year, which is a numberwe put out last time. I find it very difficult to figure out how wewould explain coming out with the 5-3/4 percent target underalternative C, after having given our sanction to a 7 percent growthrate before we knew how sharp the decline in the economy was going tobe. I should think that would take some doing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I certainly would agree that theeconomy is soft. We even have some sense of that in the Ninth FederalReserve District at this point. And that softness is well reflectedin statistics and in business behavior and sentiment. My own personalhunch would be that the fourth quarter at least could be even softerthan the staff is now suggesting. But at the same time I also sensethat there is at least a residue of optimism in terms of the longer-term outlook and expectations. In part that grows out of peoplelooking ahead to the tax cut and in part out of some of these pent-updemands that people have been talking about. There also is still somelingering hope that the inflation rate may be coming down in ameaningful way, although recent events perhaps have not worked in thedirection of reinforcing that. The relevant point here is that if wewant to talk about a sustained recovery--whether it starts in thesecond quarter or the third quarter--the sustainability quotient isgoing to depend on two or three critical things. One is bending downthat inflation rate, including the wage side. Another is the budgetsituation, which hasn't even been mentioned here, and as I would lookat that right now recent events seem to have worked in the directionof making it harder rather than easier to get on with the furtheradjustments that have to be made in that area. The other thing thatis very important in connection with sustainability is that we simplyhave to create and maintain an environment in which some of these veryserious liquidity and balance sheet strains that are all over theeconomy can be turned around. And achieving that turnaround under thebest of circumstances is not something that is going to be donequickly or easily. It's going to take some time, which in turnimplies that it will not be done in an environment in which we havethese zigzag patterns of interest rates and these zigzag patterns ofeconomic activity. That leads me very much in the direction thatGovernor Gramley suggested. And fundamentally it leaves me with theview that we ought to be proceeding slowly and deliberately withrespect to this interest rate situation, even though I, too, obviouslywould conclude that there is some further latitude that can beconstructively used here. But I think we have to be cautious and we-23-11/17/81have to try to avoid some of the problems of the past as we try towalk this very thin line.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Some of my concerns have already beenexpressed. I have a strong feeling that we're monetarists when theeconomy is expanding and we're interest rate targeters when it beginsto collapse. If we move in and put a floor on the interest rate,which is what it sounds like around here, we'll be in real trouble.We haven't kept up with what we said we were going to do. I thinkthere is still latitude to lower interest rates from where they arenow. This staff forecast has a bottom rate on mortgages of 16-1/2percent; that doesn't speak of any revival in the housing market nextyear. I think we can move it down. I agree with Lyle that we havelet interest rates swing both too high and too low. Or rather we letthem swing too high; I have seen very little evidence of theirswinging too low at this point. I think we will probably want to paymore attention on the high side as well as on the low side in the nextcycle. There's also a tendency to be very unconcerned when rates riseand then to sit and agonize for weeks about lowering them. We didthat last summer and a few other times on the discount rate. It seemsto me that we should be symmetrical and not try to fudge or change ourphilosophical point of view as we go along.If you look at this forecast--and we have had a lot ofsurprises in the forecast on a quarterly basis over the past threeyears--it takes until the end of 1982 for real GNP to get back towhere it was at the beginning of 1980. Now, that's a very, very slow-growing economy; and although there have been lots of ups and downs,we end up at the end of 1982 with an 8.8 percent unemployment rate forthree solid quarters. That is not my definition of a revivingeconomy. And we have 8.8 percent [unemployment] projected primarilybecause interest rates are assumed to rise next year. When an economyis growing as little as this one is projected to grow with no impacton interest rates, some policy parameter is wrong. And this is evenafter a very large tax cut at midyear. We're not talking about anexuberant economy next year anyway; we're talking about an economythat is just barely keeping its head above water. If we then comedown and set a floor on interest rates at 12-1/2 percent, we're goingto end up like the supply siders did with the Stockman article;somebody is going to notice that the emperor doesn't have any clotheson and that we aren't accomplishing anything. Our inflation rates forthe past three years have been 9.7, 9.8, and 9.4 percent and this isafter three years of monetary restraint. Every time we think we'regoing to get a dip in the inflation rate, something comes along and[drives] it back up again. I think we should become increasinglyconcerned about the rate of real growth in this economy and do what wecan on inflation. But [we also need to] realize that we don't havecomplete control and that we could do extreme harm if the economycontinues to run at these very low levels of real utilization.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's forthright, anyway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have to align myself with thosewho think that the downturn is apt to be more serious than the staff-24-11/17/81has suggested. With a sharp deceleration in M1-B growth and the veryhigh real interest rates here in the summer and the point that WillisWinn made that there seem to be a lot of [potential] bankruptcies--which many of our contacts are telling us will surface pretty soon--the downturn may be somewhat greater than the staff is projecting. Bythe same token, I'm somewhat encouraged by the reaction of some of thelabor unions in the softening economy and [by the fact that] the moneysupply has been kept under good control. So, I would be a little moreoptimistic about how much we might be able to do in the way ofcontaining inflation.Now, when we get to the policy issue, I think there are twoclear alternatives here. Everyone recognizes that we can't do muchabout the aggregates issue [this year]. But what we do will make somedifference for next year. Most people have focused on the firstchoice, the desirability of maintaining our credibility by notappearing to have thrown in the towel by overreacting and lettinginterest rates come down too fast. But that deals with only one ofthe two credibility problems we have. That one relates to the beliefon the part of a lot of people that generally we've erred on the sideof ease [in the past]. But there's another credibility problem andthat is that we haven't had a very good record of hitting our targets.And that is the one that impresses me more. So, I'd like to focus onthe risk that the continuation of the shortfall in M1-B might worsenthe recession and thereby impede our efforts to reduce inflation overthe longer run. If this downturn is really serious, the pressures aregoing to be pretty unbelievable for us to ease later on. So, I wouldfavor this second course of action. And if we do follow that, it'scertainly likely that we're going to have to let rates fallsignificantly. I don't know how far and no one else does. But Idon't think the market would necessarily conclude that we have thrownin the towel if this is the path that we follow, so long as M1-B isnot moving above what we set as our long-run target. So, that's theway I would like to go. I'm well aware of the limitations of M1-B;but even with its imperfections, I believe it's a better target thananything else we have. And that preference of mine has beenstrengthened by the considerable weakness we've had in the economyfollowing the weakness in M1-B. We've had strong M2 growth and yetthe economy has weakened pretty considerably. So, my preference isfor alternative A, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to alignmyself with comments made earlier by Governor Schultz and GovernorGramley. It seems clear to me that the weakness in the economy thatwe're experiencing now is something that we've been looking forwardto. We've achieved it and we hope it doesn't go any deeper. But it'sa point at which, if we make a mistake with regard to interest ratelevels, in my judgment our credibility will indeed be in jeopardy.Let me just make one other observation. For those who have commentedabout achieving an M1 growth represented by alternatives A, B, or C,I'd like to observe that we are talking about only a two-month periodremaining in this year. I believe Frank Morris spoke of adopting "B"or "C," which are somewhat more restrictive than what we adopted atthe last meeting. At that meeting we were looking at a three-monthperiod, and the incoming evidence suggests that we cannot achieve what-25-11/17/81we set out to do in September or October. To try to do so in theremaining 6 weeks of this period would not be my prescription.I think the focus should now be on the interest rate level;to moderate the interest rate reductions to smooth the transition intothe first quarter of 1982 is important. I would also observe that theinterest rate levels have been reduced rather significantly over thelast 60 days; the lagged effects of those interest rate reductions arenot clear, but they are significant. Let me remind you that as of thefirst of September, for example, the federal funds rate was averagingclose to 16-3/4 percent; it's now at 13-1/4 percent, I believe Petersaid, and rates on short-term governments have had an even furtherreduction. We don't know what the effects of this will be but theyshould be positive on the economy. As a result, just to turn looseand let interest rates continue to fall to achieve an aggregate growthtarget for the year over the remaining part of the year is not what Iwould prefer.I would suggest a prescription of alternative C with an 11 to16 percent federal funds range, a borrowing level in the neighborhoodof what it is now, which I understand is about $350 million. However,to avoid the possibility that things might turn around and we wouldget much stronger growth in the aggregates than was forecast in theBluebook, I'd like to suggest a change in the language of thedirective. I'd say growth of 5 percent from September to December, assuggested by alternative C, "or somewhat higher," thus acceptinghigher growth if it occurs. I think the [chances] are that it willnot be that high. But if it is that high, in view of the past recordover 1981 we should accept it for these last two months without movinginterest rates back up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. If I were to express a preference among the threealternatives, I'd lean toward "A" or "B." But, as has been statedbefore, this decision is a very short-run decision. If what hashappened in the past few months were to happen over the next twomonths, regardless of whether we choose "A," "B," or "C," we probablywon't hit our choice right on the nose. So, I don't think what we dotoday is all that important. I do think, though, that what we do inour next two meetings is extremely important, and I'd like verybriefly to address myself to a couple of concerns that I've had as Ihave listened to the discussion today.First of all, regardless of the terminology that tendssometimes to disguise it, there is significant sentiment beingexpressed that we should revert to paying primary attention tointerest rate stabilization. That was our practice prior to October1979. This [view] is apparently based on some very real skepticism asto whether the aggregates are meaningful, whether they're definable,and whether they're controllable. I've heard a lot of people say thatM1-B should be discarded because M2 somehow or other fits somewhatbetter today. I would remind those people that if M2 were really themeaningful aggregate and were growing as strongly as it has, wewouldn't be faced with a problem of the slow economy and recessionarycharacteristics that we're facing today.-26-11/17/81However, I think there's an even more fundamental concern aswe look ahead and that is the decision as to whether or not we oughtto revert to our former practices. We know that our mission is to tryto achieve reasonable price stability and to achieve steady economicgrowth. As some of you have said, it's not desirable to have [large]variations or ups and downs in interest rates. Well, I would remindyou that prior to October of 1979 we spent precious hours discussingwhether or not interest rates should be set 1 point or 1/2 pointhigher or lower. We attempted to conduct monetary policy by targetingon interest rates. And I would remind you, unless I misread whathappened, that when we convened on October 6, 1979, after many yearsof carefully attempting to guide the ship by controlling interestrates, we were very concerned that we had seen significantfluctuations, cyclical and other types of fluctuations, in economicactivity and we also were experiencing shockingly high rates ofinflation.Now, even though we may assume that our efforts to controlthe aggregates have not been as fruitful as we might have wanted, ifyou review what has happened since 1979, I think you would concludethat there is some relationship between the behavior of the aggregatesand price stability, lagged, and economic growth. Compare the timeswhen the aggregates grew above our ranges and see whether or not therewas a stimulative effect on the economy a few months afterwards.Indeed, [consider] whether the slow growth we've had isn't reflectedsomewhat in the present weakness in economic output that we'reexperiencing. So, I would conclude my remarks merely by saying that ifwe decide that [what we did in] October '79 was wrong, then let's tellthe world that we're going to go back to where we were prior toOctober '79. I would submit that if we do that, we would have themost violent upward movement in the interest rate pattern imaginableand our credibility would be forever destroyed, because our Chairmanhas done a very effective job of convincing people that we aredetermined to pursue this new course. But if we start equivocating,if we start waffling, I think we're in for severe problems. These aresome of the issues that perhaps we will discuss in the next couple ofmeetings. Certainly today there are a lot of people who would say:"Let's pitch out [the decision of] October '79 and go back to interestrate stabilization."MR. SCHULTZ. I don't think I heard anybody at the table saythat.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, [Roger] just said it.MS. TEETERS. It's implicit in setting a floor on interestrates.MR. GUFFEY. Not at all.MR. SCHULTZ. I didn't think so. I don't believe you'd getanybody to vote for that.MR. ROOS. Fred, it was certainly implied when people saidwe have to avoid upward and downward gyrations in interest rateswhich, of course, contradicts any ability to control the aggregates.At least I think [it does].-27-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to say there aredifferences in emphasis.MR. SCHULTZ. That may be; I agree with that. But I don'tthink anybody wants to--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's also fair to say thatequivocation is in the eye of the beholder.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't say anything about my preferenceson the alternatives before. I agree almost totally with what FrankMorris had to say. I would choose alternative B. I don't know thatit's all that important to get a 7 percent increase in M1-B inNovember and December, but I certainly would like to have anappreciable increase. As you know, we've chosen 7 percent since July.And we've only had 7 percent in one month of the months that have goneby. So, I'm not really sure what it means when I say I'd like the 7percent alternative because it may not be that at all. But I guesswhat I'm saying is that if M-1B growth turns out to be significantlybelow 7 percent--and significantly below I would define as being below5 percent--I would assume that we would not regard the federal fundsrate range as being a [constraint] that would stop [us from] trying toget more growth. So, I'm prepared to accept 10 to 15 percent on thefederal funds rate range, as stated in the directive. But if theaggregates continue as weak as they have been--not what the staff isprojecting, but what they have been--I would want us to break below 10percent on the funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the split among us is sharpertoday than it has been in a long time. It turns, really, on thequestion of how much importance one gives to a moderate, orderlydecline in interest rates as against a more rapid drop. I'm concernedabout the reaction in the bond markets if there were a rapid drop inthe fed funds rate. There could be a very negative reaction and thismoderate decline that we've been seeing--and yields in bond marketshave the best chance of influencing and bringing down mortgage rates--could be cut off very abruptly if markets see a precipitous decline inshort-term money rates. I think it's true that many of us here aremore concerned about declines in [real] interest rates when theythreaten to drop too precipitously, in our judgment, and becomenegative. But I don't think there's anything inherently immoral, letalone unaesthetic, Nancy, about asymmetry. The--MR. PARTEE. It creates a very poor economy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'm not too sure; it depends onwhere our priorities are.MS. TEETERS. That's not the argument I heard when they weregoing up, either.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I've never argued that there has tobe a mechanistic asymmetry in conducting a complicated monetarypolicy. In any case it, I align myself with Fred Schultz, Lyle-28-11/17/81Gramley, Roger Guffey, and although he's somewhat elliptical, I thinkJerry Corrigan, Henry, and a few others.MR. CORRIGAN. I didn't say anything--MR. SCHULTZ. You're just elliptical looking, Jerry!MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I've always been elliptical looking!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would argue that we should havesomething close to alternative C, say 6 percent, for October toDecember.MR. PARTEE. That's "B."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No.MR. PARTEE. Oh, for the two months, October--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or 5 percent for September toDecember, if you want to use that, but I think it would be silly toformulate it that way in the directive. Secondly, I also think afunds rate range of 11 to 16 percent makes sense because we've hadthis sharp decline of about 300 basis points in the fed funds rate.And if it were to drop to 11 percent from 13-1/4 percent within theremaining six weeks of this year, that's a very substantial drop. Iwould find it surprising that people would want to see it drop fasterthan from 13-1/4 to 11 percent within a 6-week period. I believe thatthe recession will continue into early next year and that there willbe further pressures to continue the downward [trend] of rates, whichI think we have to accept. My only point is that [the decline] bemoderate and orderly or we will have a perverse reaction in the bondmarket. Now, I would assume we would start with an initial borrowingof $350 or $400 million. I also would agree that if growth in themoney supply comes in higher, we could accept that. The disadvantageof targeting higher monetary growth is that there's a greaterlikelihood that we will get a decline in interest rates at the frontend of the period at a much more rapid rate, instead of spreading itout over a period of months in a more moderate way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we have a lot of debate back andforth, I think we ought to get through our list here with Mr. Boykin.Then we will attempt to draw all these conflicting stands into happyharmony.MR. BOYKIN. I've been sitting here, Mr. Chairman, trying tobe sure I had the strength of my convictions. If I can figure outwhat my convictions are, maybe I'll have the strength! I would liketo comment very briefly on the economy down our way, particularlysince I have a slightly different story to tell this time around. Ithink there has been a decided change in attitudes in the EleventhDistrict over the last six weeks. We see weakness starting to spreadin our area. Of course, like the rest of the nation, retail sales,autos, and housing have been weak for some time. We are starting tosee some increased layoffs in the manufacturing area--in the aircraftand the electronics industries. Also, there are some early signs ofpossible weakness in the energy industry. The drilling boom seems tobe slowing a little. I'm told that one can actually see a few rigs-29-11/17/81stacked in the yards, and that has not been the case for quite sometime, although the demand for the deep offshore rigs remains strong.We have had unusually heavy rains, particularly in the north centralTexas area, and that is going to cause quite a bit of crop loss,particularly in cotton and wheat. People are estimating a loss ofabout $25 million in that area. Also, we're beginning to hearconcerns expressed about the possibility of over-building in thecommercial area, particularly in the Houston and Dallas markets. Asfar as the staff's outlook on the economy, that is about the way Iwould see it. It's a reasonable outlook and it's consistent with whatI'm hearing.On the policy side, a very sharp decline in [the federalfunds rate] right now would cause me a lot of concern, particularlyfor the implication for the long-term rates. [As for] credibility andperceptions, I think there's more likelihood of serious criticism fromthe majority of people on the interest rate side rather than on notmeeting the stated targets. Steve's explanation of how alternative Cwas constructed and what it's intended to do I find very persuasive,and I'll line up on alternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to summarize a bit.There are some differences in emphasis, but I'm not sure--we'll findout--whether they're as great as they appear to be.Oh, let me ask you a question, a side issue, on this energybusiness. You say there are some early signs of a much [less] rapidincrease at the very least. I've heard the view expressed that a lotof the activity currently in the energy area is based upon anassumption that the oil price is going to be--I'm trying to rememberthe figure now--$80 or $90 a barrel in the 1990s. And then if thatassumption is a disappointment--MR. WALLICH. In real terms? In constant dollars?MR. PARTEE. In nominal terms.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In nominal terms. Presumably, they'redoing the drilling. It isn't all that clear to me, but the point wasthat the price [assumption] was high enough that a lot of people mightbegin questioning it. Do you have that feeling?MR. BOYKIN. Yes, that does seem awfully high. On the otherhand, we get a few scattered reports of some shutting in going on,just not producing. They know it's there and ready to go but areholding back because of the supply side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A price of $90 a barrel, if it's innominal terms, isn't even an increase in real terms if these 10percent inflation forecasts are correct.MR. SCHULTZ. May I ask a question in line with that? As youpointed out, most of the drilling going on is deep drilling.MR. BOYKIN. Yes.MR. SCHULTZ. That's natural gas drilling?-30-11/17/81MR. BOYKIN. Yes.MR. SCHULTZ. Is there any oil at those [deep] levels? Arethey doing a lot of betting on natural gas decontrol? Is that [amajor factor]?MR. BOYKIN. Yes, I think it almost has to be, Fred. Weheard a report, and the Chairman heard it also, of some deep wellsdown in the Laredo area where [it cost] about $4 million to drill onewell and $8 million to drill another. As the director who wasreporting on that said, somebody has to be thinking something that hewas not aware of. I would think they have to be betting on decontrol.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think there are a lot ofassumptions in the gas business that the price of gas is going to be$12 or more a cubic--MR. SCHULTZ. MCO.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Foot or MCO or a thousand cubic feet,whatever it is.MR. SCHULTZ. Thousand cubic feet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not in the 1990s but in 1985 or 1984.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even under the present law, newlydiscovered natural gas will be fully decontrolled by 1985.MR. GUFFEY. It is today, I believe, for newly discovered.But they have to compete with the old gas.MR. BOYKIN. But isn't there still a question of whetherit's interstate or intrastate?MR. GUFFEY. It's my impression that that's not true. Anynew gas is--MR. SCHULTZ. If it's below 15,000 feet, but it's almostall--MR. BOYKIN. We were told the other day by one energyeconomist that there are 17 different price levels for gas, if you canbelieve that. It's based on all kinds of combinations, as you say:the depth, the age, whether it's going interstate or intrastate. Butthere are 17 different price brackets.SPEAKER(?). Is it also based on how it smells?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The cheating must be enormous.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not even sure what that director wasassuming with regard to $80 to $90 a barrel. I think it probably wasin real terms.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, in nominal terms, 10 percent---31-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In ten years, 10 percent is nothing.That's right. He must have been talking in real terms.MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] is 7 years.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make one point. We did anawful lot of talking about M1. It has been pointed out by a couple ofpeople that M2 has been in the directive as well and that somehow M2wasn't as reliable because [its relatively rapid growth implied] wewouldn't have had a recession. I'm not so sure about that. Wethought the M2 range was very tough and restrictive when we adoptedit. We thought we'd be at the higher end of the range if we werewithin it at all. I guess the velocity of M2 hasn't changed much, hasit? This year the assumption was right on the button. There wasn'tmuch [change in] velocity. Anyhow, that's a side comment.While I listened to all the comments around the table, I havethe impression that there are some problems that only time will solveand I think we have one of those. I don't think we should suffer froman excessive hubris that whatever we do is going to produce a nice,neat answer to our problems. A sour view of business is rather commonaround the table. I didn't hear anybody not express that. And Iheard quite a few views that, when one has to look at an uncertainworld, the staff's projections are as good as any. There was acertain amount of talk about the risks on one side of [the economy]getting worse. Let's talk about the risks on the other side of itbeing better. I think they exist, too. There's certainly a viewaround--maybe the most common view--that the economy may not performvery well in the short run, but we're going to have one hell of arecovery in the second half of the year. A lot of people are probablyoperating on that basis. I'm not saying that's the right view, but itis a view that a lot of people hold. And that probably has someimplications for activity. Currently, there is a risk of somecumulative difficulty, complicated not just by normal kinds ofcumulative difficulties in recessions but by financial problems thatwe can't see very clearly but may be there. We have an uneasy feelingthey may be there.I don't think we can put a lot of money, speaking for myself,on any of these particular projections. And while I agree that thestaff view is as logical as any, the range of dispersion around anyforecast, I suspect, is going to be pretty high. In any event, we'vegot sour business in the very short run. We still have high inflationexpectations. I suspect they may be improving a little, but I get thesame kind of reports that Mr. Boehne commented on, and I thinkinflationary expectations are going to be very sluggish to change.Part of the nature of our problem is that the business picture canmove much faster up or down. At the moment it is down. Then someother things may change, such as inflation and inflationaryexpectations and long-term interest rates in particular after allthose markets have gone through. That in itself means we're in a kindof no-win situation. If we deal with the inflation and long-terminterest rate problem, we cannot deal with the business problem; or ifwe deal with the business problem aggressively, we can't deal with thelong-run inflation, long-term interest rate problem, I suspect. Thereis no way we can do it with the limited tools that we have. We canget more relaxed about the whole inflation issue; I'm not sure thatwould help. But I'm not ready to go with, as Nancy was suggesting, a11/17/81basically new approach. I'm not going to suggest that at the momentand [that is] a little outside the range of consensus for this meetinganyway.How favorably this will develop depends not only on all theseuncertainties about business that we can't resolve, but on how fastpeople become more confident that we can get on an orderly long-termpath. I think a lot depends upon wages. I alternatively get hopefuland discouraged about that depending upon the latest report. In fact,we don't know much. But in terms of financial dimensions, it doesseem to me, in a sense, that the key is how to get long-term marketrates down and bank rates down. Those are the rates that are going tobe most important for the economy. But it's not really just a problemof getting them down; it's a problem of getting them down so they staydown. I don't think any short-term relief on interest rates is goingto mean a thing, if they begin bouncing up again pretty quickly orwith any possibility of that happening. And I'm not thinkingprimarily in the political terms that Fred Schultz mentioned. Ourbasic problem is how we stimulate the economy. That may be expressedmore happily at the moment as avoiding an excessive decline, withoutthe threat of interest rates moving right up again as soon as theeconomy levels off and shows some signs of life. I think there is areal possibility of a turnaround at some point; how fast dependspartly on what we do. But at this second--to exaggerate just a bit--we're going to run into a stone wall, assuming the kind of monetarytargets we have for next year. We will find markets very sensitive toan increase in the economy or an increase in the aggregates, whichnormally accompanies an increase in the economy. And without eitherenough experience with declining inflation or enough confidence in thefuture generally [unintelligible] movement, as I see it at the moment,from being very abrupt.If we have a sizable turnaround in the economy in a hurry--expectations of a buoyant economy and expectations of higher interestrates or whatever--I don't think we're going to have much time for allthose balance sheet adjustments and changes in behavior that arenecessary to restore more balance to the financial system. And we'llbe up against the same dilemma this year that we had last year. Idon't know how indefinitely one can go into the future. There is aquestion of how confident people feel about the outlook for inflation.Not much has been said about the budget. The question of theupturn in interest rates after whatever downturn we have is going tobe importantly affected by what people think the budgetary outlook is.That doesn't look very good at the moment. But I must say it's alsoaffected, at least as importantly, by what people judge our ownbehavior will be--whether we're going to react or come out of theshoot in a hurry the next time the money supply shows a little bulgeon the up side, because that's the way they are sensitized to thinkwe're going to behave. And so long as the monetary growth rate islow, they are sensitized to think interest rates will go down, andthat's what is happening. In a way, if we want to get interest rateslower, the best thing that could happen is to have the monetaryaggregates continue to look low, because the minute they begin to lookhigh, I think that will be the end of the interest rate decline, atleast in the long-term market. In the space of some months, I doubtif that can be avoided. If we were successful at the moment ingetting a big increase in the money supply, I would not bet very much-33-11/17/81on long-term rates coming down--for a good many months in any event.I don't particularly think that's going to happen.There's great difficulty in knowing what the money supply isat the moment. That has been adequately discussed. I would just makeone other general comment in reaction to what some people have said.I do think that we've had too much interest rate instability and toomuch exchange rate instability. If this persists into the future inthe range that has occurred in the past couple of years, at some pointwe're going to shake these financial markets apart so much that nobodywill know where in the world they stand and a long-term investmentwill be three days. That's not very encouraging, particularly withregard to the long-term interest rate problem that we have.Something occurred to me during the discussion when FrankMorris accused--if that's the right word--Steve Axilrod of sayingsomething I don't think was in Steve's mind. But let me say that Idon't think it's so bad if it was in Steve's mind, because it'ssomewhat in my mind. We get a natural force toward moderation ofmonetary growth when we get downward forces in the economy. We get acertain natural push upwards on the money supply when the economy isbeginning to expand. And if we literally [evened off] the moneysupply through those demand forces, we'd have a violent change ininterest rates. I don't see that there's any way to avoid it. Let mecome back to Lyle's point about how violent a change in interest rateswe want and whether we really are achieving anything. I don't thinkthat calls into question in a fundamental way the trend of monetarygrowth over time. What it does call into question is how hard weshould fight against essentially cyclical movements in demand forceson the money supply. When we get these waves in the money supply, wehave lots of problems explaining ourselves to the iron-cladmonetarists in the part of the market that's [persuaded] by that kindof argument. But I don't think it is or fundamentally has to beinterpreted as a departure from the general idea that we've got to geta lower trend. It's not a question of how much cyclical amplitude weallow around the trend. We don't allow any cyclical amplitude that'sgoing to raise questions among the questioners. But one has to askwhat the lesser evil is.In any event, getting down to the nub of what we have todecide, let me try some verbal formulations. We may have a problemwriting a directive that people can understand and agree with. ButI'm not sure--we'll find out--how far apart we really are. I thinkwhat we're debating is the aggressiveness, in a sense, with which wemove to push the money supply up or deal with weakness, if that's whatwe're going to have. I don't think I really hear anybody saying thatwe shouldn't move in the direction of easing bank reserve positionsand be prepared to see some decline in interest rates if the moneysupply is on the weak side. I don't think I hear anybody saying thatif the money supply took a little jump, we should be sitting hereresisting it in any sense. Having said all that, we need to quantifywhat we mean and how we express it. It's almost easier to talk interms of the operational variables rather than the targets themselves,recognizing that the actual movement in the money supply over the nextfew weeks probably is not going to be affected much by what we do andwe'll have to take the figures as they come. Some consistency in ouroperations as we set them now--not knowing what those money supplyfigures are going to be--with further declines in interest rates of a-34-11/17/81moderate character doesn't bother me. I think that's probablyappropriate in all the circumstances. I would think that meanssomething like a $350 million figure for borrowing or $400 million, orsomeplace in that area. We'd be prepared to move down on that if themoney supply is weak and not prepared to move up on it if the moneysupply is strong unless [it's extremely strong]. But I can't conceiveof it being strong enough so that we'd want to move [borrowing] up,frankly. But we would have to be prepared, I think, to move it downsomewhat if the money supply remained weak.Just how to define weakness is going to be an issue. We havehad the pattern recently of a 5-point band in the federal funds raterange. It's an artificial contrivance in many ways at best because ifwe put a 5-point band on any of these numbers I'm not sure anybodysitting here would want to think of the federal funds rate going up to15 or 16 percent as some of these [Bluebook alternatives show]. Incurrent circumstances the rate probably is not going to go up at allsignificantly from where it is for any length of time. It is slightlyover 13 percent now. I suppose, on the convention we've used in thepast, that would make the range 10-1/2 or 11 percent to 16 percent orsomeplace in that area; but the upper part of that range isn't veryrelevant. I'm sure that this feeling would not be unanimous, butthere is a considerable amount of feeling that we'd want to take avery hard look at this if the rate got down toward the lower end ofthe range, as it well could. It is probably not apt to do that unless[the Board] reduces the discount rate in the near term. I think thediscount rate is clearly going to be in question during this periodand should be in question in terms of a downward movement. I think wewould assume that that move might well come sometime before the nextmeeting, unless there is quite a change in the business picture. Whenone thinks in those terms, we could begin getting down toward thosefunds rates quite easily but probably after a period of time. Thediscount rate isn't going to be moved right away. Now, as to how toformulate the actual directive, I think basically we have two choices:We can put in a relatively low number and say we're not bothered ifit's higher; or we can put in a relatively high number and say we'renot bothered if it's lower. Maybe we could have a little morediscussion of those options.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I've said my piece on the interest rateissue. I'm not bothered by the fed funds rate getting down below 10percent, but not between now and the next meeting. I would go withthe idea of a target and then say "or somewhat lower." My choicewould be alternative B with initial borrowing at $350 million and afederal funds range of 11 to 16 percent. It's basically "B," but witha different funds rate [range]. After all, that's a consultationpoint. I think we ought to consult if it gets [to 11 percent];remember, the next FOMC meeting is only 5 weeks away, so it's a veryshort period of time. I suspect, as I said yesterday, that we'regoing to have to move that basic discount rate pretty soon. And Iwould have some concern about the rate going [down] faster than that,which is why I say 11 to 16 percent. I'd have some concern about theborrowing getting down any lower than $200 million during this periodof time.MR. PARTEE. Well, I buy the $350 million and I buy the "B"[specifications] but I would want the funds rate at 10 to 15 percent.I certainly can't imagine it over 15 percent, and I would want us to-35-11/17/81consult very promptly if 10 percent is going to hold us up and wewould not have a good growth in the money supply.MR. SCHULTZ. Incidentally, I'd be willing to go 11 percentwith 15 percent on the top end; the only problem is that it's only a4-point range. I don't think we're going to hit that [upper limit]anyway.MR. PARTEE. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I had Steve draft a couple of alternativedirectives. Let me read them to make sure I understand them first.Well, let me just try this on you. The concept is simple enough; thelanguage can be worked on, obviously. One option follows a practicewe have used at least once and maybe more than once, and I think it'sa good practice unless we have to deviate from it because it doesn'tsound like so much fine-tuning. It starts with exactly the samedirective that we had at the last meeting, but it puts it in the pasttense, so to speak. It says that at the previous meeting we decidedon 7 percent and 10 percent, [respectively as the quarterly targetsfor M1-B and M2]. Then "In reviewing these quarterly targets, theCommittee felt that shortfalls in growth would be acceptable if theyare generally consistent with phasing into the tentative monetarygrowth targets set for 1982 and as they may occur in the context ofdeclining interest rates." Then it goes on with the federal fundsrange. So, it says in effect: This is the target we had set for thequarter; we recognize we set it; it looks like we're low and we'llaccept the shortfall provided interest rates are declining; and we'renot too unhappy with the shortfall in the light of phasing into nextyear.The other option, presumably, would be consistent with doingsomething like "C." We'd put in those numbers for the next twomonths, but say a somewhat higher growth rate would be acceptable asconsistent with the quarterly target set at the previous meeting andjust repeat the targets of the previous meeting. That doesn't sayanything about--. What I was looking for was whether there's anyinterest rate allusion in that one. There is not, I guess. But inthat one we put in the low number and say we're perfectly happy toraise it to where we set it at the last meeting. The other says thatwhat we said at the last meeting is okay, but we're happy with ashortfall [in money growth] if interest rates are declining, and it'slogical for moving into next year anyway.MR. PARTEE. What if you're not happy with a shortfall?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you're not happy with any shortfall,you're not going to be happy with either of these formulations becausethey both are low.MR. PARTEE. That's my reaction.MS. TEETERS. What if you're not happy with next year'stargets?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you really want it much higher--if you want a 7 percent target next year--then you wouldn't buy thisone. But I think all it's saying basically is that the number is-36-11/17/81something less than 7 percent. It's more consistent with what we'retentatively thinking about next year than 7 percent.MR. RICE. Why does 7 percent for the next [5] weeks meanthat we favor 7 percent growth next year?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't.MR. RICE. I didn't think so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't say we favor 7 percent growthnext year. What it says is that if we have 7 percent growth--. Well,the thought expressed around the table by a number of people was thatif we push hard for large growth now, then we will have to slow itdown next year, and that may be undesirable.MR. PARTEE. We will have a lot of shortfall to make up,though, when we get into next year.MR. RICE. Well, we still have--MR. AXILROD. It may not be as clear as I was trying to makeit. The 7 percent was for the quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's for the quarter. This is justrepeating what we said at the last meeting.MR. AXILROD. Last meeting we said we'd like the quarter tobe this way. The operative sentence says we're going to accept theshortfall from that so long as interest rates are declining, whichcould mean that 7 percent over the next two months would be ashortfall from the 7 percent for the quarter. It wouldn't preclude avote from a Committee member who favored that.MR. RICE. That's right.MR. PARTEE. But it's open [ended]. It could get to zerowith interest rates declining. It still seems to me a test of thedirective.MR. AXILROD. Well, I was trying to say that you wouldn'treally like it much below where you were going into next year.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have a smaller--MR. PARTEE. What is "some shortfall"?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, we have to give some verbalguidance on how much of a shortfall is acceptable.MR. PARTEE. Well, we better have it in the directive becauseit sounds as if it could be zero or minus 10 percent as long asinterest rates were declining.MR. BLACK. That's why a shortfall--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've used language of this sort before,Chuck. That's ridiculous, if I may say so.-37-11/17/81MR. PARTEE. It's not ridiculous because we're 7 percentagepoints off our expectations on average for the last six months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not when you take account of M2.That's just wrong.MR. PARTEE. Well, I thought M2 was below--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 is still in this directive. M2, infact, is currently projected to be on target.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree with Chuck, but for differentreasons. My concern is that the markets will assume that we mean onlya very modest shortfall if we say a shortfall will be accepted.Secondly, I'm concerned about the [possible] interpretation of thecaveat about declining rates. We'd have to say at least an "orderly"decline of rates, or something like that, which doesn't imply thatwe're pushing gung-ho for that. I think on balance there's lessdanger of misinterpretation if we use the other alternative--if we putin something like alternative C and say we will accept something lowerthan that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you going to do in yourconception if growth comes in less than alternative C?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then the fed funds rate is going togo [down] until we change it.MR. CORRIGAN. I have been thinking about alternativedirective formulations this morning, too. I must say I struck outbecause of the very problems we're running into here already. Mypreference at this point would be to have the directive state theaggregate numbers for October to December that are in alternative Cwith the language "or somewhat higher" with borrowings at $350 to $400million. I could accept combining that formulation with a federalfunds rate of 10 to 15 percent, simply because I think it's going tobe hard to get the aggregates specifications even in alternative C,given the economy. But I do think that kind of language formulation,notwithstanding Frank Morris's concerns, is more prudent and safer interms of people understanding what we're doing. And obviously, if theaggregates were soft, we still would have the opportunity to use theconsultation procedure to make further judgments as we go along.MR. FORD. I had Frank down for "A." Are you saying youagree with Frank?MR. CORRIGAN. No. I said notwithstanding his concern abouthow to explain why we're now at 5-3/4 percent instead of 7 percent. Ithink that can be dealt with. No, I'm talking about "C" or somewhathigher and, as I said, I could go with 10 to 15 percent for the fundsrate band simply because I think it's going to be hard to hit any ofthese things.MR. GUFFEY. I would join in that, except that for thefederal funds band I would prescribe 11 to 16 percent simply becauseof the shortness of the horizon; we're [only] looking at the next [5]weeks. If the funds rate drops to the tune of another 2-1/4 points,that is close to being a precipitous drop over the last three months.-38-11/17/81MR. CORRIGAN. That's my preference, too. I'm saying I couldlive with it.MR. GUFFEY. Oh, I see.MR. GRAMLEY. I would agree with Roger, and I would preferthe 11 to 16 percent. I do think the alternative formulation, thefirst one that you read, is awfully fuzzy. It's sufficiently fuzzythat I don't know whether anybody would know exactly what we'retalking about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unlike the other one?MR. PARTEE. Well, I would prefer alternative B just as it iswritten. I don't know how many others feel that way.MS. TEETERS. I would prefer alternative B with the 10 to 15percent. I think there is a real problem of perception in that itlooks as if we've tightened monetary policy at the wrong time if we gowith the 5-3/4 percent target for M1-B.MR. RICE. I would prefer to see alternative A, but I'd bewilling to accept the money growth figures for alternative B with theborrowing at $200 million and a federal funds band from 9 to 14percent.MR. PARTEE. $200 million is awfully low as a start forborrowing.MR. RICE. I'm willing to do that.MR. BOEHNE. I prefer alternative B with a funds range of 10to 15 percent and an initial borrowing level of $350 million.MR. BALLES. I'm concerned in formulating this directive, Mr.Chairman, that it certainly will appear odd that we have adopted thealternative C specifications at a time when we know the economy isworse. And that leads me to join those who have spoken up in favor ofalternative B. It's a minimum of what I'd like to see.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, no one has really [addressed] FrankMorris' point about what has happened since the last meeting tojustify making our targets more [restrictive] than they were.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A big decline in interest rates and ashortfall in M-1B in October.MR. RICE. I don't think that justifies it.MR. CORRIGAN. The shortfall in October is the easiest one inthe world to--MR. RICE. I don't think that justifies anything.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may have to agree, but you asked me whatjustifies it.-39-11/17/81MR. PARTEE. I think Tony is absolutely right. We've nowseparated the interest rate people from the aggregates people. Andit's very hard to bring them together.MR. KEEHN. Can't we to some extent cover the problem ofappearing to be tightening by commenting about moving into next year?Consistent with what you said, we could say we are positioningourselves by this particular choice to move into the band that we willselect for next year.MS. TEETERS. That will scare the market out of its mind ifyou do that because they would interpret it to mean that we're headingagain for the lower end of the range next year.MR. KEEHN. No, I'd say we would be positioning ourselves tomove into the band that we will select for next year.MS. TEETERS. I don't like next year's targets; I thinkthey're too low. I hate to commit myself to them; it gets to thepoint that we can't do anything about them in February. We'resupposed to take a new look at them in February. This freezes us inconcrete as to what we're going to do for next year's target.MR. PARTEE. That's what you've said all along.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, do we have any other comment?MR. WALLICH. Well, I'm concerned mostly about thepossibility of the funds rate falling below the discount rate and ofvery low borrowing. Then things could get out of hand and confront uswith the need to keep lowering the discount rate in order to preventthat. For that reason, I would start off with a [relatively high]borrowing assumption and I would like to consult at a somewhat higher[funds rate] level on the way down. Consulting doesn't mean that onestops there. But at least at a time when much higher mobility ofinterest rates is a possibility, we ought to look at it earlier ratherthan later. So, I would go for $400 million for borrowing and 12 to16 percent on the funds rate without any expectation that it would goto 16 percent. But neither would I like it to drop below 12 percentwithout talking about it.MR. FORD. I'm concerned about the appearance of setting agoal. Maybe I have a problem with understanding the philosophy ofthese statements even after hearing them discussed so often. As Iunderstand it, the philosophy when we set a target is that it is atarget and we may not always achieve it. We have a problem nowbecause we've been underachieving both the short-run and the long-runtargets on one of the things we look at, M1-B. Were we to put out adirective that appears to have set tighter targets as we're facing theprospect of what may be a very serious recession, starting from adisastrously low level of economic activity in major industries suchas housing and autos, we could scare the devil out of everybody byhaving people perceive that we're trying to be very tight. So, theconcern and all the talk about how to couch this is very important.I'd be inclined to err on the side of staying with the target that wemay not achieve, the one we had last time, and not narrowing the fundsband again but allowing it to have a little more leeway on the downside. I'd go with something more like Emmett Rice's prescription of a-40-11/17/81"B+" or "A-" type prescription, with a borrowing assumption of perhapsa quarter billion dollars or somewhere in that range and a wide fundsrate range. If I counted right, 4 or 5 times earlier this year we seta 6-point range. Why not set a 6-point range of 9 to 15 percent, sortof centered on where we are now and allow ourselves a little moreleeway?MR. GRAMLEY. That 9 to 15 averages 12, not 13-1/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The basic problem we're dealing with is arepetitive problem. We are setting a target for the next six weeksand nothing we do here is going to affect what those numbers are overthe next six weeks. We have to have a little longer perspective.MR. FORD. You're right. There's only a difference of $2billion in M1-B on "A," "B," and "C." It's less than the amount ofchange we've had on the last two Fridays.MS. TEETERS. But that argues more for the appearance of itand that we stay with the 7 percent. I agree with you that nothing wedo is going to affect what happens over the next six weeks.MR. RICE. We all agree on that.MR. FORD. So, the whole question is what the market [willthink]. If they think we're tightening--MR. BOEHNE. I would still stay with "C" the way it'sprescribed with a borrowing assumption of $350 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. We're not going to resolvethis before lunch. I guess I come back more strongly to my gutfeeling that we're better off not horsing around with the target thatwe set last quarter in a formal statement. But I'd clearly admit thatwe are prepared to see a shortfall under certain conditions. It seemsto me we clearly are.MR. FORD. And that we wouldn't be surprised.MS. TEETERS. I think that's more like it. It's not thatwe're willing to see a shortfall but we expect that it's going tohappen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's about the same assaying we're willing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe we should simply say there areonly six weeks left to go and there's no point in--MS. TEETERS. Is it the difference between [desiring] andaccepting?MR. MORRIS. What we do in the next 6 weeks will impact whathappens to the money supply in the first quarter.MR. BOYKIN. That's right. The world doesn't stop.-41-11/17/81MR. BOEHNE. We buy a little more insurance that the moneysupply is not going to fall out of bed.MR. CORRIGAN. The next six weeks matters, too, if we getborrowings down to whatever that frictional level is. I agree withGovernor Schultz; I have a hunch that the frictional level ofborrowing is higher than Steve was suggesting, although I can't besure.MR. AXILROD. Well, I happened to look back at the data,President Corrigan, and it might be of some interest to the Committeethat in June and July of last year the level of adjustment plusseasonal borrowing--and I think the funds rate ran a little below thediscount rate at times in that period--came out [in millions ofdollars] at 104, 34, 127, 44, 75, 20, 121, and 145 for 8 straightweeks in June and July. So, it can run quite low. There's noguarantee, but it can run quite low.MR. CORRIGAN. Look what happened in August and September.MR. AXILROD. Well, borrowing sort of goes up. It doesn'tgive you any scope for shortfalls in required reserves because youcreate large excess reserves. That can happen. That's the danger.MR. SCHULTZ. The question though, Steve, is: When we firsthit that frictional level what happened to the funds rate? That'swhat gets me concerned. There's a point at which the drop in thefunds rate gets very rapid in that kind of period.MR. AXILROD. That's only, Governor Schultz, if this so-called frictional level, which might happen in any event, is alsoaccompanied by a very sharp rise in excess reserves. Then the fundsrate could drop very substantially.MR. CORRIGAN. Did that happen in those weeks that youmentioned last year?MR. AXILROD. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me talk a little less theology and alittle more practically at the moment. Suppose we start at $350million as an assumption. Make the figure a rounder number and startat $400 million, Mr. Axilrod. In the ordinary course of events, youset a nonborrowed reserve path. You start it, just as an assumption,at $400 million and you will put in a growth path for M1-B. Let megive you two hypotheses for that growth path you put in for M1-B: Oneis 6 percent, just to keep the numbers round, which is close to "C;"and for the other extreme, say, 8-1/2 percent, or round that down.Now, if the money supply comes in around 6 percent, the borrowingswould remain at $400 million or whatever the [initial] level is, if weadopt "C. Presumably, that's what would happen. If we put in the[higher] number on the basis of "A" and the money supply comes in atthat same 6 percent, how much would the borrowing level go down?MR. AXILROD. Well, roughly it would be $200 million lower onthat, having started the path at---42-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be $200 million lower by thelatter part of December?MR. AXILROD. Yes, I was looking at a monthly average, but itwould be in that area in December. It's $2 billion divided by 10,roughly. It's not quite precise.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the range of what we are talkingabout in nondiscretionary action.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What does that $200 milliondifference mean in terms of the implied fed funds rate?MR. AXILROD. Well, sometimes it means nothing. One of ourrules of thumb has been 25 basis points per $100 million; another hasbeen 20 basis points. They've all been wrong at various times. So,one could say somewhere between 40 and 50 basis points is representedmerely by that. But, as the Chairman has said, misses in money supplyare often much larger than this little range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I think I am saying, in practice, isthat we might set that path, depending upon where we start it, closeto the "A" specification; we're probably not going to be very quickabout making discretionary upward adjustments in the path if theshortfall is anywhere within the range of "A" to "C." We mightconsider one if it came in at 3 percent or less. It depends on whathappens in M2 and all the rest, but that's what we're talking about.MR. PARTEE. You have practically no room for discretionaryupward adjustments in nonborrowed reserves because even under thecircumstances you have cited--and remember we set a monthly average--if we're 3 points off, we're down to the frictional level of borrowingby the end of the period. So there is no room to have an upward--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's not a lot of room; that's right.And that's why we're talking about relatively small numbers here. Wehaven't got a lot of room unless we really wanted to push extremelyhard. Precisely, we don't have much room.MS. TEETERS. I'm not sure what you said. Did you sayconstruct a path on "A" or--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is one alternative one couldtake. But we would not be very quick about making discretionaryadjustments. It depends upon where we start off or what people thinkabout this. If we start off at $400 million and it fell to "B" or "C"or a little less, we're going to end up with $200 million. If it fellmore sharply than that to well below "C," we're going to end up at alower level and we may run into the federal funds rate constraint.That's what the operational decision is. Now, if we set it up theother way, it depends upon where we set the initial level ofborrowing. In either case, I think we're saying that if it runsabove, we don't do a thing--we accommodate it--which we've done oftenin the past.MR. CORRIGAN. The way you stated it, isn't really theoperative question how fast we want to get to that frictional level ofborrowing? If we started with $400 million and a 6 percent path as-43-11/17/81distinct from $400 million and an 8 percent path, doesn't theoperative question then reduce to how fast we want that borrowinglevel to get down to whatever that frictional level is?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the operative question.And we're talking about a very narrow range.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, the real policy issue is the onewe discussed: Do we want a more rapid rate of decline in the earlypart, that is, in the next few weeks, or do we want to stretch it outand have a more moderated rate of decline? If we go for "A," we'retaking a bigger risk that we will have the pressure earlier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon where we set the initialborrowing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'm assuming the same range of$350 to $400 million. If you construct the nonborrowed reserve pathon "A" rather than "C," then there's a greater risk that we'll get thedownward pressure earlier and to a larger degree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It moves in that direction. We're talkingabout very small numbers in the next three or four weeks or so.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. I accept that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The most important thing is where we setthe initial borrowing.MR. BOEHNE. And where the discount rate is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The discount rate will be an importantconsideration in where the market [goes]; in fact, that's going to bemore important than this other thing. I'm afraid that the only twothings that are going to make any real difference here, in the rangethat anybody is talking about, are if somebody says we want to go allout and make sure we're going to hit 7 percent M-1B growth and weought to start with zero borrowings. Then we'd be talking about avery different kind of approach. But with the initial borrowing levelsomeplace in the range that we're talking about, these otherdifferences are going to be minuscule in a mechanical application ofthis [directive]. What is going to make the difference is if and howquickly the discount rate is changed and whether we make adiscretionary adjustment as we go along.MS. TEETERS. You wouldn't see the borrowings going above$400 million?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't see the borrowings going above$400 million under any conceivable conditions that I can imagine overthe next five weeks.MR. FORD. Unless you lower the discount rate by about 3 or 4percentage points.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we adopted a whole different kindof strategy, but barring a deliberate counter movement on the discountrate---44-11/17/81MS. TEETERS. You're assuming the discount rate will go downto around 12 percent during this period of time?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm assuming that is quite possible. Iwill not make any premature assumptions.MR. FORD. It depends on what [the Reserve Banks] recommendto [the Board].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we see both continuing weakness inbusiness and continuing weakness in the aggregates, I think that wouldbe a reasonable assumption.MR. CORRIGAN. I would still argue that if we're going to getthere, I'd rather get there in an orderly way. I would start offconstructing the path off 6 percent with the borrowings at $400million and if we have to adjust, we have to adjust. But I would wantto get there in a deliberate, orderly way if we have to get there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you're saying, "in a deliberate,orderly way" makes a difference of maybe $25 million in borrowings inthe second week in December.MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know. I'm not sure I agree with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that wrong, Mr. Axilrod?MR. CORRIGAN. My concern is getting into the realm of thisfrictional level of borrowings. I'm not sure I know what it means,but in my own mind's eye I have to leave room for the possibility thatgetting there could result in a situation where we would get a buildupin excess reserves and the federal funds market would really fallapart. That may be an outlier concern, but I have it.MR. GRAMLEY. I share Jerry's views all the way. I could buythe idea of keeping a 7 percent path instead of a 6 percent path andputting in a contingency clause to the effect that an overrun wouldnot be resisted in any way. But the idea of too disorderly a drop ininterest rates at this point is the most important thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're focusing on the wrongthing. That's going to be more affected by the way we set the initialborrowing assumption than the mechanical thing that falls out of this.MR. GRAMLEY. I agree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a 4-week period.MR. FORD. The appearance matter that Nancy mentioned is theone that keeps coming up in my mind. If this reads that we tightenedthe bands for the aggregates and we did not lower [the funds raterange]--we're at 12 to 17 percent now and you say we're going to go to11-1/2 percent or stay at 12 percent, as a number of people haverecommended--it's going to come off that the economy is crashing downand the Fed is cheering it on, possibly. Possibly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is [the bottom of the range] now, at12 percent?-45-11/17/81MR. STERNLIGHT. The range is 12 to 17 percent.MR. FORD. The range is 12 to 17 percent and if you're sayingwe are not even going to lower the range--MR. WALLICH. But the range really doesn't mean that it'sbeing held there. It's a checkpoint for consultation.MS. TEETERS. Only on the way up.MR. PARTEE. It has worked extremely well. Well, I thinkmaybe your point is a good one. Maybe we ought to start the initialborrowing a little higher for safety.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're in a very narrow range here.I have a strong feeling within the narrow range that we've discussedhere. All I'm trying to do is make the point that if we have toconstruct a reserve path, and that's what we're talking about, thedifference between "A" and "C" at the extremes is not an immediateone; once we've set the original borrowing assumption, it can't changejust mechanically by more than $25 or $50 million a week unless themoney supply really falls out of bed. It would be changed because themoney supply fell out of bed not because of the difference in theassumption; there's only going to be a $50 million difference in earlyDecember.MR. PARTEE. That is something I want to guard against. Itmight not fall out of bed, but then it might fall out of bed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, if it does, then the borrowing isgoing to come down. But it doesn't make any difference whether wepick "A," "B," or "C." If the money supply is negative, borrowingsare going to go way down. That would be because the money supply wentdown, not because we picked "A," "B," or "C."MR. BOEHNE. If we had borrowing at $400 million and then setthe reserve path on 7 percent for October through December and had afunds range of, say, to 10 to 15 percent or even 11 percent tosomething, I think that would take care of the appearance problem inthe directive as well as give us an approach on--MR. PARTEE. But I do believe that it's probably when thefunds rate breaks that we will really get the system to generatemoney. Because then the banks can't nicely lend their federal funds;they've got to get out there and do something else.MR. BOEHNE. I think that kind of break comes below 10 or 11percent.MR. PARTEE. It would come with a break in the money supply,which would force these rates down.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, if we move in your directionto the 7 percent for October to December--I don't mean September,[but] October to December--would you accept a funds rate range of 11to 16 percent?-46-11/17/81MR. PARTEE. I don't want a top of 16 percent. I think thatjust looks absolutely ridiculous.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that looks a little foolish tome.MR. PARTEE. I think then it would be a question of whetherwe want to narrow it to 11 to 15 percent. I might accept that. Thereare others who wouldn't. I think the biggest thing is--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why do we have to keep the funds raterange at 5 points?MR. PARTEE. Because we don't want it to seem constraining.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But everybody knows that the up sideis academic anyway in the next five weeks. So, why couldn't it be 11to 15 percent?MR. FORD. Because then it will be perceived that in the lastthree meetings we've closed in on interest rate management. We wouldhave gone from a 6-point spread to a 4-point spread and the chargewill raised that we're managing interest rates.MR. RICE. That's the way it's going to look.MR. GRAMLEY. I could buy Ed's formulation of $400 millionand 7 percent with a 10 to 15 percent federal funds range.MR. PARTEE. I think maybe that's what we ought to settle on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have a feeling maybe we ought togo to lunch and settle it after lunch.MR. SCHULTZ. Good idea. When in doubt, punt.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have a quick lunch.[Lunch break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me consider the numbers, with an unduedegree of technicality, because we're in a very narrow band. I don'tthink there's much disagreement here on these details; whether theywill work out or not is another question. Let me just get clear in mymind again what I asked you before. The difference, going all the wayto the extreme, of something like an 8-1/2 percent growth rate and a 6percent growth rate just in setting the reserve paths is going to be$2 billion, did you say?MR. AXILROD. Yes. The difference is roughly $2 billion inDecember. So, if we set the reserve path on the highest [growth rate]and the lowest one turns out to be what actually happens, then theaverage level of borrowing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, don't make the lower one whatactually happens. That's where we're setting the path theoreticallynow. We don't know what is going to happen yet. That's the nextquestion I'll ask.-47-11/17/81MR. AXILROD. All right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your path would be $2 billion higher inDecember.MR. PARTEE. With "A" than with "C"?MR. AXILROD. The level of the money supply, M1-B, under "A"is put in at about $400 million higher in November than under "C."That's the question.MR. PARTEE. And how about December?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, is that because there's a biggerdifference in--MR. CORRIGAN. But on the reserve path, it's only differentby $40 million.MR. AXILROD. Well, the reserve path difference would be verysmall; it's not different by much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why not? I don't understand that.MR. WALLICH. Because it should be $1 billion.MR. STERNLIGHT. The reserve path is relevant to just the 5weeks. It's not quite the average for the month of December; it's the5 weeks ending December 22 or whenever it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm looking at the December part of thereserve path. The first period is not going to make any difference,because we're going to give you the level of borrowings. I'm nottalking about what the money supply actually does now.MR. AXILROD. Well, if you tell us the level of borrowing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.MR. AXILROD. We will hold that level of borrowing through--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you'll hold the nonborrowed reservesthat are consistent with it at the moment.MR. AXILROD. That's right. And the difference in the amountof those two--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It'll make no difference.MR. AXILROD. Yes. But if you're asking about the differencein the amount of the nonborrowed reserve paths--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I'm asking--go ahead. Thatwill only be different in December.MR. AXILROD. I would say Jerry is right; it's roughly $40million. You'd take the $400 million difference and divide it by 10or something like that.-48-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you telling me the difference in thetheoretical money supply--not the actual--for December between 6percent and 8-1/2 percent is only $400 million in December?MR. AXILROD. Well, no.MR. WALLICH. It could be $800 million.MR. AXILROD. By December the difference is $2 billion, muchof which would affect reserves in January. So I'd need to make a veryexact calculation here. If you just take the December $2 billiondifference, that would be a $200 million difference in reserves,roughly. If you take the November difference, that's a difference ofabout $40 million in reserves, roughly. And the average for the5-week interval between Committee meetings will be somewhere betweenthat $40 million and $200 million on a nonborrowed reserve path, givenborrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we're talking about a difference ofonly $200 million, which wouldn't really materialize all in Decemberin choosing the path. Now the much bigger difference in the actualborrowing is going to be [because of] what actually happens to themoney supply.MR. AXILROD. That's right; that's how I started.MS. TEETERS. Is your proposal that if the money supply comesin short we would lower the borrowing?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I am trying to see--howmuch room we've got for that.MR. PARTEE. We stay on the nonborrowed path if growth comesin short, so borrowings go down.MS. TEETERS. So borrowings fall off?MR. CORRIGAN. That's the problem.MR. AXILROD. Our staff projection, for what it's worth, isessentially alternative C. That is, we would expect money supplygrowth to come in at around 5 percent in November and 6 percent inDecember. It may be a little short of that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unfortunately, with all due respect, thatisn't worth much.MR. AXILROD. Right. We think it will be that or a littleless. So if you set the path at "A" and we were nearly right on "C,"then borrowing by sometime in December would probably be a couplehundred million less than whatever borrowing number you choose,assuming nothing is done to raise nonborrowed reserves. That's oneway of looking at it. But the error could be a lot bigger than thatdifference, one way or the other.MR. GRAMLEY. $200 million is---49-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's the same $200 million I havehere.MR. AXILROD. Right, but it depends on where you start it.MR. PARTEE. It has been two months or 6 weeks; it's come up.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, it's a lot of borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but you're saying that's if it camein roughly around 5-1/2 percent. If it came in at 3 percent orsomething, that's another $200 million.MR. AXILROD. Yes, then borrowing would be down to close tozero.MR. SCHULTZ. That's where it begins to bother me.MR. AXILROD. Then you'd be $400 million below path on totalreserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how to avoid this.We'd just run into the federal funds rate constraint then. We have toconsider what we want to do with any of these alternatives.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it seems to me the more we go for thereserve path under alternative A, the greater the likelihood thatwe're going to run into the frictional level of borrowings very soon.If you can agree with the staff's forecast that the actual moneygrowth is more likely to be "C" than "A," and then you say to yourselfthat, if anything, we're more likely to come in below that than aboveit, you've really compounded the problem that I've been worrying aboutby selecting 8 or 8-1/2 as the money number on which we calculate thenonborrowed reserve path. Although it's true that it's only $40million on average for the full month of November, it's going toaccumulate to a lot more than that on an ongoing basis by the fifthweek of this period. I think it gets to be a rather significantdifference.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I do, too. The pressure we will geton rates will be significantly different if we have a shortfall. Andthat's what the real issue is about today.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think the question is: Should we haveserious downward pressure on rates, if we have shortfalls--not only,as Lyle says, from 8-1/2 percent down to 5 percent, but below 5percent or whatever it is? Shouldn't we be having serious downwardpressure on rates because of the weakness that that implies for theeconomy?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The question is how far; that's theissue. If it drops another 225 basis points in the next 5 weeks fromwhere it is presently, that's quite a substantial drop. If we gobelow--MR. PARTEE. If you look at cyclical declines, it's not avery fast drop.-50-11/17/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're probably going to need moredecline in January and February, too, beyond that though.MR. PARTEE. The faster we get it down, the less distanceit's going to have to travel.MR. WALLICH. Well, very soon we'll have done as much as wedid in 1980. We will have cut rates about in half. This would seemto be doing the same to the funds rate and bill rate.MR. PARTEE. But I think Paul is right that we'd hit thefunds rate constraint if we go through this frictional borrowinglevel, and we'd have a conference call as to what to do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I can't convince myself that itmakes all that much difference. Unless it made a real difference,even if the money supply was growing someplace in this range, wewouldn't want to see the federal funds rate drop any more.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I have an instinct--Mr.Sternlight may have a different one or may share it--that when we'retalking about borrowings between $100 and $350 million, neither of uscould argue that the funds rate would be--. At the low end there's alittle greater odds that it will drop below the discount rate. At thehigh end there may be a little greater odds that occasionally it willbe trading a point above the discount rate. But basically it would bearound the discount rate, I think.MR. WALLICH. Well, the risk is that it might drop verysharply below the discount rate, and in that case--MR. AXILROD. But only if required reserves turn out to be alot weaker than our nonborrowed path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But still, I don't think these differencesmake much difference in themselves. The question is: What happens ifa real shortfall in the money supply is added on top of it? In thatcase we're going to run into [the need for] a consultation.MR. AXILROD. In that case the lower the growth rate inmoney you start from, the less chance you have of being presented withthat problem early, so to speak.MR. GUFFEY. It seems most desirable.MR. PARTEE. That's ignoring our policy responsibility notto have a consultation if we have great developing weakness in theeconomy. We don't want to avoid the problem; we want to precipitateit so we can talk about it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or we'll have our consultationearlier if we agree on an 11 percent floor rather than a 10 percentfloor.MR. PARTEE. That's true.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably the practicaldifference here. I take it that everybody is agreed that, whichever-51-11/17/81one of these numbers we put in, if the money supply came in higher inthe short run, we wouldn't want to run up the borrowings, although itwould be called for if we put in the low number. We'd have tooverride the thing, but I think that's understood.MR. CORRIGAN. If we put the "somewhat higher" thing inthere, that makes it explicit.SPEAKER(?). Sure.MS. TEETERS. Which higher thing?MR. CORRIGAN. Regardless of what number we pick, if we put"___ percent or somewhat higher," it makes it explicit that we're notgoing to run up the borrowing if the money supply comes in stronger.MR. SCHULTZ. What happens if we just take what we had lasttime, which is the 7 percent--leave it alone--and set the borrowingsat $400 million and our consultation rate on fed funds at 11 percent?MR. GRAMLEY. Do you mean 7 percent for October to December?MR. SCHULTZ. No.MS. TEETERS. November to December.MR. PARTEE. He means September to December, doesn't he?MR. GRAMLEY. September to December you calculate at 8percent.MR. SCHULTZ. No, November to December.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's not the same as we had the lasttime. "A" is what we had last time.MS. TEETERS. That's right.MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's the only thing. Of course,we can do that whatever we say in the directive.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I would go with Fred'sproposal. To me it's really important that we not repeat what we didlast year. That's the one time I dissented and I'd have to dissentagain, I think, if the fed funds floor were put so as to permit such asharp drop in the funds rate over a short period of time.MS. TEETERS. Don't forget that last year the economy wentdown at a real rate of 9-1/2 percent in the second quarter. No wonderthe rates dropped so fast. We're going to have a decline here ofabout half that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The reaction to that would be veryperverse in the bond market. I'm convinced of it. And I think thatis much more meaningful to an economic recovery.-52-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the obvious in-between course is todraw the path just using the 7 percent. That leaves it between the 8-1/2 and 6. Something around 7 or 7-1/2 percent splits the difference;it sounds all right to me. If the money supply really goes off on thedown side, we're going to have a consultation anyway. I think that'squite evident.MS. TEETERS. What are you doing? Are you suggesting "B"with a quarter billion dollars of original borrowing?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think in terms of "Bs" or whateverhere.MR. PARTEE. Well, communicate.MR. WALLICH. Set the borrowing requirement high to be safe.Set the path, however, so we get some addition to reserves during theperiod and some downward pressure on rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we're talking about.MR. SCHULTZ. One might term my proposal "a son of a B," Iguess.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're talking about $400 million, which Iwouldn't want to exceed in the short run and, say, 7 percent just forpurposes of drawing the path. That's all we have to do at the moment.Then we've got to write a directive which encompasses this. And westill have the choice of whether to put in a low figure and say "orhigher," or to put in a high figure. I tried to rewrite the onestarting with the high figure. I had some bias, I must confess,toward not changing the directive, which we can't meet anyway everymonth. But let me try this wording on you: "After reviewing thequarterly targets for M1-B from September to December at an annualrate of 7 percent (after allowing for NOW accounts) and for M2 at anannual rate of about 10 percent or slightly higher..." And weprobably should put a phrase in there "adopted at the last meeting" orsomething. "...the Committee decided some shortfall in M1-B,generally consistent with phasing into the tentative money growthtargets set for 1982, would be acceptable in a context of declininginterest rates and continued strength of M3."MS. TEETERS. M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 rather, yes. I don't know; this seemsfairly plain to me.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't know how that relates to whatwe've been talking about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it relates to what we were talkingabout just now.MR. FORD. Is that the end of it, Paul?MR. PARTEE. It couldn't be.-53-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it goes on and gives the federalfunds range, but that's--MR. WINN. What's that going to say?MR. STERNLIGHT. 7 percent in November and December?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the same language; we've got to fillin the blanks. I take it we have a split between 11 to 15 percent and10 to 15 percent, right?MS. TEETERS. I would much prefer the 10 to 15.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. My feeling in substance isthat we ought to consult at 11 percent, but I--MR. FORD. I don't think we should do this now. With a rangeof 6, then 5, and then 4 points, we're going to be charged with comingevery time closer and closer to managing interest rates. Whether ornot they perceive it correctly, that's what is going to be said.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't consider that entirely a bad idea.MR. FORD. If that's what you want.SPEAKER(?). Fred, did you hear that?MR. WALLICH. Why do we need to specify? One sort ofinference [about] interest rates here is the borrowing assumption.The Chairman may consult the Committee, so the funds rate constraintisn't even a binding action.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the substance of your comment?MR. WALLICH. I'm wondering why we need to expose ourselvesto the charge that we're managing interest rates when we're not doingthat?MR. PARTEE. Do you mean just take out the funds ratereference?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Take out the whole sentence?MR. WALLICH. Take out the whole sentence.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's certainly widening it!MS. TEETERS. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Nobody is really going to believethat we're indifferent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what people would concludefrom our taking out the sentence entirely at this point.MR. BLACK. They'd never get it from Henry.MR. MORRIS. That we've gone completely monetarist?-54-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think for sure, at this point.MR. PARTEE. What is it, 75 percent of--MR. MORRIS. Milton Friedman has finally won!MR. FORD. Let's try it and see what happens!MS. TEETERS. I still don't like the phrase about phasinginto next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think that is essential, butI don't know how other people feel about it. It gives some feeling ofthe dimension of what we're talking about.MR. KEEHN. To restrain ourselves this late in the yearwithout putting that comment in about leading us into next year wouldbe bad. I'd be very much in favor of including those words.MS. TEETERS. My problem is that [money growth rates] arecoming in so low this year that if we start talking about lowertargets next year--there's already talk around the market of our beinglower-limit monetarists--it gives the impression that we're headingfor the lower limit next year as well.MR. KEEHN. Well, as I said earlier, it seems to me that thedirection we're going will tend to put us toward that range. We canphrase it in a way that we are aiming toward that range, notnecessarily that we'll fall under it.MS. TEETERS. Well, we're already under for this year.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but the language doesn't--MR. KEEHN. The language doesn't say that.MR. RICE. Well, we're going to be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible] then we would have ashortfall. [Unintelligible] the language--MS. TEETERS. It sounds as if we're trying to pull [money]down so we can make next year's target, and we're already below wherewe want to be next year--or where you guys want to be next year.MR. PARTEE. Well, we have the very real question of what todo about this year's shortfall--whether to add it to next year's rangeor not. We haven't discussed that.MR. WALLICH. If we move to plain M1, then we're back to theunadjusted and that's right in the middle of the range. So, we'dstart right from there.MR. FORD. We can do a definition shift.MR. WALLICH. We got rid of the base drift.MR. SCHULTZ. We got rid of the base drift.-55-11/17/81SPEAKER(?). Somebody said there is a definition shift.[Secretary's note: Mr. Guffey was leaving the room.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [To Mr. Guffey] Are you going to vote?MR. GUFFEY. No. I don't have a vote or I would stay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we having a vote?MR. FORD. Instead of base drift, we're going to usedefinition shift.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we can argue out nextyear's targets here. We have a wide enough range [of views] to startwith. All this is meant to convey is that we're recognizing that 7percent is high and we wouldn't mind being a little lower. That'swhat we're saying.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't understand why we want to deviateso drastically from the kind of operational directive we typically setup. In effect, we're using language that doesn't have any meaning tome. And I don't know how it will have any meaning for somebody on theoutside. Why [don't] we go along the lines of what Fred wassuggesting of specifying for the directive that we're seeking M1-Bgrowth of 7 percent between October and December?MR. PARTEE. Or somewhat higher.MR. GRAMLEY. Or somewhat higher.MR. PARTEE. That makes it seem quite consistent.MR. GRAMLEY. Then we know what we're talking aboutCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think you're going to getagreement on that. I'm allergic to [unintelligible] down everymeeting, if I may say so, some target for the next 5 weeks that hasnothing to do with [unintelligible]. It's just the law ofdistribution; we don't come very close to it, whether we're above orbelow it. I'd like to relate the actions in one meeting to theactions of the previous meeting. It's just presentational. We didthat, I guess, last time. I forget what we did last time insubstance, but it was some kind of reiteration of the target at thebeginning of the quarter.MR. BOEHNE. Well, there may not be agreement around thetable, but I like what Lyle and Fred are suggesting for the directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what "7 percent or higher"means. If we get a shortfall, what do we do then? Does that implyreal aggressiveness? It sounds like it to me. You're saying now thatwe're starting out there; I don't think the staff projection is worthmuch, but I think the probabilities are we could well be below 7percent. Then we'd better be very aggressive.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought it was going to be "7percent or lower."-56-11/17/81MR. BOEHNE. Say 7 percent--MR. SCHULTZ. Well, if we said "7 percent or somewhat lower,"what does that do for you?MR. WALLICH. Then do we accept it if gets higher?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the problem: Do we accept it ifgets higher?MR. WALLICH. I can see myself accepting if it gets higher,but I wouldn't want to set the few steering mechanisms we have toaccomplish that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's highly unlikely it would behigher.MR. PARTEE. Well, it could happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who knows in this world? But I think wehave to have agreement that if it's higher, we don't want to doanything.MR. GRAMLEY. That's the one thing I can agree with.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I thought we had some agreement thatif it's lower, we don't want to be all that aggressive either.MR. GRAMLEY. I certainly can go along with that.MR. PARTEE. I don't know; it depends on how much lower.MS. TEETERS. Isn't there agreement to let the borrowingsslide if it begins to come in low?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I said "not all that aggressive."We'd let them slide as they would naturally slide.MS. TEETERS. But the question is on what path to constructM1-B, isn't it--whether it's 7 or 8 percent in the quarter?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Tentatively, I thought we'd arrived atconstructing the path on 7 percent.MR. WALLICH. Well, if we start with a sufficiently highborrowing assumption, I could go with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we're talking about $400 million, as Itake it.MR. PARTEE. That's surely high; that's the borrowingassociated with "C" in the Bluebook.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The problem is that if we don't usethe 7 percent number, we then get into the formulation--if we don'twant to change it in the middle of the quarter--in which the wordingis so fuzzy that nobody really knows what it means. If we want to-57-11/17/81follow a policy of not changing target numbers during each quarter,that would have to become, I think, a consistent policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we had a strong reason forwanting to change it, we would change it, obviously. But I think whatpeople are saying here is that if we met that original target,everybody would be happy.MR. CORRIGAN. What if we took your language there--I'm notsure I have it right--and got rid of the business about the generallydeclining interest rates and next year's targets, and just had theinitial reference to 7 percent growth for the quarter. We could putin a phrase that said the Committee sought growth in the monetaryaggregates consistent with the 7 percent, taking account of theshortfall in October, and said nothing else.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what that means.MR. PARTEE. I think that means we'd make up for it.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, it means we could go ahead and constructa path--MR. AXILROD. [The staff will] construct the path on whateverthe Committee tells us.MR. CORRIGAN. I was trying to get around the problem somepeople have with declining interest rates and next year's targets.MR. PARTEE. Well, we could do it by saying "forgetting theshortfall in October."MR. GRAMLEY. We could say "while noting the shortfall inOctober."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say "The Committee decided in thelight of the shortfall in October to accept a lower rate for thequarter." That we can say.MS. TEETERS. But affirm the target for the last two months.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that's what we're doing. We'reaccepting the shortfall and saying: Let's get it back on 7 percentfrom now on, if we reasonably can.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have several precedents for saying weaccept this kind of thing in a context of declining interest rates, orthe reverse, don't we?MR. AXILROD. Yes, there were a couple of instances of thatthat I have found.MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, one each way.MR. AXILROD. It was back in December '80, but that followeda period of rapid growth.-58-11/17/81MR. CORRIGAN. Didn't we have something like that in thedirective in April or May of last year, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Yes, in May there was a shortfall from the2-month rate specified, and it was accepted in the light of the rapidgrowth in April. They all followed rapid growth; that's the problem.They didn't follow slow growth. In August, Mr. Chairman, followingthe slow growth in July, the Committee just reaffirmed the third-quarter target of 7 percent.MR. STERNLIGHT. We were expecting at that point a prettyhefty growth in August, like 11 percent.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.MR. CORRIGAN. And we weren't faced with zero borrowings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have arrived at wording that says:"The Committee decided in the light of the low rate of growth inOctober of M1-B, that some shortfall in the growth of M1-B from thetarget for the quarter would be acceptable, in a context of declininginterest rates and continued strength in M2." That should be worded,I think, in a conditional way. If M2 is--MR. GRAMLEY. You're going to drive the monetarists up thewall with that. In the context of a weakening economy and declininginterest rates, we'll accept shortfalls from our targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's in substance what you want to do.MR. GRAMLEY. I know. I'm not a monetarist. I was justthinking about those sensitive ears out there.MR. WALLICH. Why can't we just say "After taking note of themovements of the aggregates," with no specification as to what theywere, "the Committee decided..."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What?MR. WALLICH. You have to decide.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think that's what we're going todecide.MR. WALLICH. But you're saying here "after noting theshortfall" or "after accepting a shortfall." I don't think we need tosay that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the lesser evil is to put the7 percent number down and not worry about the fact that we'rechanging.MR. BLACK. The only alternative is to put a short-term rangein and I don't want to suggest that.MS. TEETERS. It's easier to say 7 percent for the last twomonths.-59-11/17/81MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if I may say so, in response toPresident Solomon's comment: I'm not an expert on public relationsbut the Committee had put down a third-quarter number of 7 percent; itwas missed and I think it was understood. For the fourth quarter anumber of 7 percent also was put down, which will probably be missedand probably will be understood. But if the Committee then decides toput down a November-December number that is also 7 percent, people aregoing to wonder after you've missed that one. This would be yourthird try.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is partly what bothers me.MR. FORD. We're becoming predictable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We keep promising these short-term resultsthat we don't get. That is precisely what bothers me.MR. FORD. The market can adjust it to that point, so long aswe stay consistent.MR. KEEHN. It seems to me there's a real risk in putting outa [number in the] directive that we know we can't achieve. Apparentlywe're far enough through the period that the opportunity of having the7 percent come in is very remote. If that's the case, are we betteroff using a number which is more achievable and gives us morecredibility?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not that far off in the sense thatwe'll probably hit the M2 target. And what we're saying in thisformulation is that we agree we will probably miss on M1. That is thepurpose of this [wording].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is your projection for now,Steve, 5 percent?MR. AXILROD. Alternative C is essentially our projection, orwe think it will come in a little lower. That's why we bent thewording that way.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what we're trying to do isstructure a compromise, Si. We're most likely to hit alternative C orbelow, but that's not acceptable to a substantial number of people,Chuck and others. So we've been trying to grope for a compromise inthat area. If we go back to your kind of language, even though it'sconfusing to the public, we'd still have to have a privateunderstanding on how much shortfall--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there isn't any what you callprivate understanding. Yes, we have to set a reserve path, whichwe've just tentatively set; there's no obscurity about it. The way toavoid these things in the future--but it would get us into otherproblems--is to say we're setting the reserve path at X, which weconsider consistent with 7 percent. We are not promising we're goingto make 7 percent; that's just where we're setting the reserve path.MR. SCHULTZ. What is the great difficulty with using 7percent--and that sets the reserve path--and then using the borrowing-60-11/17/81assumption and the fed funds constraint to take care of the fact thatwe are going to miss that one way or the other?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we're trying to do, as Iunderstand it. I think we have agreement on the substance; it's justhow to describe it.MR. SCHULTZ. My problem is my simple mind; I don't have anydifficulty with what I just said. But maybe others do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you think you can give language for adirective, if I understood you correctly?MR. SCHULTZ. I just would use the number 7 percent in astraightforward directive--the normal kind that we have used before.I'd use the numbers for M1-B and M2 that are under alternative B,which are 7 percent and 11 percent or something like that. And thenI'd put in a fed funds constraint, which I would prefer at 11 percentbecause it's very difficult to know what is going to transpire in thisvery short period of time and I think it's worthwhile to confer at 11percent. I'd start with a borrowing assumption of $400 million,recognizing that there is every likelihood that it will come down andnone that it would go up because we would be generally tolerant ofsome additional strength in the aggregates, which none of us feels isgoing to happen.MS. TEETERS. What about the language you had a minute agothat we would provide reserves in the two-month period that would beconsistent with a 7 percent rate of growth in the money supply? Shiftit from a pinpoint to a reserve supply in there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's just the traditional form.MS. TEETERS. And say we're going to hit the money supply at7 percent, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the wording we have--that weprovide reserves consistent with the 7 percent. This says "behaviorof reserve aggregates." We can do it just by putting in thosenumbers. That's right. And every month we're putting in numbers thatwe aren't going to make. We can do that; that's simple enough. But Idon't think it conveys any more information.MR. SCHULTZ. A number has two purposes. One is a target;then there is a number which is used to construct a nonborrowedreserves path. So, it has two functions. And it seems to me thateven if we really don't think conditions are such that we will make itas a target, it is useful in setting the path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question. The more I look atthis, the more I think we're arguing over nothing. We act as if theonly thing people read is this paragraph. Whatever we say we're goingto have to describe in the rest of the policy record, and we'represumably going to describe it in more or less similar terms.MR. PARTEE. How about something like "While taking note ofthe moderate shortfall in growth of the aggregates during October"--and it was only a moderate shortfall--"the Committee continues to seek-61-11/17/81expansion at the rate of about 7 percent in M1-B and 10-1/2 percent inM2 in the period ahead." And that says we gave up October.MR. MORRIS. While noting it and ignoring it.MR. PARTEE. Yes, taking note, we continue to seek--MS. TEETERS. Don't you have M2 growth too low?MR. PARTEE. I didn't have the Bluebook open right there. Ithink 10-1/2 percent is about--MS. TEETERS. 11-1/4 percent is--MR. CORRIGAN. I didn't say it very well, Governor Partee,but that's the gist of what I was trying to say before.MR. GRAMLEY. We'd have to drop out the language "seeksbehavior of reserve aggregates." Or maybe we wouldn't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the traditional way of doing it. Idon't think it makes any difference in substance; we'll describe itall anyway [in the policy record]. But it gives you less informationand we're still back to this business about jumping up and down everytime we have a 2-month target or a 5- or 6-week target over which wedon't have much control. But if you can rationalize it and say that'swhere the reserve path--MR. WALLICH. How about "set the reserve path designed toachieve X percent growth"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what we say ordinarily.That's the traditional form.MR. PARTEE. I really don't think this is a good month to tryto reform the way we state the directive. It's in the middle of aquarter, as you said before; it's at the end of a year; and it's in aperiod where we're going to fall short of our growth for the year as awhole. And we just shouldn't be doing fancy things with the directiveright now. If we want to do it, we can do it in January and start outa new year with a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we don't have this kind of problem inJanuary--at the December meeting--because we're starting a new periodfor which we have no targets. So, we don't have the problem.MR. BALLES. Does anybody recall how we handled this a yearago when we went through some gyrations in order to get the monetarygrowth rates cranked down so that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we presented a quarterlytarget a year ago.MR. PARTEE. I don't think so either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The difference now is that we have putthese things on a quarterly basis, and we did that with a purpose inmind--maybe it was only in my mind--which was to be a little-62-11/17/81consistent over the quarter. The concept was for the meeting in themiddle of the quarter to review the target we already set for thequarter. Now, this is a kind of reversion to taking a look at it--MS. TEETERS. I like Chuck's language. Governor Partee'slanguage finesses all of our problems and we've had enough discussionhere, I think, that the Manager will know what it is we're trying toachieve.MR. PARTEE. We could be more specific as to the time periodby saying "for the remainder of the year" instead of "in the periodahead."SPEAKER(?). That is five weeks?MR. SCHULTZ. No, it's almost seven.MR. PARTEE. It's essentially November and December.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we're arguing aboutany substance. As a matter of form, I don't like it. But ifeverybody else likes it--MS. TEETERS. What's the funds rate formulation, Chuck?MR. PARTEE. Oh, I didn't specify that. We were just talkingabout directive language. The specs the Chairman will recommend tous, I'm sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on that, I would prefer the 11 to 15percent just to get a consultation at around 11 percent. If we wereabsolutely symmetrical around where we now are, we'd make it 10-1/2 to15-1/2 percent, I guess.MR. GRAMLEY. It gives us a little breathing room.MR. BOEHNE. Why don't we make it 10 to 16, Schultz? Betteryet.MR. GRAMLEY. It's the bottom end--MR. PARTEE. 16 percent, ha, ha, ha.MS. TEETERS. It's only been a month since it was there.MR. PARTEE. A lot has happened in a month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see how anybody can take anyoffense at 10-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent. That is absolutely thetraditional--I'm talking about the outside reader. A Committee membercan, maybe.MR. PARTEE. That centers it on 13 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's centered on where we are, which iswhat we've been doing.-63-11/17/81MR. WALLICH. Well, then it is, what--2-1/2 points below thediscount rate? That must mean that there's practically onlyfrictional borrowing.MR. AXILROD. It's not lower than where the discount rate is.MR. WALLICH. Then it's very unstable already.MR. FORD. Yes, Henry, but we'll send you a recommendationon the discount rate.MR. BALLES. I've already sent one.MR. WALLICH. That's something one would like to be able todecide while not under the pressure of a collapsing funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that goes to the reserve path, Ithink, not to--. Well, one can argue that we might want to consult ata higher rate. I'd just as soon consult at a higher rate myself. ButI don't think where we put this number is going to affect where thefunds rate goes; it affects where we consult.MR. WALLICH. Well, that's what I had in mind.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, we never consult unless that bottom levelis broken. We never consult just because it drops and touches thenumber and pops back up. I tell you: The funds rate is a little over13 percent now, and if we're breaking 11 percent in a 5-week period,that's really moving down.MS. TEETERS. We've had informal agreements before to consultbefore we hit the bottom or the top of the range. We could do thatthis time also.MR. WALLICH. We certainly shouldn't wait a week andestablish the average that begins breaking the lower level.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am sensitive to your point, but we stillhave to put some number in here. In fact, we may consult before weget to that number. That's always an option. We can consult any timewe want to consult.MR. BLACK. And you can control that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a certain amount of control overthat.MR. WALLICH. Well, do you feel constrained from consultingbefore we reach that point?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Not for that reason alone. I onlyfeel constrained in the sense of wanting to consult if there weregenuine confusion over what we should do, whatever these numbers are.MS. TEETERS. If we had an M1-B target of 7 percent forNovember-December, an M2 target of 11-1/2 or 11-3/4 percent, the fundsrange of 10-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent, and initial borrowings at $400million, does that cover what we've been [unintelligible]?-64-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am not in favor of thatformulation. But if everybody else loves that formulation--MR. CORRIGAN. What was that first alternate directivelanguage you had earlier in the meeting about five hours ago? The onethat we didn't have [in front of us].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It said the Committee had set aside--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was essentially this, just astraightforward--MR. CORRIGAN. No. There was some nuance in there thatallowed you to keep the 7 percent quarterly number.MR. AXILROD. I think it was "a somewhat higher growth ratewould be acceptable and would be consistent with the quarterly targetspreviously [adopted]."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It puts in the "higher." It says thelower one won't be acceptable at 7 percent.MR. AXILROD. Yes. It had a second sentence that it could behigher if it was consistent with the quarterly targets or somethinglike that--MR. CORRIGAN. But isn't the presumption clear enough therethat if it's lower, we would respond the same way?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think so, but that's why I'm notcrazy about it. This one only had 10-1/2 percent for M2 as Mr.Axilrod wrote it.MS. TEETERS. But is 10-1/2 percent on M2 consistent with 7percent on M1, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, for the quarter, we thought it would be alittle higher than 10-1/2 percent; it could be 11 percent. But theCommittee's decision was 10 percent or a little higher last time.MS. TEETERS. For the quarter.MR. AXILROD. For the quarter. So, it's not inconsistentwith that at all.MR. SCHULTZ. We might go with a straight crap shoot and callit 7 and 11.MR. PARTEE. That's what I have: 7 percent for M1-B and 11percent for M2 for the remainder of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's settle this federal fundsrange. All these cosmetics don't amount to a hill of beans in someway, since we explain it all in the [policy record]. Who wants to putthe bottom at 11 percent?MR. GRAMLEY. The fed funds rate?-65-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The bottom of the fed funds range. Well,we have a majority there, clearly.MR. PARTEE. How am I going to [contend] with having aconsultation at 11 percent? Usually I'm against that kind of thing.MR. CORRIGAN. Why don't you ask who will accept 10-1/2?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the alternative is 10-1/2 percent.Big deal! How many would prefer 10-1/2?MR. PARTEE. I would prefer it.MS. TEETERS. Why not 10-1/2 percent with a consultation at11 percent?MR. BOEHNE. I like Chuck's: Consult at 11 percent; 7percent [for M-1B]; and 10 percent [for M2].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only problem I see with 11 percent,which I prefer in fact on the lower end, is where to put the top. A16 percent figure looks a little ridiculous to me.SPEAKER(?). You've got it!MS. TEETERS. We can consult at 11; it's the same thing.MR. GRAMLEY. To maintain our credibility in fighting againstinflation at 16 percent.\ CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How about 11 to 15 percent?MR. WALLICH. How about 11 to 16 and consult at 15?MR. SCHULTZ. But, Henry, that's symmetrical. You don't wantto be that--MR. WALLICH. Sometimes we can afford to be symmetrical.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. An 11 to 15 percent range happens to becompletely symmetrical around the present level of 13.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you want a show of hands?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Is that acceptable?MR. PARTEE. Acceptable is what you want?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Acceptable at this point. All right.Now, I take it there's agreement that we're going to set a path on the7 percent and we probably won't be moving that discretionarilydownwards very readily because we haven't much room to do so. If itcomes in weak, it will go down by itself starting at a borrowing levelof around $400 million. I think that's where we've been. So, theonly thing that remains is that we can just use this traditionalformat and say 7 percent for M1 and whatever we say for M2.MR. SCHULTZ. 11 percent.-66-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 11 percent.MR. KEEHN. Well, when we say 7 percent, is it going to bethe wording that's here of September to December?MS. TEETERS. October to December.MR. KEEHN. Or November and December.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can put the phrase that Chuck had infront of it: "The Committee noted the shortfall."MR. PARTEE. The moderate shortfall. It's the only monthwhen we had just a moderate shortfall.MR. KEEHN. Yes, but I think we talked about November andDecember.MR. PARTEE. Say "for the remainder of the year" so that wedon't have to say November to December.MR. WALLICH. Did we overshoot on M3?MR. PARTEE. We don't specify M3.MR. BLACK. Don't forget bank credit.MR. WALLICH. A higher aggregate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Committee, after noting a moderateshortfall in M1"? Yes, but turn it around.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd say "a symmetrically moderateshortfall in M1 and an overrun in M2."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we didn't have an overrun in M2.MR. PARTEE. No, we didn't. We expected 12.9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the directive said 10 percent forthe quarter.MR. GRAMLEY. In the earlier part, in the general paragraphsof the directive, there needs to be some reference to the eliminationof the surcharge. You have a sentence here which is "On October 30the Board of Governors announced a reduction in the Federal Reservebasic discount rate from 14 to 13 percent." I would think we'd alsowant to add that "on November 16 the Board announced the eliminationof the surcharge."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm glad somebody reads that!MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, without raising any furtherproblems for the Committee, with Governor Partee's addition of "afternoting the shortfall" does the Committee want to say after the 7percent "or somewhat more"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I don't think so.-67-11/17/81MR. PARTEE. I just said "about."MR. WALLICH. When we say "somewhat more," does that mean wefreeze the funds rate at that level?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we want to say "somewhatmore" especially because of what happens if it's somewhat less.MS. TEETERS. Why can't we say "about"?MR. PARTEE. Yes, I said "about" 7 and 11 percent. "Around"is all right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This directive will get known as the7 to 11.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What the directive will say is: TheCommittee, after noting a moderate shortfall in growth in M1-B inOctober from the target path set at the last meeting,..."MR. WALLICH. And the continued high level of M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "... seeks behavior of reserve aggregatesconsistent with growth of M1-B from October to December at an annualrate of 7 percent (after allowance for...Now accounts) and with growthin M2 at an annual rate of around 11 percent." And we're at 11 to 15percent on the federal funds range.MR. WALLICH. I think we're making it needlessly difficult bypointing to M2 as the balancing item that keeps us where we are. Whydon't we just play down M2 in this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is just the way it was the last time.They get equal weight.MR. WALLICH. Yes, but now we've mentioned the shortfall inone and said nothing about the other except--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other was within the target.MR. PARTEE. We were expecting apparently a higher Octobernumber than we got by a couple of points.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were expecting a higher number thanwhat we got and we were 0.7 below the figure we mentioned in thedirective.MR. PARTEE. It was surprising, considering all saverscertificates.MR. SCHULTZ. Let's vote.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm in favor of that.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Altmann called to my attention that we havehad more than one change in the surcharge since the last meeting.We'd have to do more than put in this suggested elimination, so Iwithdraw my suggestion.-68-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, there's no mention of a surcharge?MS. TEETERS. Why don't we put both of them in there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can delegate to the Secretaryto put in a mention of the surcharge in the appropriate place.MR. PARTEE. How about "eliminated it in two stages."MR. KEEHN. Are you dropping from the directive the commentsabout next year?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Except to the extent that they're in thatparagraph that indicates the preliminary specifications.MS. TEETERS. Yes, it does--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now that we have labored over this thingthat nobody is going to see for six weeks and until it's no longerrelevant any more--MR. SCHULTZ. And will be known as the Federal Reserve crapshoot when it comes out.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesVICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is this the first meeting with nodissent this year?END OF MEETING-69-