Federal Open Market CommitteeConference CallJuly 17, 1981PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, and Winn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, and Roos, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, and St.Louis, respectivelyMessrs. Doyle and Forrestal, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Atlanta,respectivelyStaff attendance at this session was not recorded in theCommittee's files.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofJuly 17, 1981VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Murray, this is Tony Solomon in NewYork. When Paul gets there, I'd like to make a comment to give theFOMC members a bit of news. But I want to wait until he gets on.MR. ALTMANN. All right. He's here now.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He's there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I just want to advise the members ofthe FOMC and others, Mr. Chairman, as I've already advised youpersonally, that as of this morning Scott Pardee has resigned. He istaking a position as Executive Vice President with the DiscountCorporation. And until his retirement day is effective, he'llbasically be on vacation and straightening up his records. Of course,Gretchen will continue to run the Desk until a final resolution ismade as to who will be in charge.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will have to get on that. I'msorry to hear it, but these things happen. Let me return to anotherunhappy matter of an apparent leak about part of our decision lastweek--it was last week, wasn't it?--in the Washington Post.MR. COYNE. This week.MR. PARTEE. The leak was this week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The leak was this week, but the meetingwas last week. It's very frustrating to me personally. It's hard toknow what to do about it but I'm thinking and will continue to think[about that]. As you have heard me say before, this kind of thing canbe extremely damaging and I don't how we can operate with someconfidence, given the necessary lapses between meetings andannouncements, if we're subject to this kind of thing. I don't knowwhat else I can say other than that I'm thinking about it further.So far as the substance of the discussion is concerned, weagreed to have some consultation before any actual announcements weremade, [given that] we were faced with some volatile money supplyfigures. We indeed have [new data] and they're somewhat different--Steve will go over them--than what we were assuming. I don't seeanything here that casts any question about our decisions. And Idon't propose to raise that, myself; the new figures don't require anydecision of that nature in my view. I think they do have someimplications, [with regard to] the operations that we agreed upon andthe manner of conducting them. Why don't I let Steve describe wherewe are.MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The data for the weekof July 1st that were published right after the FOMC meeting wereabout $2-1/2 billion higher than we thought at the time of thatmeeting, based on the preliminary figures. The data for [the weekending] July 8th that we are going to publish today will show anincrease of $6.9 billion. As you probably recall, at the time of the7/17/81FOMC meeting we had projected, without any data in hand, an increaseon the order of $4-1/2 billion, in part because of the acceleratedsocial security payments. But the increase, as you see, isconsiderably higher. The preliminary data for the week ending thisWednesday, July 15th, suggest that part of this [extra bulge] willcome out, and we are looking for a decline of $2-1/2 billion. Buteven with that decline, that would still leave the level of M-1B inthe week of July 15th some $700 million above where the target pathhad put it last week. And it would leave the level for July 8th some$1.7 billion above where the target path for last week had put it.So, we're running somewhat stronger on M-1B. Without changing thenonborrowed path at all and given the shortfall in borrowing last weekto $1.3 billion, this implies a borrowing level in the current weekand next week of $1650 million. That's without without doing anyadjustments to the nonborrowed path, just holding that and letting thenatural course of the figures work through.Meanwhile, because the Committee clearly indicated itsconcern about M2, I should update the Committee on that aggregate.The data we now have, which include preliminary data for the July 15thweek, suggest to us that savings deposits are less weak than had beenestimated as consistent with the path, that money market funds areconsiderably stronger, that overnight RPs are stronger, and thatEurodollars are stronger. We don't [calculate M2] weekly, but thatwould give us growth in July of close to 11 percent in contrast to the8-1/2 percent path. In essence, the nontransactions components of M2,which had been targeted, so to speak, to grow at a rate of around 8percent with M2 as a whole growing at an 8-1/2 percent rate given thegreater growth the Committee was permitting in M-1B in that month,look as if they're expanding at about an 11 percent annual rate--similar to the way they had expanded earlier in the year. That's howthey look at this moment. So, we have greater strength in M2 and wehave not made any particular adjustment in the path as of this momentfor that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One thing I don't understand. You said wewere $1.7 billion [above] where you expected to be in some week--Iwasn't sure what week. But it seems that we [published] a smallerdecline last week than we anticipated when the Committee met and wehave a much larger increase this week. Why aren't we much furtherabove the path if you--MR. AXILROD. Well, the confusion goes back [to how weconstructed the path] and I should be clearer. The Committee met onTuesday; we got new data on Wednesday; and we constructed the path onThursday night on the basis of the new data. So, I should have added,Mr. Chairman--the numerology here just gets excessively complex--thatthe June level on which the current path is based is $400 millionhigher than the June level at which the Committee was looking. Andthat added a bit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interrupt. In a sense,that's the only change that should bear upon the Committee's decision,it seems to me. And it doesn't seem to me enough to make muchdifference. It's just that the base is $400 million off from where wethought it was.MR. AXILROD. That's right.7/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That in itself doesn't seem to me to callinto question what the growth trend should have been in this quarter.MR. AXILROD. That's right.MS. TEETERS. Can we have the levels of M-1B starting withthe last week in June, Steve?MR. AXILROD. In the last week of June, the week ending June24th, it was $428.3 billion; in the week of July 1st, which is thelast week [published], it was $427.3 billion; in the week of July 8th,which is the number we're now going to publish, it is $434.2 billion;and for July 15th our preliminary estimate is $431.7 billion.MR. CORRIGAN. Steve, what's your current estimate for theshift adjusted growth of M-1B in July?MR. AXILROD. Well, the projection is based on assumptions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You still haven't told me how far we areabove what we assumed at the time of the meeting for July 8th or 15th,or whatever the week is for the latest data.MS. TEETERS. We're $1.7 billion above.MR. AXILROD. Well, at the time of the meeting, we guessedthat the number for July 8th would be $429.4 billion. Shortly afterthe meeting, we constructed a path based on a number of $432.5 billionbecause the [higher] June base got reflected in that week. And we nowhave $434.2 billion. So, relative to the number we used inconstructing the path, given the increase in the June base, you're$1.7 billion above. And our staff projection for July is a 9.2percent rate of growth. But that assumes that there is no furtherincrease form this preliminary estimate of the July 15th level, onaverage, in either the week of the 22nd or the 29th. If there is anyfurther increase, that 9.2 percent will, of course, be higher.MR. PARTEE. And June was a decline of about that samemagnitude?MR. AXILROD. The June decline as it worked out is 9.4percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know who is around from the Desk.Paul, do you want to say anything?MR. MEEK. Well, I would say that during the last week themarket has gradually [reduced] its estimates of the funds rate that isconsistent with the Committee's objectives to somewhere probablyaround the 18 percent level from 19 percent or thereabouts. Theestimates in the market of the numbers that we will publish todayrange from an increase of about $2 billion to $6 billion, with most ofthe expectations around $3 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Clearly, we seem to be getting a figurehere that's much higher than----than the market is thinking.MR. PARTEE.7/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. -- than the central tendency of the marketthinking. It's obviously a very big figure, partially and hopefully[to be] offset next week. But the arithmetic, as Steve suggested, isfor no further increases or decreases beyond next week, which [meansthe July increase] about balances the June decline. We're not veryfar above where we want to be, but the risks look a little differentat this point. And M2 seems to be running high. In the normal courseof events, I would be inclined to make one of the operationaladjustments we talked about at the last meeting and lower thenonborrowed reserve path. The presumption is that borrowings will goup; we'll go toward the position Mr. Rice expressed at the meeting,and toward what the staff saw as consistent. I would think somethingin the neighborhood of $1.8 billion is probably about right, which iswhere we were just a couple weeks ago.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you think that will put the fundsrate up around 19 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who knows at this point? I think themarket is going to be very strongly affected in coming days simply inreaction to the money supply figure. Borrowings ran low last weekwith no excess reserves and have been running very low so far thisweek, so presumably the market would tighten up even if we didnothing.MR. PARTEE. Might I ask Steve or Paul about the July M2: Doyou have any updated figures for the thrifts? There could be a run-off from the thrifts that is contributing to that increase in moneymarket funds.MR. AXILROD. All I have is that the small time component isrunning weaker, but the savings deposit component is running lessweak. The two together are just a shade stronger than we'd allowedfor.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you have for thrifts just inabsolute terms? Are they having a run-off or not in their deposits?MR. AXILROD. I don't have the raw data for early July here.But in June that seasonally-adjusted annual rate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know June was up a little, but I--MR. AXILROD. It was up only around 2 percent for S&Ls and 3percent for mutual [savings banks]; and I don't have a July projectionhere. It's running weaker in terms of the total. In small time andsavings deposits we still have a small increase projected.MR. PARTEE. For the combined banks and thrifts?MR. AXILROD. No, for thrifts alone.MR. PARTEE. For thrifts alone. I see.MR. AXILROD. But that's only the small [time and savingsdeposits]. We don't really have an estimate for the large CDs--whether they are running off and offsetting that.7/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What other observations do we have?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I would wonder about the wisdom of makingan immediate adjustment in nonborrowed reserves given just a couple ofweeks' numbers. My own reading of the economic numbers that have beencoming in since the last meeting suggests that the situation, ifanything, is a little weaker than we were looking at. We've had carsales continuing very low. We had a pretty good increase ininventories in May and the inventory/sales ratio is rising.Industrial production is down; it now looks as though we're going tohave a decline in industrial production in the third quarter ratherthan an increase. I would hope we might wait another week and seewhat the figures show before we jump too fast.MR. PARTEE. I would agree with that, Mr. Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, this is Tony Solomon.I tend to feel that Lyle and Chuck are probably right--that it's worthwaiting a few more days--because even with the 10 percent growth thatthe Board staff is now estimating for shift adjusted M-1B for July,we're still running substantially below the lower end of the range.And we will get anyway an automatic increase--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I believe right now we're not below thelower end of the range but well into the range.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not on the shift adjusted number.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. I'll ask Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. Well, I think we're below through June--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just looking at the figures we know.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have figures in front of me up hereand they indicate that we're still significantly below.MR. AXILROD. Well, we have to estimate our July figure andplot it.MR. BLACK. We're still above the short-run range but belowthe long-run range.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that's right. It's above theshort-run path that you constructed.MR. BLACK. Right.MR. PARTEE. But it's below the cone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. Is it below the cone? Ilooked at these figures the other night and I thought we were--MR. PARTEE. Yes.MR. AXILROD. Yes, as nearly as we can plot it fast, if youplot the shift adjusted number that we have for the week of July 8th--the one we're going to publish--it's below the cone and also below--7/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are below the cone. Let me see that.I looked at it the other day and I thought we were above.MR. AXILROD. Well, I think you were looking at that morespecial one you use.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought we were [unintelligible]--SPEAKER(?). You mean he has his own?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, I guess we're below. I'll take itback.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, I was going to say that evenwithout reducing the nonborrowed reserve path, we are going to get theeffects of the automatic adjustments, which bring the borrowing up to$1.65 billion. There will be some upward pressure on the fed fundsrate anyway, as well as the psychological reaction to the figures.And it seems to me that July is still so unclear that it might beworth waiting a few more days.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Black. Under ordinarycircumstances, I would agree with Chuck and Lyle and Tony. Butbearing in mind what happened last year, I think the market iswatching pretty closely. And some little move now, even if we have toreverse it shortly, would probably be pretty wise, much as yousuggested.MR. WALLICH. This is Henry Wallich. Usually waiting hasturned out badly for us. We have established some reputation now formoving in a timely way, and I wouldn't be very happy about delaying.Maybe we could wait for the funds rate to respond and see if there isa substantial response. But in the absence of that, I think we haveto move on the nonborrowed path.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Henry has a good point. Ifwe wait and see how much the funds rate goes up--it would be bytomorrow and Monday--then we would have a better feel for thesituation.MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed. I think Governor Wallich has a goodpoint, too. We may get a substantial market reaction here and thefunds rate may go up anyway. On the economy, the tone and feel typeof information that we're getting here and from our directors, [whosesources] are pretty well spread out, suggests a fairly rapid andsignificant weakening in the economy on a rather broad front. Thatitself isn't going to be cleared up over the next couple of days, butI think we may be facing a weaker economy than we thought a week ortwo ago.MR. CORRIGAN. This is Jerry Corrigan. I feel a littlebetween a rock and a hard place. It's hard for me to ignore thesemoney numbers, but I guess a couple of days doesn't matter that much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a couple of days we're not going toknow anything more than we know now.7/17/81MR. PARTEE. No, it has to be next Wednesday; we can't knowanything more 'til Wednesday.MR. CORRIGAN. [We'll know] the reaction to those numbersthis afternoon, but I think that's going to point in the direction ofmaking the adjustment anyway.SPEAKER(?). I think we're going to have to act, so I'd justas soon do so now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, not hearing any other comments, wewill make a decision in the light of all the comments that have beenmade, which is somewhere between not changing, changing in a couple ofdays, and going to $1.8 billion right now. We'll be someplace inbetween. I don't think we can wait very long. We're just operatingin the context of the decision that was made. We'll maybe look at theM2 numbers a little more closely and see how they look. Any decisionwe make now doesn't imply any operations today or Monday or probablyTuesday anyway.MR. PARTEE. That's probably right. We're talking about thenext reserve week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're talking about where we lean in thisreserve period and where we set our next reserve period. So, we willleave it at that. I will commune with my soul and interpret all therandom comments that I have heard. I guess that's all we have.MR. PARTEE. Did you want to [reaffirm] the long-run range?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we'd only need a vote if we weregoing to change something. I have not heard any sentiment to changeanything. So, this is just an updating, if that's acceptable. Thankyou.END OF SESSION