Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  Our first item is financial developments and open market operations, and let me call on Simon to deliver the Desk report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply describing the sequence of events and actions without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 2.
 MR. POTTER.  Thanks, Lorie.  As detailed in a memo circulated in advance of the meeting, the staff has assessed that there might be some merit in changing the calculation methodology underlying the federal funds effective rate concurrent with the change in data source to the FR 2420.  We are interested in the Committee’s initial feedback on this assessment. As you are aware, the federal funds effective rate is currently calculated as a volume-weighted mean.  That is, each observed transaction rate is weighted by the share of total volume transacted at this rate, and the effective rate is the sum of these  weighted rates.  The distribution of volume by rates for a particular day from the FR 2420 data is shown in the middle-right panel. The staff’s assessment is that it may be more appropriate to calculate the effective rate as the median (that is, the 50th percentile) of the distribution rather than its mean. As shown in the bottom-left panel, the volume-weighted median generates a statistic that is the same as, or very close to, the mean at most times except for the crisis period.  However, on those occasions when the mean and median do differ significantly, the staff’s preliminary analysis shows that the median is typically a better measure of broad money market conditions across a wide range of situations.  Moreover, the median is much more robust to invalid data.  In general, for an invalid transaction to affect the median, it must have a large volume attached to it, while the mean can be moved by an invalid transaction that has a more typical volume and rate.  The staff believes this characteristic of the median would enhance both the integrity of the effective federal funds rate as a reference rate as well its credibility as a monetary policy instrument.  We look forward to your views on this subject, and, based on your feedback, the staff may present a plan to move forward at the June meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes our remarks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Are there questions or comments, particularly in response to Simon’s request for comments on the federal funds rate.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is presenting information and seeking feedback.


Passage number 3.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I found that the staff memo and also the memo to Reserve Bank research directors made a pretty good case, to my mind, for using the volume-weighted median.  It’s a better measure of financial conditions for all the reasons that you went through, Simon.  In addition, it’s more difficult to manipulate. What I mean is, in theory, any trade moves a mean, whereas to move the median, it either needs to be further away or bigger.  Anyway, I think it is a good case, and I guess I have two questions relating to when we do “socialize” this to the public, which we may not have the answers to today.  One is, will a median versus a mean have a differential effect on existing contracts, of which there are many trillions.  Two is, I’d be interested to hear how market participants react to this mean–median thing. I think that the potential cost that’s laid out in the memo is that of successfully communicating it to the public.  I don’t really see that as an insurmountable concern.  I mean, very few people even know what the effective federal funds rate is in the first place, and the kind of people who know that are probably able to tell the difference between a volume-weighted mean and a median if they want to and need to.  I don’t see that as a big thing, but I would certainly be sensitive to the views of market participants on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the staff memo and the use of the volume-weighted median as a measure of financial conditions. The speaker also acknowledges the potential challenges in communicating this change to the public but does not see it as a major concern.


Passage number 4.
 MR. POTTER. In terms of the contracts that are written on the effective federal funds rate, if we were to pursue this, there would be a long lead time during which the market participants would know that the change is coming.  We would have to weigh the effect that that would have, and it would have some effect because the median is not always equal to the mean, but many of these contracts average over a long period of time.  So occasions on particular days when we do see differences are probably not going to have a large effect on those contracts. What they will be perhaps more interested in is the level of rates that you’ll be setting in the future.  If you think about a contract in 2016, that’s going to be very heavily influenced by where they think you’ll be setting the target rate. The kinds of issues to do with the gap between the mean and the median are very second-order, compared with that.  They also have to think of things like, “Where would the effective federal funds rate be trading in the range.,” and so on.  I don’t believe this change is anything of first-order importance for a contract, and it’s pretty typical for the uncertainty that market participants face overall in terms of trading in the federal funds market, which we know some large participants have left and some other participants could leave in the future, affecting where the federal funds rate trades in the range. On the market participants’ knowledge of this, I agree that many people probably don’t know that much about the detailed calculation of the effective federal funds rate.  Those who do would find it pretty understandable, I believe, that we switch from a volume-weighted mean to a volume-weighted median, partly because one of the things that we do know is that the mean isquite heavily influenced by a small transaction at a rate that is far away from where most of the volume is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential effects and considerations of changing from a volume-weighted mean to a volume-weighted median for contracts written on the effective federal funds rate.


Passage number 5.
 MR. POWELL.  That’s helpful. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 6.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In the LIBOR case, the issue about really small changes in LIBOR from what was perceived to be a correct LIBOR pricing was considered a big issue. Here you’ve got a picture of a 20 or 40 basis point difference.  It gives me a little bit of pause that the people who are contracting on this might be upset by this change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their concern about the potential impact of a small change in LIBOR on those who are contracting based on it.


Passage number 7.
 MR. POTTER. In the crisis period, particularly as the balance sheet got larger, we didn’t have that much control over the federal funds rate, and that was an event that really was exogenous to the calculation method.  Whichever calculation method we would have used, there would have been more variance at that time.  If, arbitrarily, the Federal Reserve had turned up on one day and said, “We are going to change that calculation method,” without any kind of forewarning, that would make payments flow differentially to what people expected.  The plan here is, if there is support for moving forward with this, it will be clearly communicated well in advance, and it will be the type of consideration that all market participants should have to take into account when pricing contracts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a hypothetical scenario and discussing the need for clear communication if changes were to be made.


Passage number 8.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply thanking Mr. Bullard and asking for any other comments or input from Governor Powell.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
 MR. POWELL. Well, I have a question now.  This refers to the expectations about the size of the ON RRP facility post-liftoff. This is anecdotal, but it sounds like there’s a systematic difference between buy-side participants, who tend to be predicting a larger facility, and primary dealers, who are predicting something more in line with what the Committee has been thinking of saying.  Is that accurate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that there is a systematic difference between buy-side participants and primary dealers in terms of their predictions about the size of the ON RRP facility post-liftoff. This suggests that there is a disagreement or difference of opinion between these two groups.


Passage number 10.
 MS. LOGAN. We do see some distinction between the two.  The median for the dealers is $190 billion at liftoff for demand.  For the buy side, it is $350 billion.  There is some variation, but there is variation within the dealer estimates as well.  But I think you are correct that the buy side is skewed a bit higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 11.
 MR. POTTER. There is variation within the same firm.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement simply states a fact that there is variation within the same firm. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 12.
 MR. POWELL.  Are we inclined to attribute more or less weight to the buy side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
 MS. LOGAN.  I don’t think there’s anything in the commentary that would suggest the buy side has some better analytics of understanding that from what we’re reading in the commentary.  As Simon said, even within firms, we’re hearing the numbers to be quite different.  In the survey, we did find that some firms had produced written reports that had different expectations than those who filled out the survey, so I don’t think there’s any additional knowledge or analytics that the buy side is drawing upon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Logan is simply stating her opinion and observations.


Passage number 14.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions or comments.  [No response]  Okay.  Then let’s turn to swap arrangements.  We have a proposal to renew both the NAFA swap arrangement with Canada and Mexico and a proposal to renew the liquidity swap arrangements.  Let me first ask whether there are any questions or comments on these proposals.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 15.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’d like to respectfully dissent again on the foreign swap arrangements.  The Richmond Reserve Bank has dissented on these swap lines going back 20 years on the grounds that they facilitate inappropriate actions by the Federal Reserve.  One is sterilized foreign exchange operations, which are inappropriate for reasons I spoke about in January.  The other is channeling intergovernmental assistance to our NAFA partners, among others, who may be well deserving of such assistance, but that constitutes fiscal policy that’s best left to fiscal authorities, in our view.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments or questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Hearing none, seeing none, we need two separate votes.  I’d like to first ask—and this is an FOMC vote—on the renewal of the NAFA swap arrangements with Canada and Mexico.  All in favor. [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes disagreement or dissent from Mr. Lacker on the foreign swap arrangements. He explains his dissenting view and states his disagreement with the actions of the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 16.
 MR. LACKER.  Opposed. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker is opposed. Okay.  I think that passes, and, second, I’d like to ask for a vote on the liquidity swap arrangements.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes] Any opposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. All members are recorded as being in favor of the liquidity swap arrangements.


Passage number 17.
 MR. LACKER.  Opposed. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  We need one more vote to ratify domestic open market operations. Is there a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. Instead, it is a simple exchange of statements between individuals.


Passage number 18.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any opposed.  [No response] Okay. We will consider those approved as well.  Next, I think we’re going to move to our second topic, which is normalization procedures, and I’m going to call on Ellen Meade to provide a briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking if there is anyone opposed to approving something, and when there is no response, it is considered approved.


Passage number 19.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. So I am going to make a forecast that we are all going to agree that, at least for the first few weeks, we are going to want to have some sort of a discussion   if the funds rate is trading outside the target range.  If we are going to do that, I have a couple of questions of the staff.  At what time of day would it be most appropriate to have those meetings. How would it work in terms of having the meeting, making the decision, notifying the markets— what would the timeline look like as you are carrying that forward.  Because the memo didn’t really get into the mechanics of how you would actually implement this.  I was just curious if there is any thought given to that at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking questions and seeking clarification about the logistics of implementing certain measures.


Passage number 20.
 MS. MEADE.  I think that we were trying to be optimistic when writing the memo.  So we were thinking about the first couple of weeks or so as being briefings and not being about decisionmaking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a thought process and perspective.


Passage number 21.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let’s say they were about decisionmaking.  When will you know enough in the day to have a meeting, to have decided.  When would you have to announce it to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement. It simply introduces a hypothetical scenario and discusses the timing of decision-making and market announcements.


Passage number 22.
 MR. POTTER. We are still looking at when some of the volume is transacted and also scheduling, because not everyone is in the same time zone.  I think we believe that later in the afternoon will work.  And that will give us enough time to then announce to the market that evening what the changes would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is discussing the logistics of scheduling and timing for transactions and market announcements.


Passage number 23.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Okay" is a simple affirmation or acknowledgement and does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 24.
 MR. POTTER.  The other choice is to announce very early in the morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or suggestion without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 25.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess I would say that, if we agree on this, we should nail that down pretty soon, because, in principle, this could happen as early as June, and it would be helpful if people actually had the time blocked out on their calendar.  I think we need to figure out the time slot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests the need to establish a certain time frame for a future event and suggests that it would be helpful if people had it blocked out on their calendars.


Passage number 26.
 MR. POTTER.  We are working on it.CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions before we begin the round.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation is being carried out in a professional manner, and both Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen seem to be in agreement that they are working on something. President Lockhart is mentioned as a potential contributor to the discussion, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention among the individuals.


Passage number 27.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to clarify your proposed approach, any adjustment in the first two weeks of the overnight reverse repo rate would be an FOMC meeting. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  I know the memo used two weeks.  I am thinking there is an initial period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lockhart is seeking clarification from Chair Yellen about her proposed approach, and she confirms that any adjustment in the first two weeks would be discussed during an FOMC meeting.


Passage number 28.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Until things settle down, basically. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. When we are figuring things out, and if we have to make adjustments, we need to meet, we need to discuss it, and during that phase, until we decide further things are—let me just call them “routine”—there would be FOMC votes.  We would probably be having videoconference briefings that would be converted to meetings, and both groups would be voting. Only after whatever that initial period is when things have settled down would we agree that now we have fallen into a rhythm, and any adjustments, if they are needed at all—I mean, I think in the most likely case, we are not going to need any further adjustments—but if we do, those things will be routine, and then we are talking about delegating. Let’s see.  First, President Lacker, then President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a discussion about the process of decision-making and voting within the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 29.
 MR. LACKER. In this initial period, would you envision all meetings, or a mix of briefings and meetings. CHAIR YELLEN. My understanding is the idea is that we are going to preschedule these times. When we start the video meeting, we will have some sense of whether things are going smoothly, and we really don’t have decisions to make, in which case the staff could be relieved of the burden of doing transcripts and so forth.  I would call that a briefing.  But clearly, if things are not going very smoothly and we need to deliberate, we would convene that as a   meeting right from the outset.  And, I suppose, even in the middle, if something began as a briefing, and we decided in the middle of that briefing, “Look, we need to discuss something.” Is that fair to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is asking about the format of the meetings, suggesting a mix of briefings and meetings. Chair Yellen responds by saying that the meetings will be prescheduled and that if there are no decisions to make, it would be considered a briefing. However, if there are issues to deliberate on, it would be considered a meeting. The two have differing perspectives on the format of the meetings.


Passage number 30.
 MS. MEADE.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN. We could then say, “Look, let’s convert this now to a joint Board and FOMC meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Meade suggests a possible course of action, and Chair Yellen responds with a suggestion of her own.


Passage number 31.
” MR. LACKER. Okay.  I ask because it has been a while since this group gathered in a briefing format.  I think we did it back during the crisis.  There are some rules about not saying something that matters, or has substance, or— CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we can’t deliberate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a past briefing and discusses some rules about what can and cannot be said during the briefing.


Passage number 32.
 MR. LACKER.  That’s not quite— CHAIR YELLEN.  We can’t deliberate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Lacker makes a statement, and Chair Yellen responds by saying "We can't deliberate." While there may be a difference in opinion or understanding, there is no explicit disagreement or contention present in their interaction.


Passage number 33.
 MS. MEADE.  It is really a distinction, I believe, between asking questions and discussing among yourselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Meade, is simply stating her belief about a distinction between asking questions and discussing among themselves.


Passage number 34.
 MR. LACKER. If we have something to say, like “I think this means we should do X,” then we have to convert it to a meeting to say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 35.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, you could pose it as a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is suggesting a way to pose the question.


Passage number 36.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Like in Jeopardy.  You have to ask a question.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  I see Scott Alvarez is fretting back there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a lighthearted exchange between Mr. Rosengren and Chair Yellen, with laughter from the audience.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 37.
 MR. ALVAREZ.  A briefing is an interaction with the staff, and you can ask questions, and it is for the purpose of disseminating information.  If the Committee wanted to have a discussion in which they are deliberating about a decision, that would be a meeting itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement regarding the distinction between a briefing and a meeting. Mr. Alvarez argues that a briefing is solely for disseminating information, while suggesting that a meeting involves deliberation and decision-making.


Passage number 38.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No - There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 39.
   MR. ALVAREZ.  We could set it up so that it could start as a briefing and be converted into a meeting, if that seemed to be the direction the Committee wanted to go in.  We can, as the Chair says—I think the thought process is that we will have a pretty good idea before we set it up whether there is going to be a discussion, and we will just start from scratch as a meeting if that’s the case. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Alvarez and Chair Yellen are discussing a potential setup for a briefing/meeting and exploring possibilities without expressing disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 40.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a follow-up to Vice Chairman Dudley’s question.  For how many of the short-term credit markets is it important to know about the closing in Europe.  As we think about the timing of the meetings, are there a bunch of short-term instruments that would make it relevant to act in the morning, because of when Europe closes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking whether it is important to consider the closing in Europe when determining the timing of meetings, while Vice Chairman Dudley's question suggests a differing perspective.


Passage number 41.
 MS. LOGAN. For the repo markets, most of that is going to be U.S. activity, and that is going to be early in the morning.  For unsecured federal funds and Eurodollars, there is going to be some very active trading in the early morning hours from Europe.  We saw this during the crisis when there was a lot of volume done early, and then there is some late-day volume as well in the United States.  It is going to be a mix.  We are going to do more analysis on the full pattern of volume data in the unsecured markets before we recommend a time of 3:30 or 4:00 or 4:30 in the late afternoon.  But you can think of the unsecured markets as having two trading periods, and the repo as being mostly very early in the morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the trading patterns in different markets.


Passage number 42.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rosengren is expressing gratitude, and Chair Yellen is responding politely.


Passage number 43.
 MS. GEORGE.  I was looking for a clarification.  In the context, the memo offers that both the IOER or ON RRP rates might be subject to these technical adjustments if we delegate them.  When I go back and look at the normalization principles, as they are described, they talk   about IOER as being the primary mechanism by which we will move the funds rate into the target range. Let’s say we delegate on a technical adjustment basis the ON RRP rate.  That seems to take care of itself.  But by delegating some adjustment to the IOER rate, does that signal a change in policy stance in any way.  Or will it be understood that you are trying to move the spread in lockstep.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. GEORGE is seeking clarification and discussing the impact of delegating adjustments to the IOER rate on the policy stance.


Passage number 44.
 MR. POTTER.  I have gotten this question quite a few times in public.  I use an idea that Jamie came up with, which is that everything we are doing in terms of the mechanics of lifting rates comes from interest on excess reserves.  We are trying to keep the overnight RRP as small as possible, and that means it is just trying to get better trading in the arbitrage relationship in which you are getting interest on excess reserves. I view it as the primary way we are lifting rates.  But it is not really a measure of the stance of policy.  The stance of policy is the federal funds target range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their perspective on how they are lifting rates and clarifying that the federal funds target range is the measure of the stance of policy.


Passage number 45.
 MS. GEORGE.  Okay.  In the context of these basis points we have talked about, it would be understood these are technical moves, and that— CHAIR YELLEN.  The Committee has set the target range and decided to make small adjustments to keep the funds rate there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Ms. George and Chair Yellen are discussing the technical moves and adjustments made by the Committee.


Passage number 46.
 MS. GEORGE.  All right.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of gratitude and acknowledgement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 47.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  This is just a logistical question, Madam Chair.  Do I understand correctly that what you anticipate doing is, if we agree with the concept of having these prearranged briefings, that all of our calendars will need to be kept open for two weeks following each of the next I-don’t-know-how-many FOMC meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is seeking clarification on the requirement of keeping calendars open for two weeks following FOMC meetings, indicating a potential disagreement on this logistical matter.


Passage number 48.
   MS. MEADE.  I think we were thinking initially about the liftoff meeting.  Oh, well, yes, of course.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a conversation where the speaker simply agrees with what was previously said.


Passage number 49.
 MR. TARULLO.  Unless you know something I don’t know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply expressing a sense of curiosity and possibility.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 50.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You’d have to prepare for the earliest meeting you might liftoff for, right. CHAIR YELLEN.  I suppose—I mean, people will have some conflicts, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "people will have some conflicts, right" indicates that there may be differing opinions or conflicting situations related to scheduling or preparing for meetings.


Passage number 51.
 MR. TARULLO.  They have major ones. CHAIR YELLEN. We can’t for the next whatever meetings—I mean, we can try to block out those times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
  But some people will have trips presumably that they can’t—I suppose if somebody can’t participate— MR. TARULLO.  There are already a number of international meetings that several of us on the Board, I think, are going to have—and Vice Chairman Dudley will have conflicts with as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement or contention is suggested by the phrase "there are already a number of international meetings" and the mention of conflicts with Vice Chairman Dudley. This implies that some people on the Board have conflicting schedules that may prevent them from participating in certain trips or meetings.


Passage number 53.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s my point.  I’d prefer to get this nailed down sooner rather than later, so we can block out the time as efficiently as possible.  That would be my preference. CHAIR YELLEN. Maybe we can call in—I mean, we normally have videoconferences, but conceivably we can call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a preference for getting something done efficiently.


Passage number 54.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In the old days, we had telephone calls, right. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a rhetorical question and the response confirms it.


Passage number 55.
 Maybe we could have some telephone calls that people could take from— MR. POTTER.  As long as they were secure.  That would be the issue. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, we need to work this out for sure.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 56.
MS. BRAINARD. This is just from a communications point of view.  Would we communicate at the outset that the FOMC is going into the mode of daily briefings with the possibility that they could take intermeeting action.  Or would we simply be silent on that until such time as we found it necessary to take an action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a possible approach to communication.


Passage number 57.
 MS. MEADE.  The minutes of this discussion will reflect that you have discussed some of these issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. It states that the minutes will reflect that the issues have been discussed, without indicating any arguments or disagreements.


Passage number 58.
 MR. POTTER.  I take your question as, “Let’s be very careful,” and I agree we should be very, very careful.  Maybe we want to think hard about how this is described, because we don’t want everyone thinking every day the FOMC is meeting at 4:00 p.m., and we are waiting for this thing to come over the wires about what the rates are going to be the next day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement and a suggestion to think carefully about how a situation is described.


Passage number 59.
  That is probably not— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  This is contingency planning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states two separate statements: "That is probably not" and "This is contingency planning."


Passage number 60.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  This is a contingency plan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that something is a contingency plan.


Passage number 61.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. This is contingency planning for something that doesn’t work as well as we think it is going to work.  I think we want to present it in that manner. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the purpose and presentation approach for contingency planning.


Passage number 62.
 MR. EVANS. My question is in terms of contingencies—do you anticipate that we could do this by notation vote.  Possibly, if there was a conflict and you were traveling, you missed the videoconference and maybe a staff member was sitting in—they could give you a quick executive summary and then the notation vote could be done by a BlackBerry anywhere, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes a hypothetical scenario and asks a question about the possibility of using a notation vote in that situation. There is no apparent contention or disagreement.


Passage number 63.
 MR. POTTER. Again, we would have to look at the timing exactly and tell you what that window is, because the meeting could go quite long.  Then we would still have to put out the announcement or switch to 7:00 a.m. in the morning or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement language. It is describing a potential scenario and discussing the logistics of a meeting.


Passage number 64.
  MR. EVANS. You anticipate making an adjustment in the middle of the day—I mean, for the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 65.
 MR. POTTER.  No, no.  After the meeting, it is probably pretty good practice to announce the decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is suggesting the practice of announcing a decision after a meeting as a general idea without any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 66.
  I would feel more comfortable announcing quite soon after the conclusion of the meeting, rather than waiting, but— MR. EVANS.  That does put a premium on the turnaround.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their preference for announcing soon after the meeting rather than waiting, but the other person's response seems to be agreeing with that sentiment, as they mention a "premium on the turnaround."


Passage number 67.
 MR. POTTER. —you could have some time gap there and instead do it early in the morning.  To Governor Brainard’s question, there are a lot of complications—if this is the way you want to go—that we would need to describe to you, so you understood exactly which way you wanted to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is simply presenting a possible alternative to Governor Brainard's suggestion, and then stating that there may be complications that need to be discussed and clarified if that alternative choice is taken.


Passage number 68.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Presumably, Simon, you would want to announce this the day before, because the money market trading starts very early they need to have this information, so they can digest it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing a suggestion to Simon and explaining the rationale behind it.


Passage number 69.
 MR. POTTER.  We are actively checking so you have the full information to make that choice. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let’s begin the go-round.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, states that they are actively checking to provide full information, and Chair Yellen responds with "Okay" to indicate agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 70.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is only one word provided in the passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 71.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the first question, my answer is “Yes.” It’s as simple as that. On the second question, regarding approaches, I actually think you laid out the approach we should take really well in your comments just a moment ago.  We hope we won’t need to do any of this, but having a serious meeting to discuss what is causing the funds rate to trade outside the target range, understanding what the effects of moving the two different administered rates would be, and having FOMC/Board of Governors decisions seems like the right approach.  But once things have—I think “settled down” is the phrase you used—I think it  would be completely appropriate to delegate to you any further tweaks, plus or minus 10 basis points, say, to the two administered rates.  I fully support the approach that you laid out today.  I do view this as representing prudent contingency planning more than something that I would expect to happen.  I am still pretty confident that we won’t have problems keeping the federal funds rate within the range, but I think it is good planning. I do think that one of the issues that came up in the questions asked in the past minute or two is really important, and that is about the communications in connection with this.  One of the Committee’s long-standing principles is that, to the extent possible, policy decisions regarding monetary policy really should be separated from technical issues associated with the implementation of policy.  I’m thinking back to the good old days when the Desk had wide latitude to adjust the amount of reserves in the System in order to achieve the target federal funds rate.  I think it would be very useful, if we can—and this is going to be the challenge—frame the communications regarding these adjustments to the administered rates so that we indicate that these are just mostly technical decisions reflecting, of course, the decisions of the FOMC and the Board of Governors on the policy decisions, but really communicated as technical means to achieve the policy goals that we have agreed on.  We really want to avoid this perception that moving around these administered rates reflects some kind of shift in the stance of policy or creating some noise in connection with that.  I think we are doing prudent planning.  It is April now.  Thinking through these issues now makes a lot of sense. Again, I support the approach that you laid out.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a supportive response to the approach laid out by the Chair.


Passage number 72.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am in favor of delegating to the Chair certain tactical decisions that ensure that we attain the policy goals voted on by the FOMC.  Thisis consistent with the FOMC setting strategy but delegating tactical implementation of monetary policy.  However, determining the scope and timing of that delegation should wait until we have a better understanding of how the constellation of short-term interest rates will respond to our setting of IOER and overnight RRP rates at, and immediately following, liftoff.  I am still somewhat uncertain about how successfully we will be able to target the federal funds rate and other short-term rates at liftoff.  As a result, I could imagine a wide variety of adjustments that may be necessary following liftoff. While the federal funds rate and other short-term rates may be comfortably bounded by the IOER and overnight RRP rates, I can easily imagine situations in which that is not the case.  I can also imagine circumstances in which some market rates do not adjust as expected to changes in our policy rates. In addition, it is difficult to predict how variable policy or market rates will be at liftoff. My preferred approach, in light of my concerns, would be to have frequent briefings, initially following liftoff, along with the flexibility to turn those into joint FOMC‒Board meetings, if necessary.  Once the relationship of the funds rate and other market rates to our tools, as well as the variability of those rates, is better understood, we could agree on the appropriate delegation of tactical decisions to the Chair.  Predetermining our arrangements for delegation at this time serves little purpose, if they are quite likely to change after liftoff.  I recommend being humble about how much we know now about liftoff and plan appropriately to have significant consultation and adjustments as we develop a more practical understanding of the challenges of lifting interest rates from the zero lower bound. Similarly, it is probably premature to determine the normal relationship we expect for the primary credit rate.  The current spread of 50 basis points above the IOER rate seems an appropriate spread at liftoff. We can decide to alter the spread once it is clear where the federal funds rate and other short-term rates are likely to trade relative to our policy tools. In summary, I suggest a highly flexible policy that is highly consultative.  Once relationships are better understood after liftoff, we can discuss delegation of tactical decisions for achieving our goals.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement stated. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty and suggesting a cautious and flexible approach to making decisions regarding monetary policy.


Passage number 73.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable with a governance approach that involves prescheduled staff briefings for a period of time after liftoff and then, after the initial period when things appear to have settled down, delegating authority to the Chair to make small technical adjustments to the ON RRP and IOER rates between FOMC meetings. These technical adjustments would be for the purpose of keeping the funds rate from moving persistently outside the FOMC’s target range.  If the Committee agrees on the delegation governance structure, then this delegation of authority should be communicated at the time of liftoff. It is important that the Committee be aware of the developments in financial markets and the effectiveness of policy implementation after the liftoff announcement, and the briefings would be very useful in that regard.  Whether two weeks is the appropriate time for the initial period isn’t clear to me at this point.  If we opt to prearrange daily briefings for two weeks, we might also prearrange a weekly briefing for the remainder of the intermeeting period.  Of course, the briefings could be converted to meetings, if necessary. I do believe it is important that we demonstrate after liftoff that we have the tools to bring the federal funds rate into our target range.  That may necessitate making modest changes in the ON RRP rate or IOER rate in a nimble way.  Delegating the decisions for these technical changes to the Chair seems appropriate. I believe we should treat the IOER rate and the ON   RRP rate symmetrically with respect to delegation.  That is, if we delegate to the Chair, we should delegate the authority to make technical changes in both rates. Changes that are strategic policy decisions should remain under the purview of the full Committee.  These would include decisions to deploy the auxiliary policy tools, like term deposits and term RRPs, as well as making larger changes in the IOER and RRP rates and, of course, changes in the federal funds rate target.  Particularly if liftoff doesn’t go as planned and the funds rate is trading persistently outside its target range, the full Committee needs to be responsible for making those hard choices and helping to communicate them to the public.  The Chair shouldn’t have to go it alone. The Committee hasn’t had a full discussion of what constitutes successful liftoff.  This will help inform whether a technical adjustment is needed.  Let me offer the view that liftoff will be successful if the federal funds rate is within the target range on most, but not necessarily all, days.  In my view, successful liftoff does not require that the funds rate be at the midpoint of the range.  We plan to operate with a target range of 25 basis points because we don’t expect to have precise control over the funds rate.  Under those conditions, I don’t think we should require the funds rate to be close to the midpoint of the range. Communication of any technical adjustments is an issue.  We have indicated to the public that at liftoff we will continue to target a range for the funds rate that is 25 basis points wide and set the IOER and ON RRP rates at the upper and lower bounds of the funds rate target range, respectively. If we find that adjustments are necessary to keep the funds rate in the target range, we must depart from these plans in one way or another.  Presumably, this can better be handled if, at the time of liftoff, we acknowledge to the public that technical adjustments to the two rates might be necessary and that, as we proceed with liftoff and normalization, the Board of   Governors and FOMC have delegated authority to the Chair to make those adjustments, and also that any technical adjustments would not constitute a change in policy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 74.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable prescheduling the staff briefings during the first few weeks following liftoff.  They can be canceled if they are not needed—all is working smoothly, for example, and the federal funds rate is trading within its target range—or they could be converted to joint FOMC‒Board meetings if adjustments to the overnight RRP and IOER rates are needed to keep the federal funds rate in its target range.  Obviously, we have to retain some flexibility about how long this period lasts, depending on what our experience is. Turning to the governance approach beyond this initial period, I very much favor distinguishing between changes that are tactical, such as small shifts in the overnight RRP rate and the IOER rate to achieve the federal funds rate target selected by the Committee and changes in policy, which are shifts in the target federal funds rate—this goes to President George’s question. I think there is a long history that tactical changes needed to implement the monetary policy stance that has been selected by the Committee can and should be delegated either to the Chair or to the Desk.  If you consider how policy was implemented prior to the crisis, the Desk, in close consultation with Board staff, decided how much in reserves to add or drain each day in order to keep the federal funds rate close to its target.  For many years, presumably as a governance measure, there was also one FOMC member on the call, essentially to keep an eye on the proceedings.   The decision on the amount of intervention and the means of intervention was left during normal times to the staff, the New York Desk, and the Division of Monetary Affairs at the Board.  In unusual circumstances—for example, August 2007—the staff consulted closely with the Chair in making those reserve adjustment decisions.  The issue in my mind is whether changes in the overnight RRP and the IOER rates that are small and designed to keep the federal funds rate in its target range meet this tactical criteria, and I think they do. The changes contemplated would be to implement the monetary policy stance that had already been mandated by the Committee.  So this argues for delegation.  One could even argue for delegation to the Desk and the Division of Monetary Affairs staff, but I don’t see any reason to go this far.  I would favor delegating it to the Chair to make clear that it is receiving the attention it deserves by senior policymakers.  Also, delegation to the Chair might be more appropriate in this particular case, because such decisions are about the level of interest rates offered on our facilities rather than as in the past, on the amount of reserves we might add or drain. To implement this after the initial period, I would give the Chair the discretion to move the overnight RRP rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points, so a range of 20 basis points, and the IOER rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points as needed to keep the funds rate within its target range.  The adjustments could either be in tandem to maintain a constant spread, or the spread could be widened or narrowed subject to those criteria. In contrast to the delegation of modest IOER and overnight RRP rate changes to the Chair, I think any other changes—such as implementing the time deposit facility and things like that or changing the size of the cap on the overnight RRP facility—should be left to the full Committee. With respect to the overnight RRP cap, this is pretty consequential because it will   affect the composition of money market flows, and also it is unlikely that changes in the overnight RRP cap are going to be needed on a day-by-day basis. So having the Committee make these changes is not going to be particularly arduous; they will probably be made on a much more irregular basis, if at all.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an explanation and opinion from the speaker on the topic discussed.


Passage number 75.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My reaction to the questions posed is that they’re really matters of pragmatism.  I agree that planning for daily briefings with the option ofinvoking an FOMC meeting is sensible and workable.  I’m certainly fine with that. I’m also comfortable with the approach that you laid out, with the Committee and Board making the decisions the first two weeks, and then after that, the delegation of small adjustments. So I’m comfortable in both cases.  There are some details yet to be worked out, and under certain scenarios, we may have time to work them out.  We could hear a second version of this possibly down the road. I haven’t given a lot of thought to the discount rate question, but I’m glad that President Lacker raised it and talked about it a little bit. With regard to trying to figure out what that spread should be, I want to throw out one thought, and that is a recollection that during the crisis, the Federal Home Loan Banks became a sort of surrogate discount window.  And the relationship of our setting of the rates to their operations and their settings may be relevant for us to consider. Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement and comfort with the ideas and proposals mentioned.


Passage number 76.
 MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m entirely comfortable with the approach described by the staff and yourself to be used for informing the FOMC on the effectiveness of policy implementation during the initial period after liftoff.  I’m also entirely comfortable with the approach described as that to be used for delegating authority to the Chair on tactical matters once we have declared victory on a successful liftoff. As it concerns the spread between the IOER rate and the discount rate, I think it’s actually probably best to quiesce and minimize the variability at, and immediately after, liftoff. My preference would be to stay with the 50 basis point spread until we have some separation of these events.  I think the number of moving parts at the time of liftoff could work against us,  especially as we try to understand all of the different things that could be happening, and one more change, I think, that isn’t necessary might best be saved for later. I will add to the earlier discussion on the median and midpoint—a behavioral issue that I would just like the staff to consider to the extent that we talk about changing the definition of the federal funds rate.  I don’t know what the behavioral reaction to that would be.  It seems like when we whisper, people think we shout.  I just don’t know whether people would make more of that than is needed, again, at the time of liftoff.  I understand we’re not contemplating the definitional change then, but even announcing the plan of a change could have a behavioral effect.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their comfort with the described approach and provides their preference regarding the spread between the IOER rate and the discount rate. They also raise a behavioral issue that they would like the staff to consider, but there is no clear disagreement or contention in their statement.


Passage number 77.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First, with respect to the meetings and briefings, I guess I’m having trouble seeing what the utility of daily briefings for a couple of weeks would be in the circumstance that we think is likely to obtain, which is that there’s a reasonably successful liftoff. It seems to me more likely that we would want a briefing or a meeting on the Friday following liftoff.  Thereafter, I’m just not sure how much there will be to say unless things are going wrong, in which case, as everybody says, we’re going to actually need meetings and not just briefings.  But I just note that in passing.  I know this Committee can fill up virtually any meeting that is set with questions and conversation, but I’m just not sure how much there will be to say other than getting emails from Simon and Lorie telling us what has happened on day three. With respect to governance, like everybody, I think, who’s spoken on this point, I favor giving discretion to the Chair, but actually I think I would go further than the staff though.  Indeed, I’m going to disagree with the Chair in the interest of giving her more discretion than she  asked for.  I guess I don’t quite understand why we wouldn’t give her discretion for this kind of modest change in the IOER rate or the ON RRP rate or both, even in the immediate post-liftoff period.  It is new, but we have spent most of the past year talking about how important it is to have a smooth and credible liftoff.  And, notwithstanding my substantial uneasiness with the potential medium-term effects of a large ON RRP facility, I’ve joined the consensus that our dominant goal should be that smooth and credible liftoff, and presumably that smoothness and credibility are going to be most important in the immediate post-liftoff period, which is to say the first couple of days.  It seems to me that if we regard the adjustments as fine-tuning in pursuit of a particular federal funds target rate range, it would be useful to give her the discretion in that first couple of days to make such adjustments in an effort to get, as Loretta says, to at least the bottom of that range. If there’s a major problem with liftoff, we’re going to need another full FOMC meeting.  But suppose, for example, there’s a little bit of softness in the floor on the first day or two after the announced liftoff, and that softness might be firmed by a modest adjustment in the IOER rate. A quick action of that sort might actually buttress the credibility of our tools and intentions right from the outset and thereby make the whole process smoother.  I don’t think, in any case, it represents a policy change, because we can talk about it beforehand.  Now, it’s possible that markets might read such a quick adjustment as indicating that we lack confidence in the efficacy of the decision we had just made a day or two before.  But that’s a judgment that the Chair could make in consultation with those best able to discern what market sentiment and intentions may be. Just by indicating that nimbleness is a desideratum, I think I’ve already explained why an FOMC decisionmaking process won’t do the trick.  I just think the logic of what we’re talking about here argues for giving the Chair this kind of very limited discretion to adjust those two rates that we’ve been talking about and we will set at the time of liftoff in the period in which they might be most efficacious in changing or shaping perceptions of how this whole process is going to go. As to communication, it does seem to me proper to indicate in advance that small, operational adjustments might be made in the IOER and ON RRP rates between meetings. Characterizing those as operational adjustments beforehand and contemplating them, I think, helps reinforce the sense that these are technical changes rather than policy changes. The suggestion that any actual changes be noted by the Desk, as opposed to the Chair or the Committee as a whole, also seems to me a good idea since it would reinforce the fact that these rates are more or less operational changes rather than policy changes. On the primary credit rate spread, I thought President Lacker’s comments were very interesting.  Notwithstanding the fact that they are interesting and we should think about them, particularly this difference between small and large bank stigma when we do discuss this, I personally would prefer to wait until the staff thinking about stigma effects and perhaps other elements of the discount window are done and maybe a more fulsome memo has been produced and circulated so that we can have a discussion of that.  It seems to me we’ve got plenty on our plate right now, and we might usefully put that conversation off just a bit. I want to end by saying I hadn’t thought about it this way, but I fully endorse what Loretta said about the criteria for success in how we regard the meeting of the target range post-liftoff, and I think if we all subscribe to that, it would be useful for us, through appropriate mechanisms, to get that expectation out as well so that we’re being evaluated by commentators and markets in a manner consistent with what our actual intentions and aims are.  Like President   Mester, again, this is another reason why I think these little adjustments even right after liftoff are fine for the Chair to make.  And, like President Mester, I think using any of the other tools is something that should involve the entire Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Did I see a two-hander.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 78.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like Governor Tarullo, I came to the meeting prepared to support delegation in the first two weeks.  I interpreted your earlier suggestion as, one, respect for governance in a critical period and, two, maybe a desire to have more of a group decision than an individual decision.  Could you maybe speak more for another moment or two on what your thinking is regarding that. CHAIR YELLEN.  I feel that in the days after liftoff, if things are not going exactly as we intend, and the funds rate is drifting outside the range, I do really think it’s appropriate for the entire Committee to meet, discuss what is happening, try to get to the bottom of what the problem is, and decide on what the approach is. Now, we could make the decision that this is no big deal, the funds rate is just fluctuating around relative to the target range by more than we had anticipated and this is the “new normal.” If we wanted to address it not by moving the band or changing the spread, but by moving one or more rates around to deal with this when we see persistent movements outside the range, and early on the Committee says, “Let’s just do this. It’s not that big of a deal.  That’s the way to address this”—and at that point you regard those adjustments as essentially routine, and it’s early, and then you want to delegate it along the lines of what Governor Tarullo said, I am perfectly comfortable with that, and, of course, that makes life easier.  But I think the Committee needs to feel comfortable that we have established procedures that have been determined by the Committee that we think are workable and appropriate. First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 79.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the staff briefings issue, I say by all means they should be useful and perhaps important.  If it should turn out that between the regularly scheduled FOMC meetings the funds rate begins to trade frequently below the overnight reverse repo rate for a reasonably sized ON RRP facility, I support the Chair having limited discretionary authority to restore funds rate control by raising both the IOER and the ON RRP rates while maintaining the spread between the two rates.  I agree with Governor Tarullo that this could be within the first days as well. That these rate changes are not to be subject to a vote would signal that they are technical adjustments designed simply to implement previously-agreed-upon policy.  The main focus would stay on the target band for the federal funds rate set by the FOMC. The simplicity of a system in which the IOER and the ON RRP rates are set equal to the top and bottom of the target funds rate band, respectively, is appealing and easily communicated.  Deviations from that simple system should be temporary with reserve-draining tools, like term deposits and term RRPs, being brought to bear when systematically greater interest rate control is required. I understand that we are entering uncharted territory and may need to act nimbly.  Therefore, a good solution is for the FOMC and the Board to give the Chair discretionary authority to adjust the IOER–ON RRP band relative to the funds rate target range between meetings while maintaining the width of the band at 25 basis points.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for the Chair having discretionary authority to adjust certain rates in order to maintain control over the funds rate.


Passage number 80.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The staff has laid out a perfectly reasonable plan for prescheduled briefings during the first two weeks after liftoff.  I expect the process will go smoothly and these will end up like routine morning calls.  If problems arise, I am   comfortable with turning the briefings into formal teleconference meetings to handle any policy decisions we may have to make. After the initial burn-in period—perhaps two weeks—I also favor the Board and the Committee delegating authority to the Chair to adjust the IOER and ON RRP rates by up to 5 to 10 basis points, if necessary, to keep the funds rate within the target range.  I am comfortable delegating this authority as early as you’d like.  Even at the outset would be all right with me. Basically, these are efficient ways to tweak the dials as necessary, and I see a communications advantage to this approach, as it reduces the odds of small technical adjustments to the IOER or the ON RRP rates being misread as changes in the stance of policy.  I completely trust that if any major issues arise, the Chair will not hesitate to bring us in on the decisionmaking process. I did have a question.  I can’t remember if this was in the documents or other people have mentioned this, but at the time of the first liftoff, would we be comfortable preannouncing that we have no intention of adjusting the stance of monetary policy before the next policy meeting so that any intermeeting adjustments would be seen as nimble adjustments, just technically to get the funds rate in the range. I mean, I can’t imagine that we would really think that we are going to have to have a policy tightening in between the first and the second meeting.  But it would be unusual, I understand that. CHAIR YELLEN. Certainly, we should make clear that we have an intended target range that reflects policy and stand prepared to make adjustments in the administered rates, and that we may need to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen seem to be expressing agreement and support for the suggested plan and approach.


Passage number 81.
 MR. EVANS. You can say that in your press conference rather than it finding its way into the statement. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. President Kocherlakota is simply being suggested to include his statement in a press conference rather than it being included in the statement.


Passage number 82.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m not entirely comfortable with the pre-commitment approach that President Evans outlined.  As the Vice Chairman talked about in some of the remarks he made publicly in the intermeeting period, we don’t know exactly what is going to happen to financial market conditions necessarily at the time of liftoff.  If we saw a very abrupt tightening in broader financial market conditions, there might be a reason for the Committee to think about retracing the steps they have taken, even within the intermeeting period.  I thought it was an interesting idea, but I, myself, wouldn’t be comfortable with that.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a personal opinion and discomfort with a certain approach, but there is no direct contention or disagreement with another speaker or their ideas.


Passage number 83.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would be happy to set my calendar for prescheduled staff briefings during the first two weeks to offer some insight, and I would be equally happy to remove them [laughter] if the staff judges that everything is going smoothly and there is nothing to report.  I am also comfortable delegating to the Chair a degree of authority to make technical adjustments, and I think we will know whether those are technical or more substantive as we go along. On the issue of the discount rate spread, my comments here really are along the lines of President Lacker’s—I think this issue doesn’t have much effect right now on overall financial market conditions.  But we did make changes to the discount rate during the crisis to narrow the spread and then widened it to its current 50 basis points.  Smaller banks do regularly use this facility, and Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks are required to make recommendations about the rate. It seems worthwhile to me to clarify how this rate is going to work as we contemplate normalization so that we minimize confusion and perhaps even mixed signals at the time of liftoff. Thank you.   CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement among the speakers. Ms. George is providing her perspective and suggestions, but there is no direct disagreement expressed.


Passage number 84.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the thoughtful analysis and the memos that discuss the intermeeting governance of the IOER rate, ON RRP rate, and other policy tools during the early weeks of liftoff.  I thought that the approach described of scheduling daily staff briefings during those first few weeks is prudent and should meet our needs initially, given that we could convert them to official meetings as needed. One thing I would note is that it might not always be clear what it would mean to “settle down,” so if liftoff takes place, say, in mid-June or mid-September, things might settle down after the passage of quarter-end and then you might have this issue of whether that is really settling down from the point of view of being able to deal with quarter-end.  You might want to have staff briefings, again, scheduled for the end of the following quarter, which I guess, if we raised in September, would be at the end of December.  I think just the passage of time is not necessarily going to tell you that this is going to be working and working fine.  I think that is something to keep in mind as we go forward. The staff memo noted that there are quorum rules for the Committee.  Those might be useful in the context of these staff briefings.  Not everyone needs to be here for every meeting, and the Committee still can operate. That might come up in this situation.  I didn’t say this at the very beginning, but I should say that I am very confident that this is all about contingency planning.  I am confident the tools are going to work.  I think these meetings are going to become boring very quickly.  It is going to be like the call.  Not to say that’s boring, but— [laughter]—I misspoke.  But it will become routine, at least.  That’s our baseline scenario, but I do think it’s useful to engage in this contingency planning.I think I am going to be in the minority on my next point, which is, can we transition to a situation in which we simply delegate so-called technical decisions to the Chair. Here I am not supportive of that delegation, and my answer there is shaped by three considerations. First, when my staff and I thought about the context in which increases in the ON RRP rate would be considered, we weren’t sure that those situations would be that technical per se or tactical.  It seemed like those would be situations in which the effective federal funds rate would be below the bottom of the target range, and that seemed likely to occur in conjunction with the cap on the ON RRP volume being binding.  Then there would be some interaction, at least, in your discussion about raising the ON RRP rate, and also discussion about raising the cap.  Now, the cap is a big deal.  We have talked about that at length.  The Committee certainly has strong views about that.  It just immediately seemed to bring substantive issues into play. The second consideration is that, as I listen to people talk about analogies with the past, if we were talking about delegating to the staff, I would almost be more comfortable with that than delegating to the Chair.  [Laughter] I say that because I think if it is routine enough to be delegated to staff, we can delegate it to the staff.  This is clearly not routine enough to delegate to the staff.  This is about the Committee deciding that a decision, which is not sufficiently routine to delegate to the staff, is being delegated to the Chair instead.  That is not something I feel as comfortable with. Third, basically, there is an issue here of precedent.  This is not about this Chair.  I feel perfectly comfortable with you, Madam Chair, and your discretion in this matter.  But future Committees may not have that level of comfort with future Chairs in related situations.  Getting together for meetings is hard and challenging.  It is always easy to delegate, and I think we wantto fight that tendency, especially in view of how easy modern technology makes it to pull together a quorum of the Committee for substantive discussion and deliberations. For these reasons, Madam Chair, I recommend that the Committee not delegate authority for intermeeting adjustments to the Chair.  Again, this is all about contingency planning, but I think the Committee could make contingency plans to vote, as needed, between scheduled meetings, be it by telephone, videoconference, telepresence, secure lines—all of the other suggestions that are out there. A quick comment on the primary credit spread.  I thought the idea of doing more research and work on this was a very interesting one.  At liftoff, especially if we are going to be doing liftoff in the near term, the June–September time frame, I would favor keeping the 50 basis point primary credit spread at that time, then continuing to do work on the issue before we decide.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses his perspective and reasoning regarding the delegation of authority for intermeeting adjustments to the Chair.


Passage number 85.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 86.
 WILLIAMS.  I just want to mention that there has been some loose talk about comparing the timing of these briefings to the morning call, and I am not in favor of tying them to the morning call.  Let me be clear on that. CHAIR YELLEN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 87.
 Notice when I was faced with that, I devised a way to end the requirement that— MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a personal fact about the narrator's actions.


Passage number 88.
 WILLIAMS.  I call that leadership by— CHAIR YELLEN. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Chair Yellen is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 89.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  So it can be done.  That’s what you’re saying. CHAIR YELLEN.  It can be done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It consists of a statement and a response that agree with each other.


Passage number 90.
  It only took 50 years, but— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It can be done.  CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 91.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m comfortable with the governance approach in the first two weeks of scheduling daily staff briefings, but I assume that we’ll quickly work out whether we need them every day and we can probably unschedule a few of them within a day or two.  So I think there’s some flexibility there.   With regard to the governance approach for technical adjustments in the IOER or ON RRP rates, I don’t know about previous Chairmen.  I’ve only had one Chair in my life on the Board, and my experience with that Chair is that if there is going to be any question about a need for discussion, she will call for it.  I haven’t detected her trying to get around the FOMC or the Board, and I think we can rely on that.  So I’d be perfectly willing to give the Chair an adjustment up to 10 basis points.  I agree that we need to specify that the discretion would be granted between meetings. I’m not sure about the wisdom of constraining the gap between the ON RRP and IOER rates to 25 basis points. We may find reasons why we need to move one without moving the other, and my general approach is, don’t constrain yourself if there’s no need to constrain yourself, because the law of unintended consequences is very powerful. On the primary credit rate, I agree with those who think we should try to minimize the number of adjustments we make at the time of liftoff, and that this issue is sufficiently important for banks to which we give a lot more attention than their size would imply.  I’m not sure why we would want to start by raising the cost of borrowing by 50 basis points for the smaller banks who do borrow at that rate, and we’d need to look at what would happen when we raise the rate.  And so, for both reasons, I favor examining that after liftoff. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 92.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m very well aligned with the Chair’s original comments and additional comments and response to Governor Tarullo’s and President Lockhart’s points, and with many others around the table as well. As for the briefings, I think it is fine to schedule them, and if we have them I’ll attend them, but I think the only case in which we would actually want to have them is if things are   really not going well.  And I don’t expect that that is likely at all in a world in which we have taken the cap off the overnight RRP or, for that matter, put a very high cap on. As far as delegation is concerned, if the test is adjustments that are routine or technical in nature, I completely trust the Chair’s instincts on that. I will say that if what we’re dealing with is a very difficult and failed liftoff situation, I don’t think, in real time, that’s going to feel either routine or technical.  I think it’s going to feel like something that all of us ought to be involved in and accountable for.  I also would not constrain ourselves by holding this space between the IOER and the ON RRP rates at 25 basis points.  It might make sense to do something different, again, in real time. So, for all of that, I think it’s essentially impossible to anticipate all of these things, and I would just say that I will do what is reasonable at the time. In terms of the primary credit facility, it is an interesting subject on which we can have a lot of debate.  I wouldn’t touch it until well after liftoff. In my view, it’s just not a complication that we, in my view, need to be taking on right now.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Powell, expresses agreement with the Chair's comments and other participants around the table. He also shares his views on issues such as briefings, delegation, and the primary credit facility, but there is no evident disagreement or contention with other participants.


Passage number 93.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the proposal. I think it’s very important for us as Committee members to take responsibility for actively being engaged in assessing the effectiveness of monetary control and the relative roles of the IOER and the ON RRP rates in maintaining the federal funds rate in the target range for some initial period.  The length of that period, I think, should be determined by events.  My guess is that if the decision to lift off is made coincident with a meeting with a press conference, as seems very likely, I would expect that period of active involvement to span that quarter-end, but beyond that, I think it would be unwise to be too prescriptive at this point. When market functioning has settled down, it will be appropriate to delegate to the Chair the authority to make the necessary changes to the levels of the IOER and the ON RRP rates, or possibly to the spread between them, in order to maintain effective monetary control.  I think the Committee can make that decision once it judges that the frequent briefings and meetings no long serve their purpose, along with the parameters of the delegation.  It’s very important that we carefully manage communications regarding the heightened vigilance and possible activity of the Committee and the Board during those initial weeks so that our communications bolster confidence in the normalization process and contribute to smooth market functioning. With regard to the appropriate level of the primary credit spread, I would be open to a recommendation from the staff as to returning it to pre-crisis levels.  But like many others around the table, I would want to put some distance between the timing of liftoff and the timing of possibly changing that spread so as not to further complicate our already challenging communications around the time of liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  I think this has been a very useful discussion.  Let me say the Board meeting is now adjourned.  We’re ready to go on to item 3, and I suggest we have the economic briefings and then we’ll take a coffee break before going into our round.  Let me turn things over to Bill Wascher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for the proposal and offers their thoughts on the appropriate timing and management of the monetary control measures.


Passage number 94.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m looking at exhibit 2, “Alternative Scenario:  Stronger Dollar.”  What are the confidence bounds around these dotted lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 95.
 MR. KAMIN. Well, the simulations come from a DSGE model, but it’s not an estimated model.  So we don’t compute those, although I assure you that an estimated version of SIGMA that would allow us to compute those is on our long-term work agenda. The most tenuous thing is whether or not you will actually get a 10 percent additional rise in the dollar.  As you can tell from the chart, that’s not a common occurrence.  That’s something that, broadly speaking, we think there might be a 1 in 10 chance of for a couple of years.  So that, in some sense, is the most tenuous. In terms of thinking about the effects on net exports and then on U.S. real GDP, that’s actually a little bit more straightforward in the sense that the results from SIGMA—particularly for what I’m showing here, which is the net export contribution—are broadly consistent with our estimated trade models, and those don’t give you very different results.  So the effect of a higher dollar on exports and on imports is relatively straightforward, and obviously there are errors, but they’re probably not subject to huge errors. A larger area of uncertainty comes in when translating the effect of the change in net exports into GDP, because there is some uncertainty there about the multipliers.  And there’salso some uncertainty about to what extent you want to build in a monetary policy response and what impact that has.  So, for the net export contribution itself, I would guess that, relatively speaking, is not a huge confidence error.  The confidence errors would rise as you then translate that through to real GDP growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The author mentions that the simulations come from a DSGE model that is not estimated, and that there is uncertainty about the possibility of a 10 percent additional rise in the dollar. Additionally, there is uncertainty about the multipliers and the impact of monetary policy on the translation of net export contribution to GDP growth. These uncertainties indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 96.
 MR. BULLARD.   Let me follow up with a slightly different question.  Over the past 25 years, firms have become more globalized and have learned how to handle global currency fluctuations.  They adopt hedging strategies, and they put production in various countries and switch production in response to currency movements.  In light of those changes, should we be estimating effects of real exchange rate movements using data for the 1980s and 1990s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and asks a question for further discussion.


Passage number 97.
 MR. KAMIN. Well, that’s an excellent question.  Let’s just say we periodically do revise our import equations, and we do look for signs of parameter instability.  So we’re alert to that issue, and we haven’t found any strong evidence of these changes in coefficients. There are other factors that, of course, are naturally parsed in.  They kind of correlate with what you mentioned, which is that, over time, the share of trade in the U.S. economy has grown, and that is fully taken into account in our estimations because our models do incorporate the fact that, as the dollar changes exports and imports, those have a larger effect on GDP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining how they revise their import equations and look for signs of parameter instability. They also mention that the share of trade in the U.S. economy has grown and that it is fully taken into account in their estimations. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 98.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.  Any other questions.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a conversation between two individuals.


Passage number 99.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I have a question for Bill Wascher related to the Tealbook inflation outlook.  I think in your presentation you mentioned that the inflation outlook is trending up because—I think you said—energy prices are going to be going up, resource slack will be diminishing, and maybe imported goods prices—I can’t recall the entire list. Could yourefresh my memory on the contribution of changes in longer-term inflation expectations for delivering that increase in inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a request for clarification and additional information.


Passage number 100.
 MR. WASCHER.  So, over the medium-term forecast, our view is that the underlying rate of inflation is 1.8 percent, and that serves as an attractor for the inflation rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating their own view and providing their forecast for the underlying rate of inflation.


Passage number 101.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage associated with "MR. EVANS."


Passage number 102.
  Inflation expectations, is that— MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  We call it underlying inflation, but in some sense you may think of it as inflation expectations over the medium term. Over the longer run, that drifts up to 2 percent because the FOMC says the target is 2 percent, and because tightness in the labor market is pushing inflation up.  So it does serve as an attractor, as one reason inflation moves back up toward 1.8 percent in the medium term and toward 2 percent in the longer run.  But, in addition, these other factors are important in getting there over the medium term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 103.
 MR. EVANS.  All right. That’s helpful.  That is different from the way I was remembering it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the information provided is helpful and admits that it differs from their own recollection.


Passage number 104.
  I thought that underlying inflation was pegged to your assessment of longer-term inflation expectations, and that they were still about 1¾ percent, but you’ve got a— MR. WASCHER.  That’s right. I think that’s right.  But maybe I’m not quite getting your question.  Over the longer run, we have those inflation expectations drifting up from 1¾ percent to 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply clarifies that they agree with the statement being made about inflation expectations drifting up.


Passage number 105.
 MR. EVANS.Right.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans expresses his gratitude, and Chair Yellen acknowledges him.


Passage number 106.
 MS. MESTER.  Yes, I want to compliment the staff on the new charts on uncertainty.  I think they are very helpful in thinking about the uncertainty associated with the forecast. Now, going on from what President Evans was asking, maybe, the PCE inflation in Tealbook A, page 69—if I look at that, it looks, from the way the errors look on that forecast, like the staff has been  underestimating PCE inflation.  Should I interpret this as being that we have upside risk to the staff’s inflation forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. Mester is simply asking for clarification and interpretation of the staff's inflation forecast.


Passage number 107.
 MR. WASCHER. Which chart are you looking at.  The top one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wascher is simply asking a question to clarify which chart the other person is referring to.


Passage number 108.
 MS. MESTER.  I’m looking at PCE inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is looking at PCE inflation.


Passage number 109.
 MR. WASCHER.  That’s largely because of the energy price run-up in the mid-2000s.  I think we didn’t project that, and I think that’s why the solid line, the median, is above the data there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the reason for the solid line (median) being above the data.


Passage number 110.
 MS. MESTER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 111.
  But even the distribution looks like— MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  Again, I think that’s because of the energy price shock.  This is a relatively short sample with which we calculate standard errors around for PCE inflation, for two reasons.  One is, we don’t have data going back a long way, and two is, we think that this is a period over which inflation had different properties—it was more stable recently than in previous periods.  So, because of that, I think the influence of energy prices is more prominent here than it might be in the longer run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation for why the distribution looks a certain way and is clarifying that it is due to the energy price shock and the relatively short sample used to calculate standard errors.


Passage number 112.
 MR. ENGEN.  If I could add just one thing that amplifies that point, if you look in the middle right at core PCE, the median and the projected paths are virtually on top of each other, which is another way of showing that the total is being influenced by the run-up in energy prices and how it feeds into total inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply adding additional information to amplify a point being made about the influence of energy prices on total inflation.


Passage number 113.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 114.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to follow up on President Evans’s line of questioning.  During the intermeeting period, President Rosengren suggested the possibility of raising the inflation target. If the FOMC were to introduce a new inflation target that was higher, would that have a higher gravitational pull in the staff’s model that we’d be pulled back to that higher target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question and clarification regarding the potential impact of raising the inflation target.


Passage number 115.
 MR. WASCHER.  In terms of modeling and the way we do it in the FRB/US model, I think the answer is “yes,” because we do have a small term that reflects the FOMC’s stated target relative to current underlying inflation.  I think it would be gradual, but I think in the FRB/US model, it would be a stronger attractor than a 2 percent target. Also, if I used the Taylor rule, I think it would imply a much easier policy as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing the modeling and implications of the FRB/US model and the potential impact on policy. There is no direct contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 116.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s true, a different reaction function.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break for 15 minutes to get some coffee. When we return, we have a few people who would like to comment on financial stability, and then we’ll go to the economic round. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  We now have an opportunity for people to comment on financial stability, and three people have indicated they would like to.  President Rosengren, do you want to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple conversation about taking a coffee break and then discussing financial stability.


Passage number 117.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair. When I talk to asset managers in Boston, the biggest concern raised is the problem of liquidity in the secondary market for corporate bonds.  They worry that when we begin to raise rates, a rush to sell positions in corporate bonds will occur, and a crowded exit with few buyers could lead to a rapid increase in the yield on corporate bonds.  At least some elements of this concern probably deserve greater attention. First, the average size of trades in corporate bonds has fallen significantly relative to the average size of trades prior to the financial crisis.  This may reflect an actual or perceived  difficulty in transacting large trades due to weakened liquidity in the market.  This raises the concern that if a significant portfolio rebalancing were to occur, it may be difficult to sell large positions in a timely manner. Second, there has been a significant decline in the corporate bond holdings of broker-dealers.  According to the SEC’s FOCUS reports, while J.P. Morgan held $29.5 billion in corporate securities in 2007, those holdings had plummeted to only $11.3 billion by the end of 2014. Similarly, Credit Suisse held $30 billion in corporate securities in 2007, and their holdings collapsed to only $4.4 billion by the end of 2014.  Such sizable declines in corporate securities holdings among these key liquidity providers lends some credence to the concern about potential liquidity problems in this market. Third, bond mutual funds—which were shown in the earlier charts on financial stability—and bond exchange-traded funds have grown significantly since the financial crisis.  The exchange-traded funds pose a particular problem if investors view them as highly liquid.  At the end of 2008, assets under management at exchange-traded bond funds totaled $57 billion.  By the end of February this year, assets under management at exchange-traded bond funds had soared to $320 billion.  If investors assume that the corporate bond market is liquid and, more specifically, that their exchange-traded fund shares will always be liquid, and if they choose to sell as we tighten, they may be surprised at the price at which they transact. In summary, the concerns with corporate bond market liquidity as we approach liftoff bear watching.  The degree of movement out of bonds is likely to be highly sensitive to the projected pace of tightening as well as to the timing of tightening.  An oversized reaction in this market could result in a bumpy exit from the zero lower bound.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents concerns about liquidity in the secondary market for corporate bonds and provides evidence to support these concerns.


Passage number 118.
  MR. TARULLO.  May I ask Eric a question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo is simply asking to ask Eric a question, and Chair Yellen gives permission.


Passage number 119.
 MR. TARULLO.  Eric, can you take it a step further and say what the implications of your concerns are for policy. Is it for monetary policy.  Are you advocating a relaxation of capital requirements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person asking the question is seeking further information and clarification on the implications of the concerns raised. They want to know if the concerns have any policy implications, specifically related to monetary policy and capital requirements.


Passage number 120.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  No, I am not advocating a relaxation of capital requirements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker clearly states that they are not advocating for a relaxation of capital requirements, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 121.
   MR. TARULLO.  I didn’t think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or information that would suggest any kind of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Tarullo without any conflicting opinions or arguments present.


Passage number 122.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I think it highlights that how we communicate around the time of liftoff actually is critically important for whether people decide that this is something they need to do—to rebalance their portfolios quite quickly.  I think the way that financial stability interacts with monetary policy is, it highlights that the communication issues become pretty important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and emphasizing the importance of effective communication in relation to portfolio rebalancing and the interaction between financial stability and monetary policy.


Passage number 123.
 MR. TARULLO.  That’s helpful.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows no signs of contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo expresses gratitude for the information given.


Passage number 124.
 MR. LACKER.  Also, if it happens, we can say we talked about it. CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no explicit disagreement or contention in this passage. The conversation seems to be a casual exchange where they are agreeing on discussing a particular topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the staff for the excellent assessment of financial stability.  It’s my reading that the assessment again indicates that current policy has not produced any material signs of financial instability.  Indeed, it appears that the main financial-instability consideration for monetary policy at the moment is that a near-term increase in the target range for the federal funds rate could lead to financial instability.  As the report says, “Term premiums in benchmark U.S. and other advanced economy bond yields are again near historical lows reached before the taper tantrum, raising the risk of similarly outsized market reactions at liftoff.”   The staff also identified a vulnerability that could propagate this shock from the increase in rates.  Specifically, page 4 of the assessment notes that changes in the structure of the Treasury market could amplify the effects of an initial rate move and lead to sudden swings in prices and liquidity. Now, how can we best mitigate this risk.  President Rosengren, I think, highlighted one way to think about this, which is through communication, but I have a slightly different perspective on the answer to this question.  To answer this question, I think we have to understand why long-term rates might rise dramatically in response to a small increase in short-term rates. And here I believe that a key consideration is the policy signal associated with such a move in the near term.  Raising the federal funds rate in the near term would mean they’re initiating liftoff when inflation is far below target and the growth outlook has been weakening.  Liftoff in such an environment would indicate that the FOMC is considerably less willing to provide accommodation to respond to adverse shocks than financial market participants currently anticipate. As a result, they would expect less accommodation in general but especially so in bad times, and this expectation of higher interest rates and lower bond prices in bad times translates directly into higher term premiums. Now, it’s tempting to conclude that we can somehow mitigate this potential financial instability only through reassuring verbal communication at the time of liftoff, but I think it’s difficult for words to trump the communication content of our actions.  So, in my view, we can best mitigate this financial stability risk by ensuring that our actions are always clearly connected to our pursued, declared objectives. In the current context, that would mean deferring liftoff until the economic data clearly indicate that raising interest rates is necessary for the FOMC to achieve its declared objectives of 2 percent inflation and maximum employment over the  medium term. I’ll say more about what this conclusion means for our policy deliberations tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota believes that raising the federal funds rate in the near term could lead to financial instability, while President Rosengren suggests that communication can help mitigate this risk. Mr. Kocherlakota, however, argues that it is difficult for words to trump the communication content of actions and believes that deferring liftoff until economic data clearly indicate the need for interest rate hikes is the best way to mitigate financial stability risks.


Passage number 126.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 127.
 WILLIAMS.  I’m going to pick up on the same topic that President Rosengren introduced and President Kocherlakota discussed.  However, I will not be expressing my views on monetary policy at this time.  [Laughter] I think Governor Tarullo asked a great question:  What do you do with this information. I’m going to go a slightly different direction based on something Josh said, which I found very interesting. I was struck by two sentences on page 17 of the QS report.  They are right after each other.  One is that large banks’ liquidity ratios continue to improve.  The next sentence is basically that there is less liquidity in markets.  These two sentences are right next to each other, and immediately, when I read this, I said, “What’s the connection here.  To what extent is the liquidity requirements or the capital requirements, for that matter, affecting the willingness of broker-dealers to basically make markets and provide market liquidity, especially in a stressed environment.”  But it also led me to what Josh pointed out, which is that this is apparently a longer-term research project about market liquidity and understanding what’s happening there, and how much amplification we may see, whether it’s in corporate bond or Treasury bond markets, in response to shocks. My comment is that I think this is a really important subject not just for thinking about our policy decisions or policy communication, but more generally, to understand what’s happening in those markets and understand to what extent it is changes in regulation, changes in technology, or other things.  Really, my comment is wanting to see more on that sooner, because I think this is a key issue, as others have mentioned.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Does anyone else want to comment.  [No response]  Seeing no hands, let us begin the economic go-round with President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing interest in a certain topic and agreeing with a previous comment made by another person.


Passage number 128.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would like to ask President Rosengren a question.  You are implying that the only margin for adjustment is on the inflation target rate.  Presumably there is another margin for adjustment, taking a lot of steps to make a future financial crisis of the type that we experienced in 2007, 2008, and 2009 less likely, right.  Because you could argue that one reason why we are in this position is because we had a really, really bad financial crisis.  So, in principle, one could take steps to make the probability of a financial crisis lower, and that would presumably lessen the need to change the inflation target.  How do you think about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question that seeks the opinion of President Rosengren and explores the possibility of reducing the probability of a future financial crisis as an alternative to changing the inflation target rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 129.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  If you think you can significantly change the probability or amplitude of those shocks, then you are right.  But the equilibrium federal funds rate has come down quite a bit.  Our own internal estimates of what that implies for how frequently we will hit the zero lower bound are that it is substantially higher given that most of the time the equilibrium federal funds rate that many of those models were estimated on was 4½ percent.  We are now at 3½ percent—I actually think you could make an argument that it is lower than 3½ percent.  So if you have an equilibrium federal funds rate that is lower, the implication is that you hit the zero lower bound more frequently unless you think you can dramatically alter either the frequency or severity of having the kind of shocks that we experienced. CHAIR YELLEN.  Isn’t it the case that some of the steps we would take to reduce the odds of a financial crisis—strengthening capital and liquidity—may actually, by raising the cost of intermediation, lower the equilibrium real rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speakers, Mr. Rosengren and Chair Yellen, have different views on the equilibrium federal funds rate and its implications for hitting the zero lower bound. Mr. Rosengren argues that the equilibrium federal funds rate has come down and therefore hitting the zero lower bound is more likely, while Chair Yellen suggests that steps to reduce the odds of a financial crisis may actually lower the equilibrium real rate.


Passage number 130.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I think that’s right.  But my point is just that the room you need depends on the size of the shocks that you are dealing with.  And if you do other things and reduce the size of shocks, that also should be a factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the previous statement and further expands on the idea by adding their own perspective.


Passage number 131.
  I don’t really disagree with a lot of the points that you made, but it seems to me that that’s not the only potential margin— MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I’d just raise one other countervailing argument that, certainly, the experience around October 15 of the very sharp movement in financial markets at a time when no real economic news was occurring makes me wonder—I am not convinced yet that all of the actions we have taken have necessarily, dramatically changed the probability or likely severity of shocks in the future from what we experienced before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 132.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. In that shock, though, implications for the real economy were trivial.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the implications for the real economy were trivial in that shock.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 133.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  In that case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "In that case" suggests that there is a disagreement or difference in opinion that is being discussed.


Passage number 134.
 MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair.CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the names and titles of two individuals.


Passage number 135.
 MR. BULLARD.  I appreciate your bringing this up, President Rosengren.  Just one comment about your rhetoric on this.  Missing the inflation target over six years—if you look at headline inflation year over year, it was above target in 2011 and 2012, and it came back down.  I know you like to think in terms of core inflation, but I think this is an issue for that piece of the puzzle.  When you evaluate the Committee over that kind of a time frame, I think you have got to look at headline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is offering a comment about President Rosengren's rhetoric but does not challenge or dispute it. They are discussing different aspects of inflation measurement but there is no argument or disagreement being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I would say that hitting an inflation target temporarily because of an oil price shock is a Pyrrhic victory.  You care more about the underlying rate of inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker believes that hitting an inflation target temporarily due to an oil price shock is not a true victory, suggesting that they prioritize the underlying rate of inflation instead.


Passage number 137.
 MR. BULLARD.  These are the prices people pay. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  No doubt we will return to this.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 138.
 MR. LOCKHART. Moving right along.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the intermeeting cycle, my staff conducted 56 interviews separate from our board meetings. We focused the interviews on any indications in their businesses that would confirm the weakness indicated by first-quarter data and, more to the point, suggest that first-quarter weakness might persist. We found that overall business sentiment remains quite positive, somewhat at odds with our reading of the incoming data.  On balance, our contacts and directors portrayed demand as continuing to improve at a steady pace.  We noted, however, that compared with the previous cycle, their optimism is accompanied by a hint of caution.  We heard more reports of negative effects of the dollar.  Exporters, port operators, and firms with significant foreign operations all noted market or other challenges that they attributed to the dollar. As expected, we heard reports of investment pullback and layoffs in oil and gas exploration and production firms as well as in oil services companies.  That drag is being partially offset by greater investment activity in business sectors benefiting from low energy prices. We also continued to hear reports that firms are trying to hold on to margin improvement coming from fuel and other commodity cost declines. Declines in gasoline prices have yet to translate into a meaningful boost in consumer spending.  A director with knowledge of consumer markets commented that product categories that historically have been leading indicators of stronger consumer activity—to wit, apparel, eating outside the home, and movies—have not yet signaled an upturn. We received positive reports on real estate investment activity, both commercial and residential. Architects and contractors indicated improved pipelines.  Our banking contacts report that new mortgage and investment activity is strong. Regarding employment, we heard continued concern about turnover and retention.  At the same time, we detected little change in reports this round regarding wage inflation.  On that subject, although most data indicate that the trend in nominal wage growth remains flat, a measure constructed by my staff from the Current Population Survey does show an acceleration in year-over-year wage growth in the first quarter.  Wage growth increased to a 3 percent pace in the first quarter, up from 2.8 percent in the fourth quarter and up from 2.4 percent a year earlier. Continuing on employment, I’ll mention something we heard for the first time from three large employers in quite different businesses.  All said they have begun shifting their work forces away from part time toward full time.  They all cited the high managerial and logistical cost and quality challenges of a large, part-time workforce. We’ve been struggling to reconcile these generally positive anecdotal reports with the hard data on the first quarter and early indications of second-quarter performance.  Our tracking estimate of first-quarter GDP growth is just marginally above zero, at the low end of the spectrum presented in the Tealbook. Our tracking model is a straight statistical model with no judgmental overrides.  We would not claim it’s the most accurate read of the first quarter, but it’s what the raw data are telling us, and we’ll have an official reading soon enough—tomorrow morning.  At this point, I’m holding to the view that weather and other factors played a significant role in first-quarter weakness, and that significant payback can be anticipated in the current quarter. We also observed—and this is nothing more than an observation—that weak first-quarter growth has been a pattern during the recovery, normally giving way to a stronger rest of the year. We’ve made a small adjustment to our full-year GDP growth forecast to reflect a weaker first quarter, but otherwise we have kept our forecast for growth and inflation unchanged from the March meeting.  We made no material change to our outlook.  We have growth resuming a run rate between 2½ and 3 percent, with second-quarter growth above 3 percent. A strengthening of consumer activity from the first quarter is a key factor in our outlook.   We currently judge the risk to our growth and inflation outlooks as tilted to the downside.  With the greater uncertainty I perceive at this juncture, the Tealbook alternative scenario titled “Persistent Slowdown in Economic Activity” captures my concern that my outlook may be overly optimistic.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, presents anecdotal reports from businesses that suggest overall business sentiment remains positive and that demand is improving at a steady pace. However, he states that this sentiment is "somewhat at odds" with their reading of the incoming data, which indicates weakness in the first quarter. This suggests a disagreement or conflict between the anecdotal reports and the hard data.


Passage number 139.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not provided, making it impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 140.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I ask an information question. The research that you mentioned is very interesting, but I am not sure I followed the details.  The inflation compensation measures were one- to two-year horizon expectations—and you also had survey measures of inflation expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for clarification on a topic.


Passage number 141.
   MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 142.
 WILLIAMS.  The horse race was basically this:  We aligned the inflation swap rate one year ahead with the swaps of months 13 to 24 ahead—one year ahead with one year ahead.  And then we looked at the Survey of Professional Forecasters and Blue Chip for each year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is discussing a horse race, which is not related to the alignment of inflation swap rates and professional forecasters. The discrepancy between the subject matter indicates a contention or disagreement.


Passage number 143.
 MR. EVANS.  At the same horizons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only contains a statement by Mr. Evans.


Passage number 144.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The abbreviation "MR" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 145.
 WILLIAMS.  Same horizons.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the sentence "Same horizons." It is a brief statement that does not express any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 146.
 MR. EVANS.  I see, and those were helpful. Because, if I understand some of the Board work, they use these long-term inflation expectations for their modeling because, as attractive as it is theoretically to use a short-term expectation, nobody can find a good measure of short-term inflation expectations.  Isn’t that right, Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It presents a statement and a question seeking affirmation or confirmation of that statement.


Passage number 147.
 MR. WASCHER. We use the longer-term inflation expectations in our models.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 148.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it is not clear what "MR" stands for.


Passage number 149.
 WILLIAMS. Yes, but the question I’m asking is:  What do you think inflation is going to be over the next four quarters. The SPF is actually a very good forecast.  This is roughly as good as the Tealbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a clarification or continuation of a previous statement.


Passage number 150.
  It’s asking what inflation is going to be over the next— MR. EVANS.  Well, but the Tealbook won’t use any short-term inflation measures, that’s my understanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans simply clarifies that the Tealbook won't use short-term inflation measures.


Passage number 151.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is because the passage is not providing any information or stating any opinion. It merely contains the initials "MR," which do not indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 152.
 WILLIAMS.  No, no, no.  I’m just looking at the forecast itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There doesn't seem to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are examining the forecast.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
 MR. EVANS.  Oh, yes, but those forecasts are lousy.  They might be better than the other ones, but they’re all lousy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses his disagreement by stating that the forecasts are lousy. He acknowledges that the mentioned forecasts might be better than others, but still views them as overall lousy.


Passage number 154.
  MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 155.
 WILLIAMS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the complete passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 156.
 Well, I think the research says that the Tealbook is maybe a little bit better than the SPF and Blue Chip over the next year or two— MR. WASCHER. Just in terms of forecasting. There’s probably not much difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their opinion regarding the research findings, suggesting that the Tealbook is slightly better in terms of forecasting compared to the SPF and Blue Chip.


Passage number 157.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as "MR" does not provide enough information to determine if there is any disagreement.


Passage number 158.
 WILLIAMS.  So it’s basically the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Williams, is making a statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 159.
MR. EVANS.  The Tealbook does something which is not in line with theory, to use long-term inflation expectations for a one-year-ahead inflation because, well, it kind of works, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement about the Tealbook and its use of long-term inflation expectations for a one-year-ahead inflation. There is no indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 160.
 MR. WASCHER.  Yes, we view the anchoring of inflation expectations as best approximated by long-term survey measures of inflation expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of agreement. It states that they view the anchoring of inflation expectations as best approximated by long-term survey measures of inflation expectations.


Passage number 161.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, that’s why I was asking the question about whether I understood you right, you’ve currently got it anchored at 1¾ percent and are hoping to goes up to 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The response provided by Mr. Evans indicates that he is in agreement with the previous statement or question. He is seeking clarification and confirmation regarding the current anchoring percentage.


Passage number 162.
 MR. WASCHER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 163.
 MR. EVANS.  But at any rate, I’m done.  Well, I mean, it’s interesting. I appreciate that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Please proceed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Evans expresses appreciation for Chair Yellen's comments and encourages her to proceed.


Passage number 164.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Data on economic conditions in the Eighth District have improved notably during the intermeeting period.  The pace of job creation was  revised up for 2014, and preliminary data for 2015 has generally been positive.  The District unemployment rate continues to decline and stands at 5.7 percent today, according to the most recent reading—only slightly higher than the national rate. According to the revised BLS data, District job creation occurred at about twice the pace in 2014 as compared with 2013, which was itself revised higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply presenting information about economic conditions in the Eighth District without any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 165.
 MR. TARULLO.  Madam Chair, if I could—President Bullard, I was a little bit confused by what you were saying about labor force participation, and particularly the staff’s assessment of it.  My understanding of what the staff has been saying is that while they project a downward trend in labor force participation because of demographics, they also assess the decline in the immediate post-crisis years to have been substantially steeper than that.  And what they were predicting—and continue, I think, to predict, unless Bill corrects me—is a less steep decline or a flattening-out of current labor force participation, which eventually has their projected demographic trend–based participation rate converging with the actual participation rate.  And that, I think, is what’s been happening over the past year and a half or so, during which, with a little bit of fluctuation up and down, the labor force participation rate has been roughly stable, which I think is bearing out the staff’s expectation of the convergence of their projected trend with actual labor force participation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Tarullo expresses confusion about President Bullard's statements regarding labor force participation and challenges the accuracy of the staff's assessment.


Passage number 166.
MR. WASCHER.  Yes, I think that’s how I interpret it as well.  I don’t think what we have in the forecast is at all at odds with the Aaronson and others paper of 2014.  The gap we have in there is roughly what we estimated in that paper, and as Governor Tarullo indicated, we expect the downtrend in the participation rate to continue and the actual participation rate to close the gap by falling less than the downtrend we have. CHAIR YELLEN.  First Vice President Prichard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Wascher and Chair Yellen agree on the interpretation and expectations.


Passage number 167.
 MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Economic activity in the Third District slowed during the first quarter.  While still expanding, the rate of expansion has been below expectations.  However, it appears that the recent slowdown may be temporary, and that sentiment is widely held among contacts in our region.  Unemployment in the region ticked up to 5.7 percent in March, with Pennsylvania experiencing a significant decline in employment, enough that the first-quarter job growth in the state was actually negative.  However, both our April Manufacturing Business Outlook Survey and Nonmanufacturing Business Outlook Survey indicate that the manufacturing and service sectors expanded employment in April and point to further job growth and capital expenditures over the second half of the year.  One prominent manufacturer in the region indicated that his businesses are poised to grow rather more robustly in the second half of the year once they have worked through the necessary inventory correction.  Although he doesn’t anticipate 2015 to be as strong as last year, the second half of the year should see solid growth. In response to a special survey question on the effect of the dollar’s appreciation on their manufacturing activity, respondents who have exchange rate exposure indicated that the appreciation negatively affected their operations. However, our District does not overly engage in foreign trade, with exports accounting for only 10 percent of revenues and imports   representing about 5 percent of nonlabor costs.  Thus, the overall effect of the dollar’s rise was fairly small for Third District manufacturers. Both nonresidential and residential construction weakened in March.  We are also seeing a softening in multifamily housing.  Reflecting the overall weaknesses in this sector, house price appreciation is also slower than in the nation as a whole, with prices growing in the 3 to 3½ percent range.  Retailers in the region have been reporting healthy sales over the intermeeting period and moderate year-over-year sales growth. Contacts report that sales are starting to be bolstered by lower gasoline prices, and consumers in the region remain highly confident.  They are also paying down post-holiday debt, and debit and credit card lines are declining.  Bankers in the region indicate that the growth in the commercial loan segment of their portfolios has picked up substantially, while other loan activity has remained fairly flat. Thus, our District reflects fairly well what might be transpiring in other regions nationally—a bit of a step back in labor markets, a falloff in manufacturing activity, and a lack of any significant improvement in residential investment.  This slowdown is well reflected in one of the series we produce in our real-time research center, the Aruoba-Diebold-Scotti Business Conditions Index.  The ADS uses six high-frequency data series to construct an index of current economic activity.  Those series include, one, initial jobless claims through the week ending April 11 of this year; two, payroll employment through March; three, industrial production through March; four, real personal income through February; five, real manufacturing and trade sales through January; and, six, real GDP through the fourth quarter of last year.  The index is centered on zero, which indicates normal growth rates, and the index has recently turned negative.  However, we are receiving indications that the somewhat slower growth we have witnessed is a temporary phenomenon, and that economic activity is expected to bounce back to trend growth rates. As mentioned by President Bullard, we also find that, historically, first-quarter GDP growth may not be adequately adjusted for seasonal variation.  Over the past 30 years, seasonally adjusted growth in first-quarter GDP has averaged significantly less than growth over the remaining three quarters—1.8 percent as opposed to 2.7 percent.  Additionally, if one examines the timing of the 10 weakest quarters over that span, six occurred in the first quarter and, 50 percent of the time, the weakest quarter was the first quarter of the year.  Observations like these may point us to placing more weight on GDI—gross domestic income—or on GDPplus, which incorporates the income side of GDP, in interpreting current economic activity.  GDPplus has the advantage that, unlike GDI, it is available with the same timing as expenditure-side data. With that as background, we continue to project that overall economic activity will accelerate modestly, that utilization gaps will continue to progressively narrow, and that inflation will continue to firm. With a substantial amount of data forthcoming before our June meeting, I expect that we’ll have a clearer view of the emerging trends and confirmation—or not—that first-quarter economic performance was, indeed, a poor harbinger of the year to come.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides information on various economic indicators in the Third District, but there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 168.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming national data suggest that the economy hit a soft patch in the first quarter, which is consistent with the recent information on economic activity in the Fifth Federal Reserve District. At the same time, our reports indicate that the weakness is widely viewed as temporary.  Our diffusion index of manufacturing activity, released this morning, was slightly negative in April, and that followed a reading of negative 8for March.  But our index of expected shipments six months ahead was a robust plus 38, a level that has not been exceeded since 2011.  Similarly, our index for nonretail service-sector activity was also slightly negative in April, but the index of expected demand six months ahead held steady at a pretty positive rate.  And the indexes for employment remain positive across all sectors. Retail revenue rose 5 points to plus 17. More broadly, commentary from our directors and industry roundtable participants was more positive this month than last, and we’ve heard numerous reports about transitory factors having affected recent activity.  An executive at an engineering firm in West Virginia said that “weather has been the primary factor in our business slowdown.” Several other reports cited production slowdowns attributable to the West Coast port strike.  For example, a manufacturer of industrial safety products stated that production was interrupted by delays in receiving shipments of just one critical part manufactured in China.  These reports suggest that it’s quite reasonable to expect a rebound in growth in Q2. As usual, any discussion of labor markets these days turns quickly to the subject of shortages of skilled workers.  It does seem as if these shortages are having noticeable effects. For example, the CEO of a large building materials company told of a trucking company refusing outgoing shipments due to a lack of drivers.  We also continue to hear about markets experiencing wage pressures, and, while not universal at this point, the scope of these observations appears to have broadened of late.  This was most apparent in the reports from representatives of several staffing firms, both national and regional, who serve on our roundtables, including a regional representative from Manpower.  One large staffing firm is telling clients to expect upward wage pressure “in all skill levels” later this year.  Two grocers in Richmond recently announced double-digit starting-wage increases, perhaps in response to Wal- Mart’s announcement.  A large auto manufacturer plans to raise starting wages for assembly line workers at a plant in our District from $13.17 an hour to $15.85 an hour—about 20 percent. A lumber company in West Virginia has responded to a shortage by bringing in entry-level workers from Puerto Rico, renting houses for them, and hiring an interpreter, all of which raise the cost of labor by 10 to 15 percent.  These reports suggest that broader wage pressures may be about to emerge, although I recognize that wage acceleration is not yet apparent in the monthly figures for average hourly earnings. Turning to the national economy, as I said, we’ve clearly hit a soft patch recently. Some of that softness was due to well-known temporary factors.  Combined, these transitory factors could well explain a large part, if not all, of the first-quarter slowdown.  Moreover, this wouldn’t be, as many have noted, the first flat quarter we’ve seen during this expansion.  So the question is how rapidly economic activity picks up again from here as the effect of these transitory factors fade. I share this Tealbook’s optimism on consumer spending, and that’s based on robust income growth, solid consumer sentiment readings, and continued improvement in labor market conditions.  The rebound in car sales last month was an important piece of evidence that consumers have the confidence to boost spending in the months ahead. Turning to inflation, the latest readings have been a bit firmer than expected.  Core CPI inflation averaged 2.3 percent at an annual rate from December to March.  The staff’s translation into core PCE inflation is 1.4 percent over the same three months, and that implies that Q4 will be the low point for core PCE inflation.  Oil prices appear to have bottomed out and the run-up in the dollar seems to have lost steam, so the transitory downward pressures on headline inflation are waning.  Thus, it seems fairly clear to me that we are emerging from this inflation dip, and inflation will be moving towards 2 percent in coming quarters. Looking ahead, as several of you have mentioned, we will receive more than the usual amount of data over the upcoming intermeeting period, including, importantly, two employment reports and two reports on personal income and consumption.  If the data come in consistent with the Tealbook forecast, we would have solid evidence in hand at our June meeting that consumer spending growth had rebounded and that inflation was moving up.  If so, I believe the case for raising rates would be strong, so it seems premature to make any statements at this meeting or in the days immediately ahead, I believe, that could be interpreted as taking June off the table.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents information about economic activity and makes observations about the potential for a rebound in growth and the emergence of broader wage pressures. The speaker also shares their belief that if the data align with the Tealbook forecast, there would be a strong case for raising rates in June.


Passage number 169.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Unemployment in the Tenth District remains very low at 4.2 percent, and recent employment growth has been modest but is mixed across states and industries.  Several District states are seeing sizable oil and gas layoffs, and negative spillovers are showing up in regional factory and transportation activity as well as in consumer spending areas and those that are energy dependent.  Through the first quarter of this year, District energy jobs were down 4½ percent, and firms in our latest energy survey expect their employment to fall by 12 percent this year.  District manufacturing is also feeling the effect, as the last time our manufacturing survey composite was lower than its April reading was in early 2009. Firms responding to our energy survey, however, note that breakeven oil prices have fallen considerably as services costs have dropped, providing some encouragement for future activity as oil prices edge higher.  On the other hand, District states with virtually no oil and gas activity have seen a solid start to 2015.  Colorado, in particular, continues to grow rapidly, driven by strong tourism and construction activity.  As a result, total employment in the region is up   slightly this year, and overall services activity in the District continues to grow despite the energy layoffs.  In agriculture, drought has worsened, although winter wheat production is shaping up to be similar to its recent five-year average, and corn and soybean planting intentions are generally strong.  Still, persistently low crop prices and elevated input costs continue to increase farmers’ short-term financing needs. For the national economy, my outlook for growth over the medium term is little changed.  I assume that the softness in first-quarter GDP proves transitory, as it has for the past several years.  Weather effects and the sharp decline in energy investment look to be important factors holding down first-quarter growth.  However, more persistent factors producing softer export growth and a broader slowing in new investment bear watching.  Alternatively, personal consumption appears to have some upside potential, as there is yet to be a significant boost to spending from lower gasoline prices. March’s payroll numbers were clearly below expectations, though the labor market continues to improve in several aspects.  The services sector continues to perform well.  In the first quarter of this year, services added, on average, 179,000 additional jobs per month.  This is better than the 134,000 average in the first quarter of last year.  Overall, I expect average monthly payroll growth to drift down from the rapid pace of 260,000 per month last year to 200,000 this year before settling down to a pace of around 150,000 next year as the labor market continues to tighten and growth moves to its trend level. Research by my staff also indicates improving labor market conditions, as reflected by the number of workers moving from lower- to higher-paying sectors—that is, the extent of cyclical upgrading.  Their analysis shows that the rise in the quits rate over the past two years is primarily due to a higher quits rate in sectors with lower pay, like wholesale/retail trade and  leisure/hospitality.  Tracking individual workers in these sectors using Current Population Survey data shows that they have recently been moving into higher-paying sectors, like education and health services, at rates similar to those before the recession. Turning to inflation, I expect inflation to remain somewhat below target due to lagged effects from low energy prices and a stronger dollar.  Inflation in some sectors, such as health care, have also notably slowed.  In addition, because of some of the current factors affecting inflation, year-over-year core could drift lower as stronger readings from a year ago—core PCE readings from March to June of last year were running at a solid 2 percent pace—drop out of the 12-month window.  Such base effects have not affected my overall confidence regarding the medium-term outlook for inflation, assuming there are continued improvement in the labor market and stable longer-term expectations.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides a summary of various economic conditions and outlooks without presenting conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 170.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This discussion has appropriately focused on the significantly weaker-than-expected incoming data on first-quarter economic activity.  The staff forecasts a return to higher growth of around 2 percent or more in the second quarter and the second half of the year, and we’ve heard similar forecasts during this round of discussion from several of the Reserve Bank presidents.  The Tealbook forecast is, not surprisingly, consistent with what we see in the charts given to us by Bill Wascher—in particular, the two real GDP forecasts and their fan charts.  So there’s a fair probability that will happen, but it’s not a  guarantee that we’re going to bounce right back in the coming quarter and there have been some weak data in April. In terms of elementary textbooks—looking at C + I + G + NX—the Tealbook forecasts expect the bulk of the rebound in the second quarter to come from consumption, which is a reasonable forecast in light of expectations for employment and real disposable income.  The Tealbook also expects government purchases to rebound significantly, net investment to decline more slowly than it did in the first quarter, and net exports to decline at the same rate as in the first quarter.  This is all very interesting, but of course, we’re waiting for tomorrow’s first estimate of first-quarter growth to clarify, perhaps, what happened in the first quarter. When you focus on recent growth rates, you get a fairly pessimistic picture of what’s happening, and we need to remind ourselves that the overall position of the economy is good.  Let me start with the labor market.  The unemployment rate remains at 5.5 percent, a level that is not that much above many estimates of the natural rate today and is not above estimates of the natural rate that we had going into the March meeting.  A year ago we didn’t think we’d reach a rate that low until 2016.  And, importantly, some, though not all, of the other labor market indicators whose behavior suggested that the U-3 unemployment rate understated the extent of labor market problems appear to be returning to pre-recession levels. So, from the policy viewpoint, the basic question on output and employment is whether employment will continue to grow at a rate sufficient to bring further improvement in the labor market in coming quarters. The inflation rate remains below target, and that is a problem.  However, one gets the impression that while we are committed to looking through transitory factors—particularly dollar appreciation and the decline in oil prices, and gasoline prices in particular—popular discussion both here and in Europe has not focused on what that means.  It does not mean focusing solely on core inflation, because both energy and import prices affect core inflation.  Core PCE inflation was 1.3 percent over the 12 months through March.  According to Board staff estimates in the Tealbook, increases in the dollar, which are very unlikely to persist indefinitely, are holding down that figure by 0.3 percentage point this year, bringing what could be called nontransitory core inflation to something like 1.6 percent.  And current energy price changes are reducing core inflation by another 0.1 percentage point, which brings you to a nontransitory core inflation rate of 1.7 percent. Now, you might be concerned about this if the low core numbers were being reflected in declining inflation expectations, but the survey measures seem to be relatively well anchored.  And all this, again, seems consistent with the data presented in the bottom two charts in Bill Wascher’s handout, which show inflation coming back rather quickly to just below 2 percent. I expect that the transitory factors—which are, fundamentally, oil and the exchange rate, which may or may not turn around reasonably soon—will gradually abate and possibly begin to reverse themselves.  We only need them to abate.  And labor market slack will continue to diminish, putting inflation on a path that, over the medium term, will take us very close to our inflation target.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting information and making predictions based on that information.


Passage number 171.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data for the first quarter have been weaker, overall, than expected, including data for household and business spending, industrial production, and housing starts and permits—a little bit different but quite similar to the first quarter of 2014.  In addition, the initial BLS report on the employment situation for March   was also much weaker than expected, and that’s different from last year, when payroll gains continued to be very strong right through the first quarter.  And the question, of course, is how much signal to take.  One reason to discount these data somewhat are the transitory factors that are likely to reverse, including bad winter weather and the West Coast port disruption as well as the technical factors that have been discussed.  Another is that GDP data may eventually be significantly revised and is a noisy signal—and I thought that the new exhibit in Tealbook, Book A, on prediction intervals was interesting and useful on that point.  In any case, it makes sense to me to take some signal from this year’s weak first quarter, both for labor markets and for GDP.  I think the baseline staff forecast strikes a reasonable balance for the rest of this year by assuming higher GDP growth, but not a significant catch-up quarter like we had in the second quarter of 2014. On inflation, I would tentatively say I feel a little better about inflation, which is now forecast to run at about 1½ percent for Q2, well above the Q1 readings.  Survey expectations remain stable.  Breakevens have moved up modestly across the curve since the March meeting, seemingly driven more by oil prices and liquidity rather than changing expectations.  In light of all of the recent market readings that suggest concerns about low inflation, it’s an improvement, for a change, to read stories that fixed-income traders are seeing a greater likelihood of inflation getting back to mandate-consistent levels and less risk of very low inflation.  Of course, we may overread these market movements, and it may simply be that TIPS got a little cheap relative to nominals, and traders acted on that.  The underlying story of a return to 2 percent inflation over the medium term, given GDP and labor market outcomes as forecast, continues to make sense to me.  And I look forward to gaining more confidence from the incoming data on that.  I would   worry more about lower inflation in the case that the economy does slip into a lower gear in growth and labor markets. Looking forward, the positive narrative is that consumer spending will increase to healthy levels supported by low energy prices, high confidence, and much better labor market conditions. In fact, going back to Stan’s basic equation, you could say that the U.S. economy has grown at about 2.7 percent over the last two years, with net exports at around zero.  With net exports now contributing negative 0.7 to negative 0.8 percentage point, you have to ask, where is growth going to come from.  It’s not going to come from government spending, it’s not going to come from housing investment, and it’s not going to come from business investment in a world in which drilling is being significantly reduced.  So it really has to come from consumption.  And, in fact, in the medium-term forecast, PCE growth accounts for well more than 100 percent of the growth.  That narrative, I have to say, makes sense to me, but it does amount to an airplane flying on one engine.  So far, the combination of the weak spending data and high consumer confidence says that the consumer, in effect, is now ebulliently saving. In terms of the risks, one, of course, is that PCE growth does disappoint.  Another one, frankly, is that, in a world of still-slow growth, a return to stronger growth here could well lead to a tightening in financial conditions not so much through the rate channel as through the dollar channel—it may not be a rate tantrum that is really the threat this time.  We will see, by the time of the June meeting, whether there is progress in addressing Greece’s fiscal crisis or whether Greece, instead, is headed for controls on capital flows, sovereign default, and the like, with potential disruption for the U.S. economy.  We’ll see two more employment reports and a lot more data.  And we’ll know, I think, at that point, something about whether the first quarter’s  disappointment is transitory and anomalous or, instead, marks some kind of real loss of momentum. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 172.
 MR. WASCHER.6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll be referring to the handout titled “Material for Gross Domestic Product Update.”  You have a table that summarizes some of the key aspects of this morning’s GDP data, and the first thing I would say is that it’s nice to be lucky once in a while.  [Laughter] As you can see from the first line of the table, the BEA’s advance estimate of real GDP growth in the first quarter was 0.2 percent at an annual rate.  That’s one-tenth of 1 percentage point higher than our estimate in the April Tealbook. Among the major spending categories, real PCE growth slowed from 4.4 percent in the fourth quarter to 1.9 percent in the first quarter, about as we had expected. Business fixed investment, which is labeled here by its official title, nonresidential private fixed investment, fell 3.4 percent, and residential investment edged up 1.3 percent.  Again, both of those were close to our expectations. The next three lines show some offsetting misses that turned out not to have much effect on the top-line GDP number.  In particular, government spending fell by less than we were expecting, net exports fell by more, and there was a greater accumulation of inventories than we’d written down.  In terms of their contributions to growth, net exports were estimated to have subtracted 1¼ percentage points from GDP growth in the first quarter, while inventories added ¾ percentage point to growth.  I should note that, for these two categories in particular, the BEA does not have complete data for the first quarter.  In the advance GDP estimate, inventories and net exports are based on two months of data and BEA’s assumed values for the third month—in this case, for March. Our staff had a chance to look at the monthly assumptions and other details of both of these components, and Steve mentioned to me that his colleagues in the Division of International Finance are inclined to discount some of the negative miss in net exports between their forecast and the BEA’s estimate.  Going the other way, it looks as though the BEA wrote down a very high assumption for inventories in March, and we might be inclined to discount a little bit of that.  So I don’t know that it would have much effect on the top line.  But I believe our thinking at this point would be that net exports aren’t quite as weak as the BEA has estimated, and that inventories may not be quite as large. The bottom of the table shows the BEA’s estimate of consumer price inflation. Total PCE prices fell 2 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter, the same as our 6 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 6).   Tealbook estimate, while core PCE prices rose nine-tenths of 1 percent, one-tenth more than we were expecting. Finally, I’ll just mention that real disposable personal income rose at an annual rate of 6.2 percent in the first quarter, while the saving rate came in at 5.5 percent.  Both of those figures were also close to our expectations.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. Are there questions for Bill.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 173.
 MR. BULLARD. Bill, is the staff embarrassed that you missed this by 50 percent. [Laughter]  No, congratulations on this.  This is a good call, and I think it was useful information to bring to the Committee.  It’s a tough job, and when you get something right, you should definitely take some credit for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a positive response and the speaker is congratulating Bill on a good call.


Passage number 174.
 MR. WASCHER.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great.  Then let’s turn to Thomas, who is going to brief us on our monetary policy decisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement about the order of the agenda.


Passage number 175.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thomas, I’d like to ask you about your thinking as you drafted alternative C.  Specifically, I’m referring to the bracketed choices in paragraphs 2 and 3, and I’m interested in how the staff is thinking about the choice of the “has become somewhat more confident” and “may soon warrant an increase” language, as opposed to the “has become more confident” and “likely will soon warrant an increase” language. These two language options could be seen as a sequence of statements over, say, two meetings.  They could convey increasing certainty on the part of the Committee or increasing probability of a liftoff decision.  Alternatively, I can imagine choosing between these two language options at the meeting ahead of liftoff, with the choice depending on the probability of the liftoff decision. So I can see a case for both of these interpretations of the alt-C bracketed language as something we might consider in the future, and I wonder if the staff had either of these ideas in mind or if it’s just providing an option for this meeting alone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and understanding regarding the different language options and their potential interpretations.


Passage number 176.
 MR. LAUBACH. We also explored the choice between “may” and “likely will” in previous drafts of alternative C and in other materials that, if I remember correctly, were sent to the Committee ahead of the January meeting.  In my view, just focusing for now on that, one key question is how the Committee wants to strike a balance between, on the one hand, sending some advance notice and, on the other hand, emphasizing data dependence.  So I think one key question for you at some point will be, how firmly do you want to express that the next meeting might be likely for liftoff, and how do you balance that against the fact that, of course, over any intermeeting period, you will receive data that may change the course of policy.  That’s some of the thinking that went into the considerations about “may” and “likely will.” As to the “somewhat” in paragraph 2, you’re right that you can see a pair between— “somewhat” in paragraph 2 could perhaps fit better with “may” in paragraph 3 because it still emphasizes a little bit more that you’re reserving judgment.  So that’s certainly a possibility. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Laubach and Chair Yellen are discussing different aspects and considerations regarding the choice between "may" and "likely will" and the use of the word "somewhat." They are providing their perspectives and discussing possible options, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 177.
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes—thank you, Madam Chair.  I had a question and a comment.  The comment is on page 1 of the handout that you provided, “Market Expectations and Policy Issues.”  I thought that was a very nice set of experiments, and I like the idea of having these three possible cases and laying them out.  My own thinking is, focus more on the tantrum case, but, certainly, it’s useful for us to keep in mind the conundrum case as well. My comment is about the use of optimal control as a way to evaluate the appropriate policy response here.  When I think about what was going on in these episodes, it was really that there were uncertainties in markets about what the Committee was trying to achieve with policy —and you used the same language, I believe, when I was listening to you. But optimal control, of course, involves the assumption that what we were trying to achieve with policy is all pretty much common knowledge. For example, in the tantrum case, we might want a more aggressive response in order to rebuild lost reputation, in some sense, about what we’re actually trying to achieve. In the conundrum case, the same is true—we might want to be even tighter than what’s built in here, because we’re actually trying to convince markets that we are really concerned about inflation getting too high.  But in the tantrum case, we might be even easier than what’s described by optimal control, because we have this need to rebuild reputation in the eyes of the markets about the fact that we really care about getting inflation back up to 2 percent. That’s a comment.  The question I had actually builds, I think, on what Dennis was asking about alternative C.  I’ll ask the same question about alternative B.  As you described on page 2, which was a great way to summarize what’s in the various alternatives, we’re really relying on paragraphs 1 and 2 to speak to the Committee’s assessment of the criteria for liftoff.  I   guess we’re relying on the evolution of the data over time to allow the public to figure out what we think is relevant. Another way to proceed is to actually be more explicit about, “Okay, we’ve had some incoming data—paragraphs 1 and 2.  We just saw GDP now.  How does that affect the likelihood of liftoff in, say, June.”  So we could have provided more explicit guidance about that in the statement in alternative B.  And I guess my question is, what were you thinking in not doing this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion where Mr. Kocherlakota is providing his comments and asking a question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 178.
 MR. LAUBACH. I have two thoughts, perhaps, on that, and maybe Simon can also weigh in on at least one of them.  Namely, as Simon showed you yesterday, there was a question in the primary dealer survey on which factors market participants view as most relevant for the achievement of reasonable confidence.  So there is an indirect route in the sense that what you say in the statement will be evaluated even though you may not have a direct statement in there about how the Committee is now more or less confident than before.  Presumably, market participants will look at your characterization of these various factors and draw conclusions from that about how your confidence has shifted. I’m not quite sure how easy it would be to try to come up with a summary statement for the degree of confidence because, well, my guess is that various participants rank different criteria differently, and I think that’s evident from your comments.  Therefore, I believe this is a step that’s left to market participants and the public in general to draw conclusions about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they are not sure how easy it would be to come up with a summary statement for the degree of confidence because different participants rank different criteria differently. This suggests that there may be a lack of agreement among the participants regarding the factors that contribute to confidence.


Passage number 179.
 MR. POTTER. Prior to the GDP release, I think the dealers put an average probability of 13 percent on liftoff in June.  Let’s assume that’s moved down to 8 percent or something right now based on the GDP release.  If you felt that that 8 percent was way too low compared with the likelihood that you might lift off in June, then you might want to try to indicate something.  Before it was way too high, but it seems a little bit less likely that you would want to indicate something at 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the likelihood of a lift off in June and suggesting that if someone felt the probability of 8 percent was too low, they might want to indicate something.


Passage number 180.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s helpful.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. Are there other comments or questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a conversation between two individuals.


Passage number 181.
 MR. LACKER.  Thomas, I wonder if you could, to help us understand these scenarios, refresh the Committee’s memory about the extent to which overnight short-term interest rates that we influence directly through the federal funds rate target can affect economic activity in the FRB/US model independently of the values of the 5-, 7-, and 10-year interest rates, which appear to figure prominently in these scenarios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing the request for Thomas to refresh the Committee's memory about the influence of overnight short-term interest rates on economic activity in the FRB/US model. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 182.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Monetary policy transmission in the FRB/US model is largely through long-term rates, so I’m—let me think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Laubach, is simply stating a fact about the monetary policy transmission in the FRB/US model.


Passage number 183.
 MR. LACKER.  Entirely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, seems to be in agreement or alignment with the statement or question being made.


Passage number 184.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Largely—well, to varying degrees.  For example, there are some rates in there, like the rate on auto loans, that arguably are not quite as long term.  So they are not only a 10-year Treasury yield. But it’s true that the funds rate, in and of itself, doesn’t carry a whole lot of weight in monetary policy transmission, but only through its effects on longer-term yields. By implication, these shifts in term premiums that we are considering in the scenarios are actually quite powerful.  So they do have a substantial macroeconomic effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and stating facts about interest rates and their effects on monetary policy transmission.


Passage number 185.
 MR. LACKER. Well, I have two follow-ups.  One is, when I think about this, I have difficulty reconciling that structure with the impression that a sizable volume of bank lending among the bankers I talk to seems to be priced off LIBOR and other short-term interest rates. The second thing is, what would this imply for Taylor rules. Have we been wrong for years.  Should we have been including a term premium thing that we accommodate in the Taylor  rules. Should we think about policy differently now that we’ve got this transmission mechanism whose strength varies depending on what the term premium does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contradiction. It presents two follow-up questions or concerns without any conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 186.
 MR. LAUBACH.  There are two separate aspects to this.  One is, what if monetary policy transmission also importantly works through term premiums.  That means that term premiums systematically vary with the path of short-term interest rates. To some extent, that is actually the case in the FRB/US model—namely, that the term premium is an endogenous function of expected future output gaps.  So to the extent that choices about the path of the funds rate affect the outlook for future output gaps, that has an added effect by moving term premiums endogenously as well. A separate question is, should a Taylor rule also take into account other financial conditions more broadly.  And there, arguably, a Taylor rule that responds only to current economic conditions may have a shortcoming because it responds only to current inflation and, say, the current output gap, whereas financial conditions that you observe today, like movements in the dollar and things like that, clearly affect your outlook in the future.  So that is not an aspect that is captured by Taylor rules that just mechanically respond to current conditions.  Of course, for example, if you look at optimal control, it obviously knows about these things because it’s run under perfect foresight.  Therefore, agents anticipate that changes in financial conditions today more broadly, including changes in term premiums, will affect the future outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes


Passage number 187.
 MR. LACKER. Let me follow up further.  When I look at the plot in the upper-left-hand corner, if I took Taylor rules and incorporate this term premium, doesn’t that mean that an augmented Taylor rule should now predict interest rates 2 percentage points higher for 1994 than would a Taylor rule without that augmentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 188.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s assuming you have a time-constant equilibrium real rate, but the equilibrium real rate could be moving, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is stating a possibility or alternative scenario, without any conflicting views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 189.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, there’s that.  There’s the gap.  There’s inflation.  But now we add the term premium, and that’s pointing in the other direction by 2 percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different factors or elements (such as the gap, inflation, and term premium) that may be pointing in different directions.


Passage number 190.
 MR. LAUBACH.  If you look just at, say, the lower-frequency movement, it now seems as though, on an almost secular or at least a highly persistent basis, the term premium seems about 2 percentage points lower than it was back then.  That is an effect that arguably ought to be reflected already in current conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about the term premium without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 191.
 MR. LACKER.  Current conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It only states "current conditions" without providing any further information or opinion.


Passage number 192.
 MR. LAUBACH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 193.
  If you thought about a sudden drop right now— MR. LACKER. What about the current Taylor rule.  Shouldn’t it be in the current Taylor rule, too.  We should include it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 194.
 MR. EVANS.  It’s in the current Taylor rule through current conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the Taylor rule and its inclusion of current conditions.


Passage number 195.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Well, I think the point I’m trying to make is that this is a secular downshift in the term premium from a mean of what looks like around 2 percent in the 1990s to about close to zero now.  But that’s not a recent development, that’s been persistent since the mid-2000s.  The decline in the term premium, in and of itself, arguably had, at some point, a stimulative effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Laubach about a secular downshift in the term premium.


Passage number 196.
  Assuming that this really occurred in isolation, as I referred to in my briefing, you could see— MR. LACKER.  So it’s affected the current gap and the current inflation rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker is making an assumption about a certain occurrence and then referencing its potential impact on the current gap and inflation rate. There is no mention of opposing views or disagreement among speakers.


Passage number 197.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement made by Mr. Laubach without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 198.
 MR. LACKER.  But your optimal control says that, even given the current gap and the current inflation rate, there should be some response of the funds rate to the term premium.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of Mr. Lacker's belief and interpretation of the optimal control.


Passage number 199.
   MR. LAUBACH. Yes, but those are projected future changes in the term premium, not where it is today.  So my point is, if you had just observed in recent history a 2 percentage point decline in the term premium, then if that had happened in isolation, that should indeed affect your outlook.  Your outlook should be stronger, all else being equal—again, with the caveat “all else being equal.”  If the 2 percentage point decline occurred in the context of a flight to safety, that’s no longer so obvious.  But if that had recently occurred, then, indeed, there is a little bit of a discrepancy in terms of your standard Taylor rule response only to current conditions.  If these current conditions haven’t responded yet to that decline in the term premium, then there is a bit of a tension since you project that that decline in the term premium, in itself, actually is going to provide a boost. If you think, for example, about the staff projection, it is, very importantly, driven by our assessment of financial conditions today and over the projection period.  So the Taylor rule does take account of that over the projection period. CHAIR YELLEN. Governor Fischer, do you have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 200.
 MR. FISCHER. Yes, it’s a two-hander.  What is the correlation between the term premium and the difference between the short-term rate and the long-term rate.  Is it high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 201.
 MR. LAUBACH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, the passage you provided is incomplete. Could you please provide the full passage?


Passage number 202.
  The correlation between the term premium and the slope—sadly, I do not know this right off the top of— MR. POTTER.  It has to be high on a daily basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have immediate knowledge of the correlation mentioned. Mr. Potter affirms that the correlation "has to be high on a daily basis."


Passage number 203.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It has to be high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states a statement made by Mr. Kocherlakota without indicating any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 204.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, it would be high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 205.
 MR. POTTER. That’s because the short-term rate is not moving that much, because the FOMC is not moving it, but the 10-year is moving around every day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a fact about the short-term rate not moving much while the 10-year rate is changing daily.


Passage number 206.
MR. EVANS.  Yes, arithmetic, I guess. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of statements between Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 207.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually having the passage provided. Please provide the relevant passage so that I can analyze it and provide you with an answer.


Passage number 208.
 WILLIAMS. My question is related to President Lacker’s topic, but I guess it’s really more about how we think about movements in the term premium in general.  As I understand the FRB/US model and the way you described it, Thomas, is that these movements have very powerful effects because they affect all asset prices. They affect mortgage rates, the stock market, and the exchange rate.  These movements are really spilling over throughout financial conditions, and so have a very powerful effect on GDP, employment, and inflation. The research on the effects of QE—I’m thinking of the work of Vissing-Jorgensen and Krishnamurthy—a lot of the research has looked at this and seems to have called into question whether there’s this full pass-through of Treasury term premium effects onto private rates, such as corporate bond rates and mortgage rates, as well as asset prices in general.  I guess the question is, to what extent are you buying into the story that maybe the term premium doesn’t affect financial conditions as fully as the FRB/US model would tell you. Or how do we think about some of the more recent research in terms of these simulations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply describing and discussing different viewpoints and research on the effects of movements in the term premium. There is no clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 209.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I think the short answer to that is, what I have here on the handout and what is being shown in the “Monetary Policy Strategies” section of Tealbook, Book B, of course, buys fully into the FRB/US view that, to the extent that long rates matter for real activity, changes in the term premium are in long-term rates.  So no distinction is drawn between whether the movement is in the expectations component or in the term-premium component. We could certainly try to look at how the results will change.  Broadly speaking, my expectation would be that the lines you see in the lower-left panel are based on 100 percent—thatis, term premiums are worth exactly as much as changes in expected future interest rates.  Then you can shave that if you thought that a more reasonable estimate was, say, 50 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of agreement with the "Monetary Policy Strategies" section of Tealbook, Book B.


Passage number 210.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 211.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  The second comment is really to President Lacker.  This is why you have a time-varying r*. In my view, this is the argument for thinking about the fact that the term premium changes over decades.  Other factors, such as risk premiums, the equity premium, and the sovereign risk premium—lots of things change in the economy, which is basically the argument not to have a constant r*. Your point is exactly right.  On its own, the term premium going down would argue for a higher r*. So what’s really striking is that Laubach-Williams, which just tries to let the data decide, has r* falling all of the way to zero, despite the fact that QE and other factors have pushed the term premium down.  The way I view this is, there are these factors pushing r* up, but the other factors, the headwinds and the other things, are just so much more powerful that, on net, they push r* down.  Through the lens of r*, everything makes sense.  [Laughter]  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don’t we begin our round now.  Our first speaker is President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is agreeing with President Lacker's point and providing additional analysis to support it.


Passage number 212.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m looking forward to hearing President Williams’s remarks through the lens of r*. [Laughter]  We’ll see how that goes. Madam Chair, I favor alternative A.  My rationale for alternative A is based on the modal outlook for prices and employment, the risks to that outlook, and the zero lower bound.  On the benchmark outlook in the Tealbook, Book A, you see that inflation does not return to the FOMC’s target of 2 percent until 2019, which is four years from now.  We should take steps to facilitate a faster return of inflation to target.  These additional steps would also help boost  employment over the medium term.  Our congressional mandate calls for us to achieve maximum employment and stable prices.  If we are able to simultaneously create more jobs and improve our performance on the price-stability goal, we should do so. That’s the argument just based on the modal outlook alone.  It provides a clear justification for the policy course described in alternative A. I think this argument is enhanced by consideration of the risks to the outlook.  I agree with the Tealbook, Book A—the risks to the outlook for prices and employment are to the downside.  The standard risk-management considerations that are often advanced by the Committee suggest that these future downside risks bolster the case for current accommodation. When we think about the zero lower bound, as recent Brookings conference paper by President Evans and his colleagues makes crystal clear, these risk-management considerations are significantly enhanced by the presence of the zero lower bound.  The past five years have taught us that when we’re close to the zero lower bound, as we expect to be over the medium term, we will not be able to mitigate downside risks as effectively as we would like.  As President Evans’s paper points out, this means that we should make policy choices so as to strengthen the economy in advance of these shocks hitting.  That, again, argues in favor of the kind of stance described in alternative A. So I see three arguments in favor of alternative A—the modal outlook, the risks to the outlook, and the constraints on policy imposed by the zero lower bound. As I’ve indicated in the past, I believe that it is important for monetary policy decisions to take account of the macroeconomic risks created by potential financial instability.  My own reading of the QS report is that the main financial stability risk we face right now is actually  associated with higher, not lower, interest rates. This will build on some of the work that Thomas was showing us earlier this morning. In May 2013, we began to tighten policy while we were still apparently several years away from achieving our macroeconomic objectives.  Market participants lost confidence in the willingness of the FOMC to buffer the economy against adverse shocks, and we saw a rapid increase in the term premium. If we raise the target range for the federal funds rate when headline inflation and core inflation are both running so low, we risk sending the same message that we did in 2013, and, accordingly, we risk seeing the same rapid run-up in the term premium. Madam Chair, the modal outlook for inflation is too low.  We can best address this deficiency and simultaneously create more jobs by making clear, as alternative A does, that we are willing to use all of our tools to return inflation to target within one to two years, and that such a determined approach in the pursuit of our mandated objectives is also the best way to manage the risks we face, especially near the zero lower bound. I’d like to conclude by suggesting a topic for a possible research briefing.  It builds on President Bullard’s comments yesterday and, actually, the conversation we were just having among President Williams, President Lacker, and Thomas.  I think it would be really useful for us to understand the work going on in the System on r*—what’s determining it and what’s moving it around.  It plays, actually, a pretty critical role, even in the statement itself.  So I believe exposing the Committee to the research going on in the System on this would be very valuable.  With that, I’ll conclude.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a speech given by Mr. Kocherlakota expressing his support for "alternative A" and providing his rationale for that choice. He does not mention any opposing viewpoints or engage in any debate.


Passage number 213.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today’s GDP report confirms what we already knew—that GDP growth slowed significantly in the first quarter. It’s too early to  determine whether that slowdown will be persistent or whether it will be temporary, as last year’s first-quarter slowdown turned out to be.  With no decision on the table, we don’t have to make that determination today.  June’s decision is going to be data dependent, and we’ll be receiving important information, including two monthly employment reports, to help come to a decision about liftoff in June.  Thus, I think it’s important not to signal anything today about a June decision.  I support the spirit of alternative B today because, at this point, I favor data dependence and the meeting-by-meeting nature of the decision of liftoff.  I believe it is appropriate to acknowledge the slowdown in growth and employment in paragraph 2, but then to maintain the characterization of the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced.  However, in my view, the tone of the first paragraph on intermeeting developments is too negative.  I think some of that negativity comes from focusing too much on short-term changes in economic indicators instead of providing the Committee’s assessment of changes in economic conditions that matter for a policy decision. I do appreciate some of the changes that were made between the first draft of statement language that was circulated and the draft on the table today that addressed this issue of tone, but we have to remember that the public doesn’t see the evolution of our drafts. The Tealbook, Book B, tells us that the intention of alternative B is to avoid any date-based guidance and retain the option of beginning policy normalization in June if the data and outlook justify it.  My concern is that alternative B doesn’t seem to achieve this.  My concern is, it’ll be read as our signaling that we’ve taken June off the table when that’s not the case, and it would be inconsistent with our data-dependent approach. Since our March meeting, market expectations have shifted to a later liftoff and a flatter policy rate path.  In normal times, such a shift would be reflecting their assessment of the incoming data for the economic outlook, and we might want to take some signal from it.  But as we prepare for liftoff, markets are particularly sensitive to our communications.  The shift in the expected policy rate path may not be providing any independent assessment of the economy.  Instead, it might be reflecting the market’s view of the Committee’s view. As former Chairman Alan Greenspan once said when discussing how difficult policy communications are, “People hear what they want to hear.”  In such an environment, we must be even more careful than usual not to say things that could be misinterpreted, even if they’re factually true.  Of course, anticipating how the market might react to anything we do say is a difficult task. Turning to language specifics, in paragraph 1, I would opt to say “growth slowed . . . , in part reflecting transitory factors,” rather than “at least in part.”  And at this point, I understand that the rest of the language is pretty well locked down, but I would like to suggest one change.  Instead of “Growth in household spending declined,” can we say “Household spending continued to grow, although at a slower pace”. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  So you said that, instead of “Growth in household spending declined”—what did you want. Just review what you wanted to say instead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses her concerns and preferences, but there is no direct disagreement or contention. She acknowledges some changes that were made to the statement language but suggests some additional changes to improve clarity and avoid misinterpretation.


Passage number 214.
 MS. MESTER.  Yes.  “Household spending continued to grow, although at a slower pace.” CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 215.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, including the statement and President Mester’s suggestion concerning “in part.”  I see the decision at this meeting on both policy and statement as straightforward.  So I’d like to spend a few minutes looking ahead and thinking aloud about statement language possibilities in alternative economic scenarios, obviously evidenced by incoming data, and alternative liftoff decision scenarios. I expect it will be evident in this round that there is some desire to keep June an active option.  In any event, I think having various communication strategies in mind could help the Committee achieve as smooth a policy transition as possible and reduce the chances of avoidable and unwanted market volatility associated with liftoff.  For my part, I’m not so optimistic that by June we will be able to make a clear and plausible case that the economy is on track in terms of our two decision criteria.  Having repeatedly emphasized the data dependency of our liftoff decision, I think it’s important that we not cause impartial observers to scratch their heads about the data on which we’re basing a liftoff decision.  I expect that the data picture will be sufficiently inconclusive by the time of our next meeting to justify waiting a bit longer. As my earlier question to Thomas indicated, I’m trying to think through how communication might evolve in the coming meetings should we decide not to move in June.  As I suggested in framing the question for Thomas, there are a couple of ways the language options in this meeting’s alternative C might serve as a template. The “has become somewhat more confident” and “may soon warrant an increase” language option, combined with the “has become more confident” and “likely will soon warrant an increase” version, could be viewed as a sequence of statements over two meetings in advance of the liftoff decision.  Alternatively, the two versions could be viewed as distinct choices, with one or the other selected depending on the degree of certainty or probability the Committee wishes to convey, presumably in a statement of the meeting just ahead of the liftoff meeting.  Having said all of that, my sense of opinion in the Committee is that there is not a lot of appetite for signaling liftoff two meetings in advance, even if couched in very tentative terms.  I also doubt there’s much support for a move to language along the lines of alternative C unless the liftoff decision is highly probable.  So I have difficulty actually envisioning circumstances in which we might choose to use the softer “has become somewhat more confident” and “may soon warrant an increase” version in alternative C. Where this leaves me is the view that the most feasible approach to some amount of guidance in advance of a liftoff decision is the “has become more confident” and “likely will soon warrant an increase” choice.  I apologize for walking everyone through my tortured thought process.  [Laughter] It’s certainly possible that we will receive a string of data reports between now and June that is strong enough to justify pulling the trigger.  If we were to move in June, the advance-signal decision will be moot, of course.  In that case, the question becomes whether the June statement ought to address what comes next—that is, provide some more concrete guidance on what is the Committee’s expected path of policy over the subsequent meetings. As I said at the top of my remarks, I just want to air some communications considerations.  I think it would be helpful to further discuss the question of whether to provide advance guidance and, if so, how to phrase it.  And it’s not too early to start thinking about ways to prepare the public for the path of policy after liftoff. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 216.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  The data to date have not met the conditions we provided in the March statement for raising rates.  I am very skeptical that these conditions can be met by June.  With two quarters of weak real GDP growth,we once again are faced with a forecast of improvement—the data reflect broader-based weakness. In addition, international conditions since the March meeting have become more worrisome.  The frustration among Greek leaders when talking with European policymakers is palpable, while the European policymakers I spoke with seemed to have more confidence that any problems associated with a Greek default could be readily contained. I am less confident that a smooth resolution will be achieved.  Moreover, I worry that this misplaced confidence in the likely containment of spillovers arising from a possible Greek default may generate conditions that make default even more likely. As I discussed yesterday, it is possible our inflation target is too low, given the accumulating evidence that we set the target based on research that underestimated both the likelihood and severity of being at the zero lower bound.  If we are willing to entertain a higher target, then a later liftoff would be further justified.  In part, this would also indicate a higher standard for moving, shifting from reasonable confidence that we are moving toward our inflation target to just plain confidence that we are moving toward our inflation target. As the data to date should not make us even reasonably confident, this distinction will become more relevant at future meetings, presumably in the fall. In terms of language, I would take out the “at least,” and I would keep “in part reflecting transitory factors.”  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses skepticism and disagreement with the idea of raising rates based on the current data and international conditions. He also suggests that the inflation target may be too low and proposes a later liftoff. This differs from the views of others who may be more inclined to raise rates sooner.


Passage number 217.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  There’s no denying that the bulk of data on real activity released since our March meeting has disappointed expectations.  However, a review of what has happened and what may be revealed to have happened argues for maintaining flexibility with respect to the timing of liftoff. Labor market conditions continue to improve, albeit at a slow pace.  We’ve also seen the trade-weighted exchange value of the dollar fall slightly against other major currencies and the price of oil move irregularly upward.  So we have some reason to think that the two main forces that have driven down headline inflation and which might pose a threat to long-term inflation expectations are abating. Measures of core inflation have ticked upward. In the University of Michigan survey, longer-term inflation expectations edged downward in April’s preliminary report but remain within their recent range. Between now and the June meeting, the information that we will receive may shed new light on jobs, retail sales, consumer sentiment, and the overall health of the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors.  We will also have two new reports on trimmed mean PCE inflation and household inflation expectations. Several of the current uncertainties hanging over the world economy may be at least partially resolved.  It seems to me to be well within the realm of possibility that the information we receive between now and June will warrant a policy response. I believe it is important, therefore, that a June liftoff remain on the table. While, technically, there is nothing in the language of alternative B that takes June liftoff off the table, I do have some concern.  I can readily imagine people in the financial markets and business press drawing the conclusion that June action is all but impossible, given the lack of foreshadowing in alternative B.  This move in market expectations could prove to be an impediment to Committee action.  Therefore, the language in paragraph 3 of alternative C with the “may soon” option is attractive, as it more clearly indicates that June remains a viable option. On the other hand, alternative B states the Committee’s intention to take timely action once its criteria have been met.  With the possibility of continued uncertainty on both fronts, I support alternative B.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the disappointing data on real activity but argues for maintaining flexibility on the timing of liftoff. They consider various factors such as labor market conditions, the exchange value of the dollar, and inflation expectations. They also mention the uncertainties in the world economy. While they express some concern about the language in alternative B, they ultimately support it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 218.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, although with a language change, which I will get to toward the end of my remarks. I first wanted to say that I agree with people that once we have removed the forward guidance, as we’ve now done, every meeting should be a live meeting in which the possibility of a change in the federal funds rate can be on the table.  Having said that, though, we still have different assessments as to how likely it is that we think we’re going to want to raise the federal funds rate target range in the next couple of meetings.  I, for one, don’t think it’s very likely at all.  But I do believe that we should not do anything that formally takes it off the table. I wasn’t going to comment on this, but President Lockhart’s thoughtful observations did provoke me to say a couple of things on how to begin moving forward.  I think I’m coming out in a somewhat different place, although only in a tentative way, and would like to hear other people’s views on this.  I’d be reluctant to put back into paragraph 3 at some point an indication that, one or two meetings from now, we are more likely to move.  The reason is, I think that becomes a form of calendar guidance of its own.  Just as, when we put in the quasi-calendar guidance before, saying, “Well, this isn’t really calendar—it’s all data dependent,” the markets all read it as calendar guidance, I think the same thing is going to happen now if we put in language such as that included in paragraph 3 of alternative C. My preference would be that we use paragraph 2 as the vehicle for beginning to communicate a change in the Committee’s collective view as to where the economy is headed, which, it’s hoped, actually begins to, I would say, increase some volatility a little bit as people  begin to think liftoff is more likely but is not a done deal.  That way, we don’t have a surprise at the meeting in which we eventually lift the target range, but it is not de facto occurring just by the inclusion of language in paragraph 3 at a meeting before we’ve actually decided to lift the target range. As I said, my current view is that June is very unlikely as an appropriate time to increase the target range.  I thought that paragraph 1 as originally circulated a week or two ago actually hit about right the factual characterization of the economy.  It’s fairly hard to argue with the proposition that the data were rather disappointing and pretty bad, yet paragraph 1 began with something saying that it was “in part reflecting transitory factors.”  Most important, I think, the beginning of paragraph 2 communicates that “Although growth in output and employment slowed during the first quarter, the Committee continues to expect…”  In other words, the basic direction of the Committee’s expectations hasn’t changed, notwithstanding the disappointing developments reported in paragraph 1. Notwithstanding the fact that I thought the original paragraph 1 got it about right, I’m okay with most of the changes that have been made since the original language was circulated, although I wouldn’t want to see us going too much further to try to look for the cheery in a way that would obscure what’s actually happened.  The one exception, Madam Chair, is the sentence on inflation, which is the second-to-last sentence in paragraph 1.  Back in March, that sentence said “Inflation has declined further below the Committee’s longer-run objective, largely reflecting declines in energy prices.”  So the phrase “largely reflecting declines in energy prices” was, in effect, explaining how the decline had gone further below.  It was an explanation of the delta.  I think the language that was circulated originally to the Committee a week or two ago is now in alternative A, and the language is as follows: “Inflation continued to run well below the Committee’s longer-run objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non-energy imports.”  There, the way I read it when that language was circulated was that now this phrase “largely reflecting” in effect explains the “well” part—why it is “well” below.  But as it’s been modified, the sentence now reads “Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s longer-run objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non-energy imports.” I don’t think it’s the case that all of the difference between the Committee’s target and where we are right now is explained based on the earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non-energy imports.  On the contrary, as many people pointed out yesterday and a little bit today already, we haven’t been hitting the inflation target for quite some time now.  And if you pull out housing inflation—which, of course, is largely a function of rents imputed to homeowners—then you have an awful lot of continuing questions about how much inflation there is. As a factual matter, I think we should modify that sentence to say something like the following: “Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non-energy imports”—or something just making clear that that second phrase does not account for all of the difference between the Committee’s target and where we are right now. Finally, like those who have gone before me, I would prefer removing “at least” in the first sentence.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo expresses his disagreement with certain language changes and suggests different approaches for communicating the Committee's view, specifically regarding the timing of raising the federal funds rate target range and inflation. He also disagrees with the inclusion of the phrase "largely reflecting" in the sentence on inflation and suggests modifying it to better reflect the actual difference between the Committee's target and current inflation levels.


Passage number 219.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our March statement provided forward guidance only as far ahead as this meeting, and it effectively said we were going to go to a meeting-by-meeting, data-dependent approach to decisionmaking.  From now on, that’s the right thing to do, and I think that’s important.  This means we will not be in the business of telegraphing interest rate moves in the previous meeting’s statement.  I support the observations President Lockhart made on this.  An important corollary of that is that we should not be encouraging people to believe we won’t raise rates without having sent a telegraph on the issue in the previous meeting’s statement. Concerning alternative C as a stalking-horse for future statements, I don’t feel the need to include language like that in paragraphs 2 or 3 at a meeting prior to liftoff.  So I agree with Governor Tarullo—every meeting should be live, and we should, to the extent that we have the opportunity, condition people to expect that we could move without forewarning, perhaps.  A critical aspect is today’s characterization of the economy, especially in the first paragraph.  As I said in the earlier round, a substantial amount of data is scheduled to arrive between now and our June meeting.  If those reports are reasonably close to what the Tealbook is forecasting, they’re going to show a rebound in consumer spending growth, and they’re going to show a firming in the monthly inflation figures. In that case, there could well be a strong argument for raising rates in June.  Now, we don’t know for sure the data will come in that way, and we don’t know for sure there won’t be some looming concerns on the horizon that alter the outlook. We could find we’ve hit a more prolonged soft patch.  In that case, we may be inclined to delay raising rates when we get to June, and I’m open to that possibility.  But, in view of the information we’re going to get, I think it’s very important not to take June off the table.  As I said, the critical aspect is how the statement characterizes the data, and that focuses attention on the first paragraph.  The revisions that were made between the beginning of last week and the end of last week in the first paragraph were good, important, and necessary.  But I agree with President Mester that the first paragraph still has somewhat of a “glass half-empty” tone, emphasizing the empty half of the glass I guess you’d say.  I support her suggestion for changing the characterization of household spending.  I also support Governor Tarullo’s change of “largely” to “partly.” I think he’s right on there. But I believe that the inflation sentence in alternative C is more balanced and fair, as it acknowledges that inflation is no longer declining.  It calls that out. Central bank communication is all about what you choose to call out, and I think it would be fair to call out that inflation isn’t declining.  So I’d put that suggestion on the table. Regarding the phrase “at least,” I’ve been wrestling with that in my mind.  Certainly, in a broad-brush kind of way, you can see how including it might make things a little more dour than they ought to be, as President Mester argued.  But, on the other hand, “at least in part” means that the amount that’s attributable to transitory factors is “in part” or “greater than in part.”  From that point of view, “at least in part” seems to me like a more upbeat assessment than just “in part reflecting.” But I could be persuaded either way on that.  Those are my comments on language, Madam Chair.  Thank you very much. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 220.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Kocherlakota made a good case for alternative A, and I’m sympathetic to his view, but I can support alternative B.  I continue to believe that economic conditions will most likely be consistent with an appropriate time for liftoff being sometime in 2016.  I currently think, based on data, that it will take until then for me to be reasonably confident that we’re on course to achieve our inflation objective within an acceptable time frame. The information we’ve received since our March meeting has not changed my opinion on this.  Indeed, I’m a little nervous over the latest data on activity and their implications for further  slower reductions in resource slack. The recent stabilization of energy prices and the dollar are positives.  But, as I discussed yesterday, I need to see a good deal more broad-based, concrete evidence before being confident that underlying inflation trends actually are heading up with adequate momentum.  But, having said that, we’ll see how the data evolve. Let me make a couple of comments about other things people have mentioned.  I agree completely that we have moved to the point at which it’s a meeting-by-meeting decision.  They’re all live decisions on the rate increase, so data conditionality, by itself, is all we need.  I don’t think we need special language, either, to signal our intent. I agree completely with Governor Tarullo on the paragraph 1 language on inflation.  I had noted that myself.  The problem is that the previous iteration had talked about the gradient— inflation declining—and now it’s a level concept—“continued to run”—but it leaves the same factors in place. So if you add, as I think you said, “partly reflecting earlier declines,” that would take care of that.  Alternatively, if you leave the language, you could also add “and resource slack” as part of the explanation, but the more minimal “partly” would probably be better there. I’m indifferent on the language about household spending growth that President Mester indicated.  I’m a little worried that it’s going to sound like the message you communicate when you go out and say, “I support so-and-so 1,000 percent.”  When you say, “Household spending continued to grow,” the alternative to that is a recession.  If household spending doesn’t grow, it’s a recession, so I’m not quite sure—but, at any rate, that’s fine. On “consumer sentiment remains high,” these are factually correct observations, but I’m a little worried that it might be risky.  After all, we’re thinking that the energy price declines are transitory.  Gas prices are going to go up, and we know that sentiment goes down when gasoline prices go up.  So we might be providing a different bright line for people looking for a bright   sign here.  Then, if you see that one go down, it might have a little more of an implication than we intend.  But otherwise, I don’t have a problem with that.  I support alternative B. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses sympathy for alternative A but ultimately supports alternative B. He also discusses various factors and considerations, such as economic conditions, inflation trends, and language choices, but there is no indication of strong disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 221.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B and the latitude it offers the Committee to consider a change in policy at its next meeting. In terms of guidance that we can glean from policy rules, the benchmarks in the Tealbook, Book B, continue to generally suggest that the funds rate should be higher than its current setting. Granted, the equilibrium real rate, or r*, we’ve been discussing remains depressed and raises questions as to whether these benchmarks are providing appropriate guidance today. At the same time, common frameworks used to estimate r* also provide an estimate of potential GDP in which declines in r* go hand in hand with lower potential.  For example, the current Laubach-Williams framework indicates that the equilibrium real rate is negative, though it also implies that output is actually above potential.  So, while policy should incorporate a lower equilibrium real rate into the appropriate setting of the funds rate, it also should not neglect the implications for potential GDP and the output gap.  For example, using the lower r* measure and positive output gap in the Taylor (1999) rule with inertia suggests a higher current funds rate.  The Taylor (1993) rule indicates a setting above 1 percent, even with the lower equilibrium real rate.  I don’t take the positive output gap to completely reflect current conditions by any means, since some labor market slack remains.  However, this example illustrates that taking on board a lower equilibrium real rate may also imply a smaller output gap. Finally, although this is not a decision for today, I note increasing uncertainty about the timing and effects of ceasing reinvestments.  I’m a bit concerned in looking at the market participant surveys and noting that expectations on the timing of when reinvestments will be ended are quite diffuse. For example, a slight majority of dealers expect Treasury reinvestments to end in the first quarter of 2016, but then expectations are spread over the next four quarters into 2017.  This is somewhat concerning, especially given the risk highlighted in the QS report and recent IMF financial stability reports that longer-term rates could increase sharply approaching liftoff.  Or the Committee could be facing another conundrum in which longer-term rates remain low.  I think we should try to manage some of this risk by providing more guidance on the timing of reinvestment, perhaps incorporating it into the SEP or perhaps just distributing it on an internal basis for our own use, to think about expectations on when we anticipate ceasing reinvestments.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and discussing various viewpoints, but there is no direct contention or disagreement.


Passage number 222.
 MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I view the evolution of the draft alternative B to finally contain entirely data-dependent language.  This is a very positive development and, I believe, an essential step on the path to policy normalization.  I also interpret the language in alternative B as leaving our options open for beginning normalization at any future meeting as we are informed by incoming data. My biggest concern with alternative B is its overly weak interpretation of the current economic environment.  As I mentioned yesterday, expenditure-side data for Q1 over the past 30 years appears to be suffering from poor and perhaps incorrect seasonal adjustment.  An indicator that incorporates income-side data, GDPplus, which was posted to the website of our Real-Time Data Research Center this morning, indicates that the first quarter may not be nearly  as weak as many of the nowcasts being reported.  GDPplus grew at 1.65 percent in the first quarter after growing 3.3 percent on a year-over-year basis in 2014:Q4. Further, I suggest that the Committee consider, now or in the future, simplifying its assessment of the labor market. Many labor market indicators paint a relatively healthy picture of the labor market.  For that reason, I would favor deleting the third full sentence in paragraph 1—again, either now or in the future—and simplifying it.  That sentence begins with “A range of labor market indicators…”  This sentence is fairly imprecise, and it adds little to the meaning that is already embodied in the preceding sentence.  The idea would be to seek every opportunity to boil the FOMC statement down to its essence by eliminating sentences that don’t add particularly to meaning or understanding. I am otherwise supportive of the suggestion to eliminate “at least” and of the other suggestions that have been made.  Thank you very much, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Prichard expresses his positive views on the evolution of the draft alternative B and the language it uses. He also raises his concerns about the interpretation of the current economic environment but does not engage in any disagreement or contention with the other participants.


Passage number 223.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 224.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  Let me respond to some of the language suggestions first.  Like others, I would not include the phrase “at least” in the opening paragraph.  That’s not needed.  It’s even unclear. On Governor Tarullo’s suggestion, I think he’s absolutely right.  I would put “partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices” in the penultimate sentence in paragraph 1. That’s exactly right.  In the recent data, core is running about 1 percent.  Overall inflation is running at around zero over the past couple of quarters, but it was obviously negative in the first quarter.  There are a lot of factors going on—President Lacker made this point, too.  That’s just accurate and, I think, better.  Paragraph 2 is really the place in which we do the heavy lifting and explain how we interpret things.  Paragraph 1 is really about the data. I’ll make a comment about data dependence in paragraph 1.  This is part of life. We’re in the data-dependent mode.  Paragraph 1 is going to describe the data.  We had only a month, really, of data here.  This is a very small sample, but these are the data we have, and I think we have to just describe them accurately. The part of the statement in which we try to explain how we interpret them is paragraph 2. In that respect, I thought paragraph 2 did a nice job of making the point that, yes, the data have been weaker.  Yes, we’ve had these factors in terms of inflation.  But, basically, our outlook hasn’t changed much.  I’m not concerned so much about the weakness or the signaling in paragraph 1 as currently stated, because I think that’s the way the data have been.  It’s just a small sample, and, of course, we’ll get a lot more data before our next meeting.  So I’m fine with that. In terms of Governor Tarullo and others who’ve commented on where the future statements should go, obviously President Lockhart started us down that road.  I strongly agree with Governor Tarullo and, I think, President Evans as well as some others that we shouldn’t be going back to trying to put some quasi-date-based guidance in there.  That whole thing of how we have to take a couple of steps before we act is a kind of straightjacket we don’t want to get ourselves in. We’re in a good place now on our statements, and I wouldn’t want to see us move back to that. Now, my own view in terms of the outlook hasn’t really changed based on the data we’ve seen in the past month, which is similar to what others have mentioned.  First-quarter data seem to be distorted by some seasonal factors and other factors.  We’ve been down this road before.  In terms of the inflation data, I haven’t changed my view there, either.  I still have the view that inflation will come back over the next couple of years to our target.  But this is all forecast, and we’re now in the data-dependent mode.  When I’m asked when I think we’ll be raising rates, I say, “I might have a view on this, but I don’t know.” I try to avoid talking about June, September, December, or whichever year because it really depends on how the data come in, how they influence our outlook, and what the right policy is. That’s a hard message for us to get across, because we’ve been focused on June versus September versus December or whatever.  So I’ve been thinking a little bit outside the box here about how we can, beyond this statement, get to a more data-dependent approach.  Madam Chair, I have a suggestion for you.  I made you a special T-shirt [Laughter].  The message reads “Monetary Policy Is Data Dependent.” CHAIR YELLEN.  How about one for everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Williams, is expressing support for alternative B and agrees with Governor Tarullo's suggestion. They also agree with the language suggestions made by others. There is no disagreement or conflict present in this passage.


Passage number 225.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The initials "MR" do not provide enough context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. More information is needed.


Passage number 226.
 WILLIAMS.  I have a whole box of them.  You wear this around, and then I think that’ll make the point pretty clear.  We won’t have to worry so much about— CHAIR YELLEN. Fantastic. Love it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response from Chair Yellen ("Fantastic. Love it") shows agreement and enthusiasm towards Williams' suggestion.


Passage number 227.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or making any claims, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 228.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only includes a statement of gratitude, with no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 229.
 MR. TARULLO. Have the softball team wear those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 230.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the given context or information is not sufficient. Please provide the passage or topic in order to analyze it properly.


Passage number 231.
 WILLIAMS.  Another great idea.  Oh, I have one last comment I want to make— sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 232.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You can’t top that, John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a brief exchange where one person responds to another person's statement with laughter.


Passage number 233.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 234.
 WILLIAMS.  No, I know.  Actually, President Kocherlakota, I can—in this way.  I would like to second the comments of President Kocherlakota and President Bullard about having more of a discussion regarding the natural rate of interest, with r* estimates obviously being at the center of this.  I get a lot of feedback, pro and con, about this, and there is some  literature developing on this besides just the Laubach-Williams model.  So I really do think that having a further discussion about that would be helpful. The basic logic of Laubach-Williams is actually pretty simple.  Over the past five years, output growth has been averaging 2.3 percent—I’m picking up on President Kocherlakota’s point yesterday about how Laubach-Williams works.  The trend growth in our model is 2.0 percent.  I think that’s consistent with most people’s views. So we’re getting growth of 0.3 percentage point above trend over five years, while the real federal funds rate has been about minus 1.7.  The only way you can interpret this statistically is to think that the real rate gap— basically, the amount of monetary stimulus—is very modest over the past five years, and this hasn’t changed in our model. What Laubach-Williams is telling you is simple.  We’ve had negative real rates for five straight years.  Output growth has been just a smidgen above potential.  Therefore, there’s really not much monetary stimulus relative to the neutral rate going on.  This is something we should discuss further, but, basically, that’s how the model interprets the data.  If the equilibrium real rate really were 2, growth would have been a lot faster than 2.3.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply restating and agreeing with the comments made by President Kocherlakota and President Bullard regarding the need for a discussion about the natural rate of interest. The speaker also agrees with the basic logic of the Laubach-Williams model and provides some data to support their point. Overall, the passage is focused on agreement and further discussion rather than contention.


Passage number 235.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had read about the T-shirt in the media, and I’m glad to see the real thing in front of us. But the more serious thing is, President Williams summarized a number of people’s comments that we want to get away from being date dependent.  One challenge with regard to that is the way the Summary of Economic Projections presents our policy outlooks.  That’s very date dependent.  In fact, that’s what I’m often asked about:  “Boy, it looks as though everyone’s saying 2015. What do you think about that.”  So it’s something to be thought about.  If we’re really trying to get away from date dependence, I think that says something about how we want to be talking about interest rates in the Summary of Economic Projections as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  That’s a good suggestion.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is making a suggestion about how the Summary of Economic Projections should be presented in order to align with the goal of getting away from date dependence. Chair Yellen responds by thanking him and agreeing that it is a good suggestion.


Passage number 236.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B.  On the statement, I support taking out “at least” and changing “largely” to “partly.” More broadly, paragraph 1 initially struck me, and continues to strike me, as fairly downbeat.  But what saves it for me is this comment about how household real income is rising strongly, which I think really sets out our narrative for just how much we’re counting on consumer spending and is a pretty strong statement in a context of weak spending.  So, overall, it achieves a level of balance, and I’m fine with it with those changes. In terms of forward guidance, I’ll just add that I believe it’s a very bad idea to surprise the market with liftoff.  I would avoid calendar-based guidance.  I would let the data speak.  I would let the statement, the minutes, and the speeches speak. I do think the market will get it. It’s very unlikely that the people in this room would be approaching a decision to lift off the interest rate, with all of the attention we’re getting, and that this would be a surprise to themarket.  That’s incredibly unlikely. In fact, my guess is, as we approach that, it’s not going to be a surprise to the market, in light of all of the transparency and all of the attention being paid. More broadly, I think that policy is right where it’s supposed to be—looking at incoming data to see whether the liftoff narrative still holds together, that narrative being reasonable growth that is strong enough to support further improvement in the labor market at a meaningful pace and inflation moving up to 2 percent in the medium term. The sense I had at the beginning of the year was that the labor market would continue to heal fairly quickly in a context of moderate growth, and I think there’s a better-than-even chance that something like that narrative will reemerge as we leave the first quarter behind, just as it did in 2014.  So, as I said yesterday, I feel good about where the current Tealbook forecast is, and I consider that to be still on the same path we were on—a little bit slower, but a reasonable path. I do have to admit I have a concern now, though, that the speed limit on U.S. growth may now be closer to 2 percent than 3 percent, because of the drag generated by the behavior of net exports, and that improvement in the labor market will also slow down as a result.  Time—and data—will tell.  Monetary policy can respond and really has already done so through expectations.  It may limit further tightening but doesn’t feel as though it can reverse the tightening in financial conditions that we have already experienced. In the case of returning closer to the old path that had strong job growth, we’re close to the natural rate.  Monetary policy works with long lags.  Zero isn’t the right number.  This remains for me a very satisfying approach if we do get back to that path, and, again, that’s my modal case. The lower path is just much tougher. We’re still close to the natural rate. We’re still eliminating slack, but at a much slower pace, and I think that, more important, the economy ismore vulnerable to an unwanted tightening in financial conditions and probably in a nonlinear way. I would still want to lift off, just a little bit later.  But I would point out that the communication challenges and the risks are much less attractive. I’d be very happy to see data come in that would justify liftoff in June or at any meeting subsequent to that.  But, having resisted predictions so far for the most part, I’ll continue to do so today.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of the speaker's opinions and preferences.


Passage number 237.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I support alternative B.  It seems appropriate for the statement to recognize that incoming data have shown softness across a range of spending categories, in industrial production as well as in labor market conditions. Although there is reason to believe that some of the weakness reflects transitory factors or statistical noise, my best guess is that some of it also reflects a more persistent slowing in economic momentum.  In particular, the negative effects of dollar appreciation and weakness in activity abroad on net exports and business investment, as well as the negative effects of earlier oil price declines on drilling and mining, appear to be greater than expected, and the boost to consumption has not materialized. This softness of recent data, along with the advance estimate of GDP, leads me to favor removing the bracketed “at least” language from the first sentence. I also support Governor Tarullo’s modification to the sentence on inflation.  That is simply a more accurate statement. By the same token, reflecting our uncertainty about the persistence of these effects, it is appropriate to include mention of some continuing positive economic signals, such as the relatively high level of consumer sentiment.  For that reason, I support the additional words in paragraph 2, which stress that, despite the weaker data, the Committee continues to expect the economy to expand at a moderate pace. For those who worry that paragraph 1 is too downbeat, I would note this is significantly counterbalanced by the fact that alternative B makes few changes to paragraphs 2 and 3 of the March statement, including importantly reiterating that the risks to the outlook and the labor market are nearly balanced rather than emphasizing downside risks in light of recent data. In my view, the incoming data, on balance, do not suggest we’re appreciably closer to our two conditions for liftoff.  The incoming data on the labor market do not provide evidence of further improvement.  If anything, the softer tone of the aggregate spending data raises the possibility that labor market improvement may stall this year.  My reading of the data on unemployment, labor force participation, and the number of employees working part time for economic reasons is that slack remains.  Nonetheless, we’ll have two additional labor market readings to help with our assessment before the June FOMC deliberations. Meanwhile, the modest improvement we’ve seen in putting a floor under inflation falls short of our standard of reasonable confidence.  We’ve seen some encouraging movement in core CPI, although core PCE remains persistently soft relative to our 2 percent target. The recent firming of oil prices and the recent plateauing in dollar appreciation raise the possibility that we might be seeing an inflection point, but further appreciation seems likely, accelerating wage growth has yet to materialize, and market-based measures of inflation expectations remain soft, although they’ve shown some improvement as the price of oil has firmed. It’s possible that the data we will receive in the coming months will reveal the weakness in the data to have been a temporary aberration, and that momentum in underlying activity is undiminished.  It could also be that incoming data and economic developments abroad will show  foreign activity to be on more stable footing than now appears to be the case.  If so and if price inflation and measures of inflation expectations show further signs of firming, then liftoff could be appropriate.  On balance, my assessment is that, although June should remain on the table, the probability of liftoff has shifted from June to later in the year.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their own views and opinions, but there is no clear indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 238.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  I support alternative B.  Given the slowdown in growth, the weaker payroll trend, and a host of other weak economic data, I think it’s unlikely, speaking for myself, that I’m going to see sufficient news in the next seven weeks that’ll cause me to want to lift off at the June FOMC meeting.  That said, I wouldn’t rule it out completely, because, as Governor Fischer makes clear, it’s possible that we could see two strong employment reports and a big upturn in economic activity.  So we could get there.  I just don’t think that’s very likely at this point. I hope the economy is going to cooperate and is going to make a September liftoff feasible, but I don’t even really have that much confidence about that, either. The Tealbook forecast is actually interesting now in the sense of how flat the unemployment rate trajectory is. So modest shortfalls in growth could actually cause the unemployment rate trajectory to be completely flat or even tick up.  In that case, we might not find ourselves yet able to pass the “further improvement in the labor market” test. I think that “further improvement in the labor market” and “reasonably confident [about] inflation” are really good tests, and I feel very comfortable using those when speaking about my own views in terms of the timing of liftoff.  We should talk about that in speeches and make those our criteria, and that will help the market participants think along with us. In terms of language, I’m with everyone else. I would delete “at least.”  I’m not that confident that it’s all due to transitory factors, so I think “at least” goes a little too far. With respect to President Mester’s suggestion to change the sentence about consumption, I believe the meaning is the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual expressing their opinion and discussing various possibilities and factors that might influence their decision.


Passage number 239.
 MS. MESTER.  The meaning is the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement "The meaning is the same" suggests that there is agreement or consensus regarding the meaning.


Passage number 240.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Given that the meaning is the same, I guess I prefer to go with the more parsimonious number of words—a more direct approach.  So I think I prefer what we have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing their preference for a more parsimonious number of words, which they consider a more direct approach. They also express a preference for what they currently have. There is no indication of disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 241.
 MS. MESTER.  I think second derivatives are harder to understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents an opinion.


Passage number 242.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. In terms of Governor Tarullo’s “partly” versus “largely,” I think you really could go either way.  You think about the gap between our target of 2 percent for inflation and where we are. My judgment would be that about two-thirds of that gap is due to lower energy prices and the stronger dollar, so about one-third is due to other things.  You could call that “largely” if you wanted to, or you could call that “partly.” It’s really what the Committee wants to communicate in terms of how concerned they are about inflation being low that should drive whether you want to be “largely” or “partly.”  I would slightly favor “partly” because I’m not as concerned about inflation today as I was six weeks ago, but I’m happy to accept the judgment of the Committee. With respect to the statement, I’m really glad that we’re now in a data-dependent place, and I don’t feel bad about that in the slightest.  The market should be able to think along with us as they see the data, as long as they can interpret them through the prism of labor market improvement and whether we are becoming reasonably confident about the inflation outlook over the medium term.  If the market starts to diverge from what our expectations are, there are  plenty of forums in which to remind people of what the data mean to us in terms of those two criteria.  I think we can easily pull the market back. Lastly, Chair Yellen opened the meeting by recognizing Chris Cummings, so I want to close my remarks similarly.  I want to acknowledge Chris’s service to the New York Fed, the Federal Reserve System, and this Committee.  On several occasions during the crisis, Chris was forced to sit in this chair and provide the New York Fed’s views on monetary policy, and she did that very ably.  We hope that will never have to happen again. In terms of Chris’s contributions to the System, they’re very large.  She’s been a great colleague to me and to many others throughout the Federal Reserve System.  I’ve heard many people comment to me over the past few days and weeks about how much they’re going to miss her and how important she’s been in contributing to the Federal Reserve System writ large, as opposed to just the New York Fed.  She embodies, in my mind, the modern central banker in that she has a very deep and broad portfolio, ranging from serving as product director for the Wholesale Product Office to chairing the Financial Stability Board’s Cross-Border Crisis Management Group.  That’s a pretty wide span of responsibilities. I want to thank her personally for her wise counsel and support during my tenure.  And, of course, I wish you the best in all of your future endeavors.  [Applause] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks, everybody.  First of all, let me acknowledge that I heard the support for a Committee discussion about r* and the factors influencing it, and I also think that’s a good idea.  We’ll work with Thomas and others to see if we can put that together.  It’s a great idea. I heard, in general, broad-based support for alternative B for today, and we have a few language issues to review.  First, starting at the top of paragraph 1, we have the bracketed “at  least,” and I actually heard a large number of people who suggested we not include the bracketed “at least.”  Let me give anybody who wants it in there an opportunity to say so.  President Lacker, I heard you support putting it in there, but are there others.  [No response] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 243.
  Then I will— MR. LACKER.  I could support deleting it. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great. So we will remove the bracketed “at least.”  The next change suggested was President Mester’s recommended change in the language about household spending.  Just to remind you, she suggested changing the words “Growth in household spending declined” to “Household spending continued to grow, although at a slower pace.” I heard a little bit of support, not a great deal, and a couple of people were opposed.  Let me just ask—I think I heard two supporters in addition to President Mester.  Is there widespread support for that change.  If so, please indicate if you support that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. It simply mentions suggestions and opinions from different individuals, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 244.
 MR. FISCHER.  I do. PARTICIPANT.  I support the change. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I see three people who are supportive.  And how many are opposed.  [Show of hands]  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, there is no contention or disagreement. All participants express support for the change being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 245.
  I’m going to— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Chair’s prerogative. CHAIR YELLEN.  Chair’s prerogative.  I think leaving it as is, rather than going with the suggestion, is, frankly, my own preference. Finally, we have Governor Tarullo’s suggested change.  That would be in the “inflation” sentence, the next-to-last sentence in paragraph 1, and the suggestion is to change “largely reflecting” to “partly reflecting.” I did hear quite a bit of support for that.  Personally, I’m also  open to making that change, but let me see what people think who didn’t weigh in on that.  How many people would—President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement and contention in this passage. The speaker suggests making a change, but the chair expresses a preference for leaving the passage as it is. The chair also mentions hearing support for another suggested change, but wants to hear opinions from those who haven't weighed in on it yet. This indicates that there is disagreement among the participants in the conversation about making changes to the passage.


Passage number 246.
 MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a clarifying question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans simply asks for clarification and Chair Yellen agrees to answer his question.


Passage number 247.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 248.
 Vice Chairman Dudley, you mentioned two-thirds of— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That would be my characterization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely restating what Vice Chairman Dudley mentioned.


Passage number 249.
 MR. EVANS. Was that of headline inflation or core.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on whether the mentioned inflation is headline inflation or core inflation.


Passage number 250.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Headline is zero.  Core is running about 1.3-ish on a year-over-year basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents information about the Headline and Core running rates without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 251.
 MR. EVANS.  So you’re saying two-thirds of the low headline inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is being relayed as a factual statement from Mr. Evans without any opposing views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 252.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Since the passage is not provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 253.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes.  That’s fair. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, agrees and finds the statement fair.


Passage number 254.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. It refers to inflation.  It doesn’t refer to core inflation.  I think you can argue it either way, frankly. CHAIR YELLEN. Inflation is running about ¼ percent.  Core is running about 1.4 or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker provides information about both inflation and core inflation rates without expressing any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 255.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: In order to answer this question, the passage itself needs to be provided.


Passage number 256.
  So about two-thirds of the gap is in these transitory factors, and about one-third is— MR. EVANS.  When I say inflation, I’m thinking underlying inflation—something closer to core—so that’s why I believe “partly” is important.  But you’re right.  If this was nailed down and it said headline inflation, that would be okay.  At any rate, I support Governor Tarullo’s recommendation.CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Let me see support for Governor Tarullo’s suggestion.  [Show of hands] I see broad-based support.  Is there anyone who feels strongly opposed.  Okay.  So let us also make that change. We will change the word “largely” to “partly.”  And those are all of the suggestions that we need to review, so I think we’re ready, Matt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants in the conversation are discussing and making changes to some suggestions, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposition. They are making adjustments based on different perspectives and opinions.


Passage number 257.
 MR. LUECKE.  The vote will be on alternative B as depicted on pages 7 and 8 of Thomas’s handout, with the changes of taking out the words “at least” in the first sentence and replacing “largely” with “partly” in the penultimate sentence in paragraph 1.  It will also cover the directive on page 12 of Thomas’s handout. Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard Yes President Evans Yes Governor Fischer Yes President Lacker Yes President Lockhart Yes Governor Powell Yes Governor Tarullo Yes President Williams Yes CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The individuals mentioned all appear to be in agreement with the proposed plan and there are no indications of conflict or dispute.


