Passage number 1.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate it. CHAIR YELLEN. Let me mention, as was indicated in the agenda, that the entire FOMC meeting will be conducted jointly as an FOMC and Board of Governors meeting—and this will likely be true going forward.  I need a motion to close the Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the need for a motion to close the Board meeting.


Passage number 2.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  And without objection. Our first item of business is “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations.” Let me call on Simon to give us the Desk report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The participants in the meeting seem to be in agreement and the discussion is proceeding smoothly.


Passage number 3.
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m looking at exhibit 2, figure 7—“FX Performance over Intermeeting Period and Net Commodity Exports.” What is the lesson I am to draw from this chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a query about a specific chart.


Passage number 4.
 MR. POTTER. In general, countries that export a lot—mainly to China—and have done very well over the past 10 years are suffering quite a lot of exchange rate pressure right now.  In addition, you see some big outliers down there that I discussed that have idiosyncratic events going on right now, probably the most important of which is Brazil, due to its size.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is providing a general observation about countries that export a lot and have experienced exchange rate pressure, as well as mentioning Brazil as an outlier due to its size and idiosyncratic events.


Passage number 5.
 MR. BULLARD. One interpretation is that this line is pretty flat, and everybody depreciated against the dollar. Maybe it’s not so much related to commodities—it’s just everyone depreciated against the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting an interpretation, but there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 6.
 MR. POTTER. There’s a bit of a scale issue here and I agree that nearly everyone did depreciate against the dollar, but there is a relatively weak relationship here, and it does have a negative slope.  If you took into account the depreciation over a longer period of time, you’d see more of a consistent one here. At the previous briefing, I discussed Canada and Norway in terms of the depreciation that they’ve had, and we saw less of that in this intermeeting period, but it’s been substantial leading into this intermeeting period.  The point we’re trying to get across is, these are really big relative price shocks for these countries, and some of what we saw in the loss of risk appetite is how well they deal with these big, relative price shocks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It mainly provides information and offers an analysis of the relationship between currency depreciation and the dollar.


Passage number 7.
 MR. BULLARD.  Countries have also been changing their monetary policy stance, something that would tend to depreciate their currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about countries changing their monetary policy stance, which tends to depreciate their currency.


Passage number 8.
 MR. POTTER.  Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 9.
 MR. BULLARD.  So it’s not just commodities—it’s commodity market developments in conjunction with monetary policy developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is simply stating a fact and explaining that commodity market developments are influenced by monetary policy developments.


Passage number 10.
  MR. POTTER.  The theory is that you can get some economic stabilization by having a flexible exchange rate.  And we’re on the other side of that, as you pointed out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is merely discussing a theory about economic stabilization with a flexible exchange rate.


Passage number 11.
 MR. BULLARD.  I have a question about panel 12, which gives key components of financial conditions.  Could you just plot the financial conditions index that you think is the most appropriate. Because if you do it this way, then I’ve got to compute in my head what happened to the financial conditions index.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply asking for clarification and requesting a specific plot to make it easier for him to compute the financial conditions index.


Passage number 12.
 MR. POTTER.  I think there’s a new one of those produced each day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only presents a statement made by Mr. Potter, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 13.
 MR. BULLARD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of the word "Yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 14.
  [Laughter] MR. POTTER.  And they have differences among them with respect to their construction.  There’s one that’s been very prominent in the past week, and that one has been given some weight by people outside this building.  For the people around this table, I think you can’t rely on an index constructed by someone else for how you should look at the deterioration in financial conditions. I tried to emphasize that it’s been mixed.  Mortgages tightened.  If you put a lot of weight on the housing sector, then this doesn’t look as bad as some other periods.  If you put a lot of weight on the exchange rate, then this is a pretty big intermeeting move.  If you look at some of the bigger indexes that are in the first percentile for the stock market, this is still pretty small. We could give you one index, but I think that would be misleading because every situation is different.  The weights might have worked well in the past, but they might not work well going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different perspectives on how to interpret the deterioration in financial conditions.


Passage number 15.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So your point is that it’s a mixed picture with respect to financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker's point is that it's a mixed picture with respect to financial conditions.


Passage number 16.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.  That, we hope, is our spin.  CHAIR YELLEN.  I have President Evans next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter agrees with the statement made and Chair Yellen acknowledges that Mr. Potter will be the next person to speak.


Passage number 17.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Simon, could you talk more about chart 11 on inflation expectations between one and two years after liftoff. I assume this comes from the dealer survey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 18.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s from both the dealer survey and the Survey of Market Participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that the information is from both the dealer survey and the Survey of Market Participants.


Passage number 19.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  It seems to show that in June and July of 2014, inflation was expected to be above 2 percent. Is that because they thought we would be late to liftoff.  We were taking a while to taper and we hadn’t finished the tapering, and now should I infer that we’re early to liftoff or right about time for liftoff. Also, is there any information from this about how longer-term inflation expectations might be moving. I understand that it’s short term, but any information about credibility anchors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and information, but there is no argument or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 20.
 MR. POTTER.  I can’t look into the heads of the people who put this answer down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their inability to understand the thoughts of others.


Passage number 21.
 MR. EVANS.  But you do statistical analysis of other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Evans does statistical analysis of other things.


Passage number 22.
 MR. POTTER.  We do, but not psychology, which I’m not so good at.  What has been the case, if you look at the probability distributions we have collected over the past year to a year and a half, there’s less probability assigned to the higher inflation outcomes, so that naturally drags down the average inflation rate that people expect.  In terms of the probability that inflation will be less than 1.75 percent over one to two years ahead, the dealers think there’s a 30 percent chance, which is not as high as they thought in March.  The buy side places a slightly higher probability on that outcome than they did in March.  If you average the dealers and buy side together, you get about 45 percent probability, and that’s consistent with the subdued inflation we’ve seen and the current inflation outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating information about probability distributions and inflation expectations. There are no conflicting views or arguments presented.


Passage number 23.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you.CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 24.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or making any claims that could be disagreed or contended against.


Passage number 25.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  I want to follow up on President Bullard’s question on panel 12 and then I want to make a link to panel 5.  I noticed that the MBS OAS came down.  I have a clarifying question and a more analytical one.  When the Treasury nominal swap spreads come down, that means that the swap rates are coming down more than the Treasury rates, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a question and a statement.


Passage number 26.
 MR. POTTER.  They’re both going up, but by less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Potter is not being challenged or disputed.


Passage number 27.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is not possible to assess if there is any underlying or implicit disagreement without further information.


Passage number 28.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes, but they’re actually both coming down, on net, over the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 29.
 MR. POTTER. This is the one-year forward rate, so you have to be careful with it. And it’s not updated for what happened yesterday.  If you look at the two-year note, it was 80 basis points at close yesterday. And you did see swap spreads also fall again yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining that the forward rate needs to be considered carefully because it is not updated for recent events. They also mention the previous day's closing rate for the two-year note and the fact that swap spreads have fallen, which are both stated as facts without any disagreement.


Passage number 30.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 31.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.  So, first, the swap rates have fallen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact without any conflicting information or opinions expressed.


Passage number 32.
 MR. POTTER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Potter said "Yes."


Passage number 33.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states "MR," which could stand for "Market Research" or "Mental Retardation," but without further context, it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 34.
 WILLIAMS. And the second question is, do we have a view on what is more correlated with the interest rates we think matter for borrowing, like corporate rates, other borrowing rates in the economy, and mortgage rates—is it swap rates or the Treasury rates. Treasury securities can have special features that mean that there’s a special premium associated with those, and possibly swap rates are more correlated with the private borrowing rates that we probably think actually matter—that is my question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is simply posing a question and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 35.
 MR. POTTER. It’s definitely true that this could be taken as something the private sector would like if they want to swap floating for fixed.  Overall, though, if you look at high yield OAS, that did move out a reasonable amount but it’s still not a really big change.  I’ve got 14 basis points over the intermeeting period, which we quoted as being at the 31st percentile.  One of the intermeeting periods was 128 basis points, which occurred with the fall in oil prices and the effect of the energy credits.  What we tried to do in chart 12 is to give a feeling for the richness of how you might measure financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any disagreement or contention. It consists of a statement and an explanation of data.


Passage number 36.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 37.
 WILLIAMS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided is incomplete and does not contain any information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 38.
 Are other borrowing rates besides mortgage rates, like corporate bond rates— MR. POTTER.  I think corporate bond rates have moved out, so they’re higher, and that’s definitely something that’s been happening over the past few months.  But as Lorie emphasized, we’ve seen absolutely zero evidence of signs of stress in funding markets.  Again, as I said, it’s a new world, and maybe we’ll learn there’s a great index that would’ve told us what to do in a year’s time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter agrees with Lorie's statement about there being no signs of stress in funding markets and acknowledges the possibility of a new world and the potential for a new index to provide guidance in the future.


Passage number 39.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not clear from the given information whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the passage is not provided. Please provide the relevant passage for a more accurate answer.


Passage number 40.
 WILLIAMS.  So what we really need is a daily r* out of all this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement expressing a need for something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 41.
 MR. POTTER.  Thank you.  You and Thomas can work on it, then.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN. Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the laughter that occurs after Mr. Potter speaks, which suggests that his statement or suggestion is not in agreement with the others in the conversation.


Passage number 42.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just a very short intervention on the swap rate.  The swap rate really is not a good indicator of what other corporate rates are going to be because it doesn’t really have a credit default component in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents the swap rate as not being a reliable indicator for other corporate rates due to the absence of a credit default component.


Passage number 43.
  When the swap is struck, there’s no notional value, so the swap rate doesn’t really reflect corporate credit rates in a— MR. POTTER.  But holding that constant, it does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker's statement is interrupted by Mr. POTTER, but their statements are not contradictory or conflicting.


Passage number 44.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It affects relative supply, and I think the way Simon was using it was to show that there’s a lot of Treasury supply that’s entering the market, presumably from the liquidation of foreign exchange reserves, and that’s causing swap rates to fall relative to Treasury rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is explaining how the increase in Treasury supply is causing swap rates to fall relative to Treasury rates. There is no conflicting information or contrasting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 45.
 MR. POTTER.  There are some other explanations the Tealbook discusses as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Potter mentions that the Tealbook discusses other explanations. Chair Yellen acknowledges President Rosengren, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 46.
  MR. ROSENGREN. My question is for Lorie, and it’s concerning the challenges of implementing the reverse repo facility when we decide to start raising rates.  It’s a two-part question.  One is from panel 15.  Were you surprised there wasn’t more activity in the reverse repo facility around the end of August and the beginning of September. And as you think about the volatility we’ve been experiencing in financial markets—the debt ceiling, the government shutdown, and end-of-the-year effects—how do you weigh those things in terms of thinking about the challenges to actually doing liftoff when we want to lift off.  Are there things that particularly concern you as we think about October, December, or next year and what’s going to be happening, whether we’ll actually be able to lift off effectively when we want to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question being asked by Mr. Rosengren to Lorie about her thoughts on implementing the reverse repo facility and the challenges it may face.


Passage number 47.
 MS. LOGAN.  With respect to the first question on not seeing more usage, I guess you’re referring to the financial volatility in markets and flight to quality.  We didn’t see any funding pressures, as Simon just discussed.  I would think that the type of volatility we’d expect to affect the overnight RRP would be more closely connected to funding pressures than asset price volatility going longer out.  So I wasn’t particularly surprised, but we were monitoring it closely to be sure. With respect to the year-end and the debt ceiling, given that the Committee is considering suspending the cap at liftoff, I don’t think we would expect to see year-end issues associated with managing the rate because there would be plenty of room to accommodate year-end pressures while targeting the overnight rate.  There are other issues associated with liquidity in financial markets— there might be an exaggerated move in broader asset prices just because there’s not as much trading going on during that time of year. So I think there are two separate issues when you look at liftoff at the end of the year.  One is related specifically to implementation, and I think the cap should go a long way toward alleviating that if it was lifted.The other is just broader financial market volatility, and I think that one is harder to assess, but I would say that there’s a lot less liquidity at year-end. With respect to the debt ceiling, I think it can go both ways.  One the one hand, with the reduction in bill supply, we should expect there to be more pressure to use the overnight RRP due to a shortage of collateral.  On the other hand, we don’t know when that really is going to start, and we also don’t know how markets are going to treat the at-risk securities. If market participants think the ON RRP facility is going to be there, they may not withdraw from the money funds that might give them those at-risk securities, and so we might not see the pressures there. I think it’s hard to know with respect to the debt ceiling. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. LOGAN is providing her thoughts and analysis on different factors that could impact the overnight RRP and financial markets, while CHAIR YELLEN does not respond or provide a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 48.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Madam Chair.  I thought panel 12 was quite informative.  I was wondering if you know or if you could provide a similar metric with regard to the decline in market-based measures of inflation compensation during the intermeeting period in terms of a percentile. I thought the percentile metric was very helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 49.
 MR. POTTER.  I don’t have that in front of me.  At times it was large—you can just look at the time series chart to see that.  It’s going to vary by which measure you use.  There was definitely a period, around the middle-to-late part of August, when it was falling quite strongly, but I don’t have that offhand.  We can find it for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have the specific information at hand, but they acknowledge that the data can be seen on a time series chart and that the measure may vary. They also offer to find the information for the listener.


Passage number 50.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, if you could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kocherlakota.


Passage number 51.
 MR. POTTER.  I think it’s not going to be as big as some of the moves we’ve seen in the past.  Remember, when I show you a chart like this, it doesn’t tell you what level we start at.  A lot of people say, “The stock market was a little high, and so it naturally came down.”  And it could be that some of those big moves down occurred when inflation compensation was relatively high compared with where it is today. So this is neutral on these statements. This is really looking at some change in change, you could almost argue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 52.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  But if you could provide that to me, that would be useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota simply expresses his desire for the information to be provided to him.


Passage number 53.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes, will do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Potter agrees to do something without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 54.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response by Mr. Kocherlakota is a simple statement of gratitude.


Passage number 55.
 MR. KAMIN.  If I could just offer a little bit of additional information regarding President Bullard’s question about the relationship between commodity prices and exchange rates.  We’ve done some research on this: basically, econometrically relating changes in currency values to the share of a country’s trade that’s in both oil and non-oil commodities.  It turns out that if you run that regression over the entire past year, starting when the dollar started to fall, you actually get pretty precise, statistically significant estimates of the effect of both oil prices and non-oil commodity prices on exchange rates.  That explains somewhere in the neighborhood of half of the cross-sectional dispersion of exchange rate depreciations. Now, if you take a snapshot of the previous intermeeting period, you might expect that, as it’s a more tumultuous time and a shorter period, you’d get a less precise reading on the relationship between commodity prices and exchange rates, and that is indeed what we found.  You still have a statistically significant effect of oil prices on currencies, but it’s a smaller coefficient, and a not-statistically-significant effect of non-oil commodity prices on currencies. That’s all to say that I think the basic relationship between commodity prices and a country’s exchange rate still holds, but it’s been obscured in this past month and a half with the more general market volatility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting research findings and explaining how the relationship between commodity prices and exchange rates may have been obscured in recent market volatility.


Passage number 56.
 MR. BULLARD.  Just to respond to that—why should they depreciate against the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is a response to a question without any conflicting views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 57.
 They should really depreciate against a basket of currencies of noncommodity countries, so the dollar is sort of proxying for the noncommodity— MR. KAMIN.  Well, they probably are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that the value of the dollar should depreciate against a basket of currencies of noncommodity countries. However, the statement is followed by a tentative response by Mr. Kamin, indicating a possible disagreement or uncertainty about whether this depreciation is actually occurring.


Passage number 58.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.  But that would be a big part of the world if you include the yen and the Europeans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 59.
 MR. POTTER.  Well, the euro and yen went up against the dollar, so the currencies of commodity countries depreciated against them as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any further questions or comments. [No response] I need a motion to ratify domestic open market operations since July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are simply discussing the changes in currency values and asking for a motion to ratify open market operations.


Passage number 60.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  We’re next going to turn to “System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy,” and I’m going to call on Beth Klee to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers show agreement by thanking each other and proceeding to the next topic without objection.


Passage number 61.
 MS. KLEE.2  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Chris Erceg and I will be referring to the materials titled “SOMA Reinvestment Policy.” At the July FOMC meeting, participants discussed various aspects of the decision to end reinvestment, including the appropriate economic conditionality of such a decision and the macroeconomic effects of alternative strategies.  In that context, you recently received a follow-up memo that addressed a number of these questions.  As noted in the upper panel of your first exhibit, key questions include the following: How much might the choice of reinvestment strategy matter for economic outcomes. How much might the choice of reinvestment strategy affect the path of the federal funds rate. And can reinvestment strategies that are linked to the federal funds rate improve economic outcomes in situations when the effective lower bound on the federal funds rate is binding.  In our briefing, Chris and I will provide evidence on these issues and discuss possible implications for the reinvestment language options included in alternative C of the September Tealbook. To start, under the trigger strategies considered in the staff memo—and as noted in the lower panel—the Committee would announce that full reinvestment of the principal payments from Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities would 2 The materials used by Ms. Klee and Mr. Erceg are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).continue until the federal funds rate reaches the trigger—either 1 percent or 2 percent—and then stop permanently.  These strategies have several key features. First, they are state dependent and, therefore, in line with the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans document, which indicates that the timing of the end of reinvestment will depend on the economic outlook.  Second, these strategies link reinvestment to the level of the policy rate, a feature that may be conceptually attractive as it then indirectly links the end of reinvestment to economic conditions.  Third, the conditionality is limited because the triggers, as constructed, imply that reinvestment ends permanently once the trigger is reached.  Of note, although we assume for illustrative purposes that the trigger strategies are geared toward specific numerical values of the funds rate, these strategies could be communicated through qualitative guidance about how far policy normalization had to proceed before reinvestment would be ended. Your next exhibit explores some consequences of the trigger strategies if economic conditions evolve in line with the modal outlook.  Panel A compares the evolution of the SOMA portfolio under the baseline reinvestment strategy—for which it is assumed that reinvestment ceases roughly six months after liftoff, and which is depicted by the solid black line—with the trigger strategies.  The 1 percent trigger— the blue dashed line—delays the end of reinvestment only briefly, while the 2 percent trigger—the red dotted line—delays the end of reinvestment until two years after liftoff, to late 2017.  The larger balance sheet under each trigger strategy causes the term premium—panel B—to run a tad lower than under the baseline strategy.  Because the inertial Taylor rule assumed to govern the federal funds rate in our simulations does not raise policy rates enough to counteract this additional balance sheet stimulus, long-term real interest rates decline a touch compared with the baseline—panel C—and, consequently, the unemployment rate also falls a little more quickly—panel E.  However, it is clear that the macroeconomic effects are small, even under the more accommodative 2 percent trigger. You might look at the results and wonder if reinvestment policy could matter much for macroeconomic outcomes.  Returning to the top of the exhibit, consider a polar case—shown by the green dash-dotted lines in panel A—in which the FOMC announces that the SOMA portfolio will be held constant at its current level for a very long time.  In this case, the term premium drops about 40 basis points on the announcement—the green line in panel B—and the unemployment rate, panel E, falls about ¼ percentage point below baseline by 2018.  This example highlights the result that reinvestment policy can have sizable effects, albeit under an extreme strategy. Turning to your third exhibit, the stimulus from the alternative reinvestment strategies can be offset by a somewhat higher funds rate than implied by the inertial Taylor rule.  As seen in panel A, we implement this offset for each strategy by boosting the intercept term of the Taylor rule by enough to achieve nearly the same macroeconomic outcomes as in the Tealbook baseline.  As seen in panel B, only a small upward adjustment of the federal funds rate path is required under the trigger strategies—the blue and red lines—to mimic the baseline outcomes for unemployment, panel C, and inflation, panel D.  By contrast, offsetting the effects ofmaintaining a constant portfolio requires a noticeably higher funds rate—the green line in panel B. Chris will now continue our briefing starting with your next exhibit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 62.
 MR. ERCEG. Thank you, Beth.  Although the macroeconomic effects of the baseline and trigger reinvestment strategies do not differ greatly under the modal outlook, trigger strategies can provide considerably more balance sheet accommodation in response to adverse shocks, particularly those shocks that would drive the federal funds rate to the ELB.  To illustrate this, in exhibit 4 we consider a recessionary shock that pins the federal funds rate at the ELB for three years under the baseline reinvestment strategy—the solid black line in panel A—and results in the unemployment rate—panel B—rising to 7½ percent.  Under the 2 percent trigger strategy, the red dotted line in panel A, the public expects that the federal funds rate will remain below 2  percent until 2021.  Accordingly, SOMA holdings, panel C, are expected to remain at their current level until the funds rate reaches 2 percent in 2021. The larger balance sheet under this strategy results in a much lower path for the term premium—the red line in panel D.  As a result, the trigger strategy mitigates somewhat the rise in the unemployment rate—panel B—with the peak rise about 0.4 percentage point lower than under the baseline strategy. The bottom panel discusses three key implications of trigger strategies. First, the balance sheet stimulus under the trigger strategy in an adverse scenario comes from an expectations channel:  Because reinvestment is tied to the policy rate, which is expected to remain low for a long time, the balance sheet is expected to remain large for much longer than in the baseline.  Second—and relatedly—a “calendar based” strategy that simply delayed reinvestment for a couple of years after liftoff would provide much less economic stimulus in adverse scenarios.  This outcome is illustrated by the strategy labeled “liftoff plus 2 years” shown by the dashed blue lines in panel C.  It delays the end of reinvestment by two years after liftoff, to late 2017, and thus extends the SOMA holdings.  Because the effects on the term premium— panel D—are quite small, this alternative approach only slightly mitigates the rise in unemployment, the blue lines in panel B, relative to the baseline. Returning to the bottom panel, the third key implication is that the trigger strategy only provides noticeable stimulus if the adverse shock occurs before the policy rate reaches the trigger. If the recessionary shocks occurred later, the trigger strategy— through delaying balance sheet adjustment a year or two—would provide only a small degree of additional stimulus.  A strategy that would restart reinvestment in response to sufficiently bad shocks could potentially do better in limiting their adverse macroeconomic effects than would an irreversible trigger strategy, at least if this strategy were well understood by market participants.  Of course, the greater state dependence of this policy might make it more difficult to communicate. As noted in your final exhibit, paragraph 4 of alternative C provides two options to characterize the Committee’s thinking about when to cease or begin phasing out reinvestments.  The first is to continue reinvesting “until normalization of the level ofthe federal funds rate is well under way,” and the second is to continue reinvesting “at least during the early stages of normalization of the level of the federal funds rate.” You might view “well under way” as qualitatively consistent with the trigger strategies discussed in the memo.  In particular, market participants might interpret this language as suggesting that reinvestment would not cease until economic conditions had led the Committee to increase the target range for the federal funds rate more than a few times.  In addition, the public might conclude that, in the event that the economic outlook deteriorated, reinvestment could continue for a long time.  This qualitative language would leave some ambiguity about how high the federal funds rate would have to rise to trigger an end of reinvestment, although policymakers could help clarify the public’s understanding through speeches, testimony, and other communications. In contrast, “at least during the early stages” might be interpreted as indicating that the Committee intends to cease or phase out reinvestment after a few hikes in the policy rate even if the federal funds rate stayed relatively low thereafter.  Market participants would probably view this language as indicating that policymakers place a relatively high priority on beginning to normalize the size of the balance sheet fairly soon.  However, the qualification “at least” would likely suggest that the Committee wanted to retain some option to continue reinvestments if the labor market was to weaken or if inflation was stubbornly low. Thank you very much.  Beth and I will be happy to take your questions. CHAIR YELLEN. Let’s start with questions for Beth and Chris, after which I’ll be very interested in seeking the Committee’s views on these different options.  I expect that in the not-so-distant future I will be asked more about our thinking, and I’m looking for some Committee-approved language that I could use. Why don’t we start with questions, and then we’ll have an opportunity for comments.  We’ve got a list of people who have asked to comment, and others can join on.  But now, questions.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 63.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First of all, thanks a lot for the excellent memo—I thought it was very informative and very useful.  I’d be interested in your perspectives, in terms of the language that you propose, why you decided to go with as ambiguous or qualitative a characterization as you did as opposed to at least mentioning the   federal funds rate or maybe actually talking about some numerical range for the federal funds rate.  Why use the term “well under way,” which is open to a lot of possible interpretations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a request for clarification and understanding of the language used in the memo.


Passage number 64.
 MR. ERCEG.  I think that the trigger strategies potentially can be communicated in different ways.  The minutes suggested that the Committee preferred qualitative guidance about the balance sheet, so we wanted to avoid really making it seem that the triggers we provide in our quantitative exercises for concreteness purposes really should be treated as numerical triggers as such. CHAIR YELLEN. We had a discussion about this at our previous meeting, and I think our interpretation of the sense of those on the Committee was that they preferred qualitative language to an explicit quantitative characterization. Other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Erceg and Chair Yellen are discussing the Committee's preference for qualitative guidance over explicit quantitative triggers.


Passage number 65.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m looking at panel B of exhibit 2 about the term premium effect, especially the line associated with the constant portfolio. Drawing on the simulation, you said there was around a 40 basis point effect on the term premium over a decade.  Usually we teach people that there’s monetary neutrality, and monetary policy can only have temporary effects.  This looks pretty much like a permanent effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding of the information presented in the panel and comparing it to the concept of monetary neutrality.


Passage number 66.
 MS. KLEE. The 40 basis points is correct.  There are a couple of different things.  If you structure the balance sheet so that it’s constant for a very long time, our models suggest that has a very large term premium effect. I think in the memo we estimated it was going to be about 20 years until the size of the portfolio was normalized under this scenario.  I think over time the Federal Reserve has used its portfolio in order to affect longer-term interest rates, and there’s a question as to what is neutral.  When we have traditionally reinvested, we’ve done it in a way that’s neutral to the Treasury’s issuance of securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and discussing different factors related to the balance sheet and interest rates.


Passage number 67.
  But I think that there are different ways you can think of a neutral portfolio and whether it actually will affect—  MR. BULLARD. According to this, if we can grow the portfolio at the pace of nominal GDP growth, we’ll depress term premiums permanently, and we’ll get permanently lower unemployment. That is long-run nonneutrality of monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents different perspectives on the concept of a neutral portfolio and the potential effects of monetary policy, but there is no explicit disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 68.
 MS. KLEE.  I think it fades over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is a statement of opinion by Ms. Klee, and there is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 69.
  I don’t think it’s— MR. BULLARD.  Where does it fade in the picture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply consists of a person expressing their thoughts about something without any opposition being presented.


Passage number 70.
  You’ve got— MS. KLEE.  Further out. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a conversation between two individuals.


Passage number 71.
 MR. FISCHER.  The amount of government debt in the hands of the public is lower as long as we’re holding a portfolio of a given size, and that’s what the nonneutrality is—it’s on the size of the government debt, and that’s a particular monetary policy that has been undertaken in a way that does, in fact, make a change in the government debt, and it’s nonneutral. CHAIR YELLEN. Chris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen seem to be in agreement on the issue of nonneutrality of monetary policy and its effect on the size of government debt.


Passage number 72.
 MR. ERCEG.  I just wanted to add that it might be helpful to think of the balance sheet policy as essentially affecting what we might call the equilibrium real rate or the natural real rate.  From that perspective, balance sheet policies that depress term premiums very persistently would in essence be tantamount to raising the natural real rate.  And that’s essentially what’s happening in these exercises, and it would be underscored in exhibit 3, in which you see the increase in the federal funds rate at relatively long horizons. Now, of course, this effect is derived from an estimated model.  It’s taken from the Li and Wei model, which is estimated over the 1994 to 2007 pre-crisis sample period.  It’s consistent with relatively large and persistent effects on term premiums associated with very protracted changes in the level of long-term assets on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  So that drives  these very persistent effects, but it’s certainly based on an estimated model over the pre-crisis period. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and explaining a concept.


Passage number 73.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think of this kind of policy intervention as really more akin to a fiscal policy intervention.  It’s not about the increase in the liabilities, but really more in terms of the composition of assets that are in the hands of the public, as Governor Fischer was suggesting.  And so the change in the composition of the assets in the hands of the public lowers the term premium below what it would be otherwise in a permanent fashion, for a given particular time path of public debt issuance by the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their viewpoint on the policy intervention and agreeing with Governor Fischer's suggestion.


Passage number 74.
 MR. BULLARD.  Show me a model. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard asks for a model, and Chair Yellen responds by mentioning Governor Fischer, likely implying that Governor Fischer could provide a model. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the exact meaning of their exchange.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
 MR. FISCHER.  I think, President Bullard, the fundamental non-neutrality theorem says that if all the exogenous nominal variables are changed in the same proportion, that will be neutral.  But this is not a change that changes them in the same proportion and so it is non-neutral. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Fischer disagrees with the idea that the change being discussed is neutral, while Chair Yellen does not express her agreement or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 76.
 MR. LAUBACH. If I may just quickly elaborate on some of the things that President Kocherlakota and also Chris mentioned.  You might think of this as if you kept the balance sheet permanently larger, you would have a permanent shift in the equilibrium real interest rate.  If you didn’t accommodate that or didn’t take that into consideration in your policy rule by moving the intercept appropriately, you would end up missing your inflation target permanently. Now, the policy rule has, of course, the 2 percent inflation target hardwired into it, so it would constantly push against the resulting inflation overshoot that would result from notadjusting the intercept of the policy rule.  But it’s still the case that if you properly took into account the resulting shift in the equilibrium real interest rate in the policy rule, then you would end up reaching your inflation target over time. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Laubach, argues that if the balance sheet is permanently larger, it would cause a permanent shift in the equilibrium real interest rate, which could lead to missing the inflation target permanently if not taken into consideration in the policy rule. However, Chair Yellen's response to Mr. Lacker's statement is not provided, so we cannot determine whether she agrees or disagrees with Mr. Laubach's argument.


Passage number 77.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m looking at exhibit 3.  We discussed this last time, that in principle, a change in the funds rate path should be capable of completely and exactly offsetting the effect of a different balance sheet path.  So I’m surprised at these little differences in C and D—why doesn’t the funds rate path for the constant portfolio result in the same unemployment and inflation rates as the baseline case. Why didn’t you nail it in C and D. And, second, the intercept term in the inertial Taylor rule changes a lot, as shown in A—for example, look at the constant portfolio case—10 years from now, it’s still above 2 percent.  How come, in 10 years, the difference in the funds rate paths between the constant portfolio and the baseline case isn’t closer to the difference in the intercept terms.  So why didn’t you nail it, and why is the funds rate not that much different at the end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question and inquiry about certain aspects of the financial data, but there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 78.
 MR. ERCEG.  I think that in the FRB/US model this is an implementation issue.  We were trying to, within the confines of the model, use a relatively simple way of offsetting the additional stimulus.  It’s imperfect in exactly insulating the macroeconomic effects, but it comes, I believe, very close. In a smaller-scale model that I set up, one can achieve, as one might expect, that perfect insulation, but it’s difficult to do in a much larger model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the implementation issue of trying to offset additional stimulus within the FRB/US model. There are no conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 79.
 MR. LACKER. Is this just a computational issue. I mean, there’s some number that nails it, right. Is that true in the FRB/US model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The question posed by Mr. Lacker is seeking clarification on whether the issue under discussion is solely computational and if there is a specific number that can accurately represent the situation.


Passage number 80.
 MR. ERCEG. Yes, in principle.  You can alternatively adjust the intercept in a small-scale model or put an extremely large coefficient on the output gap.  And by doing so—say, the   latter approach—you’ll completely insulate the economy from the effects of what is essentially an increase in the natural real rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply discusses different approaches to adjusting the intercept or coefficient in a model to insulate the economy from the effects of an increase in the natural real rate.


Passage number 81.
 MR. LACKER.  So were you just guessing and moving and then just gave up before you got there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is just asking for clarification and clarification on the actions of the person being addressed.


Passage number 82.
  [Laughter] MR. ERCEG.  Well, I honestly didn’t implement these simulations myself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement as the speaker acknowledges that they did not implement the simulations themselves.


Passage number 83.
  But, nonetheless, it is difficult to do this in much larger scale models with— MR. WILCOX.  Very rich transmission structures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 84.
 MR. ERCEG.  Exactly.  Transmission that is much more realistic than in our simple models.  In simple models, you can completely insulate.  It’s easy to do.  You have many different ways of doing so.  Under an optimal strategy that didn’t penalize the change in interest rates, you can exactly insulate the macroeconomy from the effects of a shift in the natural rate. In bigger models, it’s a lot harder to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply explains that in bigger models, it is more challenging to insulate the macroeconomy from the effects of a shift in the natural rate compared to simple models. There is no contradicting statement or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 85.
 MR. LACKER.  It’s a little mysterious.  So the right-hand side variables in the Taylor rule are virtually the same—the only thing different is the intercept term.  So why isn’t the funds rate path different by about the difference in the intercepts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is posing a question and stating a fact about the variables in the Taylor rule.


Passage number 86.
 MR. ERCEG. It’s going to depend as well on the exact way that the intercept change is phased in. There are a number of complications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the outcome or impact may depend on the way the intercept change is implemented. It mentions complications, but without explicitly showing disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 87.
 MR. LACKER.  But it was, like, 0.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 88.
15 every period, and after 10 years you’d get— MS. KLEE.  Toward the end it’s exactly the same. If you look in 2025, they’re both about 50 basis points apart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact that both returns are about 50 basis points apart in the year 2025.


Passage number 89.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Any other questions, or can we begin comments.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The participants are simply acknowledging the end of a discussion and moving on to the next topic.


Passage number 90.
  MR. ROSENGREN. Regarding your choice of a discrete stop versus a tapering strategy—there are pretty large standard errors around how we think this would actually work, because the understanding of this is somewhat experimental, as this has occurred just since the financial crisis.  As you think about a strategy that just allows reinvestment to stop completely versus a tapering strategy, why did you pick the particular one that you did.  And why not show a tapering strategy, as that’s where the market seems to think we’re going to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and reasoning behind the chosen strategy.


Passage number 91.
 MS. KLEE.  Our Tealbook baseline is with a complete cessation of reinvestment six months after liftoff.  We could have chosen a phaseout strategy—it doesn’t make a whit of difference in these models in terms of the macroeconomic outcomes.  It’s more of a market-functioning issue. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I have a list of people who’d like to comment, and, again, I’m really interested in your views on the alternative C options.  Let’s begin with the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different strategies and stating that it doesn't make a difference in the models in terms of macroeconomic outcomes. The chairperson then asks for opinions on alternative options.


Passage number 92.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a brief comment.  First, I very much appreciate the staff memo.  I thought it framed the issues very well—very small effects when using the modal forecast scenario, but more significant effects in terms of insuring against adverse outcomes.  In other words, reducing the probability of returning to the zero lower bound, which I think is the key issue that we’re really talking about here. In terms of the language in alternative C, I think we need a small addition.  I’m fine with the phrase “until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way,” but I think we should add an additional condition that we think that the normalization is expected to prove sustainable or something similar.  Paragraph 5 in alternative C might read something like “The Committee anticipates doing so until the normalization of the level of funds rate is well under way and is expected to prove sustainable.”  The notion I have in mind here is that the end of reinvestment should not be tied mechanically to the level of the funds rate but also tied to the economic outlook.  I could imagine supporting an early end of reinvestment at a relatively low federal funds rate if the economy was forecast to grow very rapidly over the following year with very few downside risks in terms of the economic outlook.  In that case, the likelihood would be that the Committee would raise the federal funds rate further over the next year, and the probability of an early return to the effective lower bound would be very low.  In contrast, I’d favor waiting to end reinvestments if the economy was lacking forward momentum even at a somewhat higher federal funds rate.  That’s because the risk of returning to the effective lower bound would be higher in that case. The point I’m trying to make is that we’re delaying reinvestment for a reason—to reduce the probability of returning to the effective lower bound.  That should really be the parameter that we’re focusing on.  That probability is not just governed by the level of the federal funds rate, but also the economic outlook at the time.  We want to end reinvestments when that probability is relatively low, and I think that’s not sufficiently summed up just by “well advanced.” I think you have to get the concept of the outlook in there as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their appreciation for the staff memo and then suggesting a small addition to the language in alternative C. They clarify that they believe the end of reinvestment should not only be tied to the level of the funds rate but also to the economic outlook. They provide examples to support their viewpoint but do not engage in any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 93.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage you provided, "MR," does not contain any text. Can you please provide the passage you would like me to analyze?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 94.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m glad to say I’m comfortable with either version of the reinvestment language in alternative C and most other aspects of alternative C as well. Oh, but I’ll leave that to tomorrow’s discussion.  [Laughter]  I thought you might appreciate that. I’d like to make a few observations about the staff memo, quite honestly picking up on most of the themes that were discussed in response to some of the questions and also Vice Chairman Dudley’s comments.  In terms of the staff memo, making decisions about the appropriate size of the balance sheet, I think it’s very important that we weigh both the costs and the benefits under a wide range of plausible scenarios.  The memo emphasized one specific adverse scenario in order to illustrate a potential benefit of using a state-dependent rule for any reinvestments.  As was described in the memo and in the presentation, in this particular scenario, a state-dependent rule continues reinvestment for several years beyond the baseline, and the larger resulting balance sheet provides additional stimulus relative to the case of ending reinvestments on a preset path. But in considering the merits of such a state-dependent rule, we shouldn’t lose sight of the bigger issue of the relative costs and benefits of maintaining a very large balance sheet.  Indeed, taking the analysis of the memo to its logical extreme, we should always maintain a very large balance sheet, arguably even larger than what we have today, to provide insurance against negative shocks.  Now, I’m picking up on something implied by Vice Chairman Dudley’s comment because, according to the Board analysis we discussed, a large SOMA portfolio lowers the term premium and effectively shifts the IS curve out, and this implies a higher equilibrium federal funds rate—it’s about ½ percentage point higher than baseline for the constant portfolio. What does that do.  It provides us with more buffer to use the federal funds rate as a policy instrument to respond to negative shocks. I see this memo not really being about this scenario or about the strategy for ending reinvestments.  Really, it’s a question of, fundamentally, do we need a bigger buffer, especially in light of concerns about a continuing very low equilibrium real interest rate.  In a way, I think the memo narrows the question too much to just the specific language concerning how we would end reinvestments, and we really should think much more carefully about both the benefits more generally of having a large balance sheet, and also revisit the costs around that because the memo obviously can only cover the benefits.  Now, we’ve decided through our discussions in the past that the costs of holding a very large balance sheet outweigh the benefits at most times, and we shouldn’t lose track of that in thinking through some of these issues in terms of the reinvestment strategy, as opposed to just focusing on the benefits under certain scenarios. Now, I recognize I am veering into the topic of the long-run policy strategy that the Chair has initiated and is under way, but I do think this is an important issue to think about.  If we really do think we’re in a world of a lower equilibrium real rate and we are worried about downside risks, I think we really should be thinking in very broad terms about what the costs and benefits of the balance sheet are.  And getting back to President Bullard’s question, what do we really understand about the effects of the balance sheet on the equilibrium real interest rate, and what are these tradeoffs that we’re facing. I think that the memo is fine—I have no quibbles about the memo—but it narrows this discussion down far too much.  The discussion we need to be having is about this broader issue of the costs and benefits of the balance sheet and not just thinking through this one experiment because, more generally, in a stochastic environment, we’re going to get hit by both positive and negative shocks. Again, I’m looking forward to the work that’s being started in the work group with regard to the long-run policy initiative, but I do hope that this is one of the issues on which they give us better guidance, and sooner rather than later.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  Good.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains contention or disagreement. The speaker, Williams, disagrees with the approach taken in the memo and argues that the discussion should focus on the broader issue of the costs and benefits of the balance sheet, rather than just considering the benefits under certain scenarios.


Passage number 95.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  We’ve had questions from President Bullard and discussions already by Vice Chairman Dudley and President Williams.  There’s a very interesting issue present in this discussion, which is:  How should we think of the influence of   the balance sheet. And what this analysis has brought out has been that, essentially, in the “stock” view of what it is that quantitative easing does, all of the quantitative easing that has been done so far is in the balance sheet—it’s there and it’s having an effect.  Let me ask the next question and then I’ll tell you the effect. When we do quantitative easing, the short rate remains unchanged.  Well, what happens to other interest rates. Our analysis is that quantitative easing goes into the term premium.  We buy up assets, and the money that’s put into the system goes into longer-term assets and reduces the term premium. So the next question is, what do we want to do over the longer term, after we’ve normalized the federal funds rate.  If we had already reduced the balance sheet to its steady-state level, we might have a lower federal funds rate.  At some point, we might even reach the point at which we would be at a near-zero federal funds rate again.  What the large balance sheet is doing for us is keeping us away from the effective lower bound, as both Vice Chairman Dudley and President Williams pointed out, and it’s providing us with a twist in the term structure which we probably like.  We haven’t really seen the effects of quantitative easing show up in investment spending very much, but, in principle, it is a factor encouraging investment.  And the question is:  What do we want to do.  Do we want to keep this effect of having a higher federal funds rate and a lower longer-term rate. We’d like the possibility of keeping the federal funds rate positive for longer, I assume, because we don’t like what we’d have to do if we got back down to zero, and it will be politically controversial and so forth.  So it’s useful to have this “stock of QE” under our control.  We can reduce it at some time by stopping reinvestment, and we could in effect reduce the stock  of QE under our control.  So this is a kind of investment and also a monetary policy choice, in terms of what term structure we are looking at. What this analysis did in my case was to make me think better of holding the larger portfolio for longer because then it would be safer for us and for the economy in terms of keeping us away from the zero lower bound in the event that we get a lot of negative shocks.  Well, we may get them, we may not get them, but they’re a risk, and we’d prefer not to be there.  So I don’t know which of these strategies I’d like more.  I think we should look at the likely quantitative effects of the two approaches. I think that what the analysis does show, particularly with that green line which goes out there forever, is that the effect of QE is 40 basis points on the federal funds rate—that’s what our models say, precisely. I conclude that we ought to rethink and keep reinvestment going a little longer.  We have a slight problem in the fact that when you read what people say, they all assume it’s six months after normalization begins before we end reinvestment.  Simon, I must get a different set of analyst remarks from that you get, but that’s what I find in the analyst remarks that I read—six months, nine months—and I think we might want to go longer.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fischer, is discussing the influence of the balance sheet and the effects of quantitative easing on interest rates. He presents different perspectives and considerations, but does not express any disagreement with the previous speakers or provide conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 96.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I also want to thank the staff for the memo.  I actually thought it was very helpful.  I’m sympathetic to the notion that you can’t take into account everything, so for my purposes, this actually worked quite well. My view is that we have our normalization principles, and unless we’re rethinking those, at some point we’re going to have to end reinvestments because we want to get the balance sheet back down to what the normalization principles say.  And I found the memo actually helpful in thinking about that.  To my mind, I didn’t see that much difference in either the adverse scenario  or the normal scenarios with the 1 percent trigger or the 2 percent trigger.  I like the fact that we’re tying the end of reinvestments to the funds rate because we’re using the same economic conditions.  It’s a state-contingent strategy. The one thing the memo did for simplicity is not allow for us to start up reinvesting again.  I would prefer to end reinvestments when the trigger is 1 percent, and then if need be—if things turn out to be worse than our baseline scenario—we can always start reinvesting again. This is a simple memo because, by necessity, it should be to be clear, but in terms of how we approach policy, we could reverse the decision at some point, and I think that’s what my preference would be, because at some point we’re going to have to end reinvestments. Concerning the language, the one issue the memo didn’t address is when the Committee would want to provide the public with more concrete information, and I think that’s really a question for Simon and the Desk—how much advance notification do market participants need about what our strategy is going to be. If we can agree on a strategy and if you come back and say there are benefits to being clear, we might want to be more explicit in the liftoff statement about what our strategy is, including putting in, if we agree on a trigger, what that trigger is. If you think that we don’t really need to be that explicit in qualitative language, perhaps you could say something like “when normalization is further along” that would be in between the two choices on the table for alternative C. But I think it’s a question really for the Desk about how much advance notification market participants need to prepare for the end of reinvestments.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses appreciation for the memo and states their own views and preferences regarding the normalization principles and the end of reinvestments. They also raise a question about providing more concrete information to the public, but there is no opposition or disagreement presented.


Passage number 97.
 MR. POTTER.  I think if it’s a 100 percent stop, then that has the potential to affect market functioning, and that’s one thing we could talk about.  If it was a phaseout and market  participants were aware it was going to be a phaseout, I think we shouldn’t worry so much about those market functioning issues because the phaseout should take care of them. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents two different perspectives on how a potential stop or phaseout might affect market functioning.


Passage number 98.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I appreciated the staff memo.  My comments are going to dovetail with some of the previous comments that were made by President Lacker and President Williams. Overall, I want to think of the FOMC as just choosing the level of accommodation.  That’s maybe just a better way to think about it.  Accommodation can be provided through two channels—either through the federal funds rate or through a balance sheet policy action.  In the first set of simulations, the FOMC acts by following an inertial Taylor rule.  In reality, the Committee chooses how much monetary accommodation to provide based on macroeconomic circumstances.  So the effects of a particular reinvestment strategy of the type outlined in the memo could be completely offset by an appropriate choice of the federal funds rate path, as has been discussed in the previous comments.  This is illustrated in the memo. So what’s the meaning of different reinvestment strategies and probably different levels of accommodation.  We want to leave it up to the Committee to change policy based on whatever the Committee thinks.  And surely we want that deliberation to go on, and we want the Committee to be looking at the right level of accommodation at a particular point in time.  So I’m not sure it’s a useful exercise, the way it’s constructed in the memo.  And as far as our policy is concerned, I think we might as well stick to the baseline strategy of ending reinvestments six months after liftoff, and then go ahead and let the Committee choose the federal funds rate path that it judges provides the appropriate level of accommodation. In the second exercise in the memo—reinvestment strategies under the adverse scenario—a similar conclusion can be drawn.  In this scenario, the economy is forced back to the zero lower bound in 2017 for three years.  A trigger-type reinvestment strategy could provide accommodation in this scenario, but of course the Committee can simply choose the appropriate level of accommodation by choosing the appropriate level of the balance sheet—that is, presumably by reinstituting QE.  I know you’re swearing off QE, but if you get in the right circumstance, you’re going to use the tool again.  The FOMC could get exactly the right level of accommodation and not have to rely on the approximate amount offered by the trigger strategy.  So why are we going through this elaborate exercise of having the trigger strategy, and then we’re going to adjust our path of the funds rate that’s going to give the right level of accommodation, taking into account what the trigger strategy is going to do over the forecast horizon. I’m not sure that this is that useful of a way to think about it.  It’s due to the substitutability of the two approaches to providing monetary accommodation.  It appears that there’s little to be gained by tampering with the existing reinvestment strategy.  I think we might as well just allow reinvestments to end at some point after we lift off and call it a day.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their opinion, but there is no direct contention or disagreement with the previous comments or the memorandum.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 99.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Maybe because I’m the newer person, I’m a little more sensitive and maybe even uncomfortable on two fronts as we do the execution.  I’m sensitive to the fact that we have some uncertainty regarding the effect of beginning the process of raising rates—that creates its own set of uncertainties, particularly when we start from the lower bound.  I’m also particularly uncertain about the effect of beginning to phase downreinvestments.  Even though I agree with the overall debate and having that second discussion about the broader costs and benefits, I think, from an execution point of view, the one way we’ll find out what the effect of doing each of these is when we do it. From a risk-management and prudence point of view, my own bent—which is why I like the “well under way” language you have here—is to first make sure we are well under way when going through the first exercise of raising the federal funds rate, seeing what we learn, making sure we are in fact well under way.  Only after we’re comfortable with that—not only what the prospects are, but what we’ve learned from that process—can we then think about beginning the second process, which will have its own degree of uncertainty and learning that come from that. I’d rather start that second process second, rather than intermingling these two at the same time. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Kaplan expresses his uncertainties and discomfort about raising rates and phasing down reinvestments, while also expressing a preference for addressing each issue separately.


Passage number 100.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In terms of our reinvestment policy, once it’s appropriate to raise rates, I’m fine with the language in alternative C that states we expect to continue reinvestments “until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way.” The risk-management benefits from the 2 percent trigger exercise seem desirable to me. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen express agreement with the language and strategy mentioned.


Passage number 101.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I thought the questions that were raised by President Williams were important considerations and ones we should think more about, as well as the communication issue that President Mester raised in the context of our existing normalization principles.  The staff has helped us think about these triggers, but we probably need to think more.   As it relates to alternative C, I have a slight preference for the language that says “at least during the early stages of normalization,” based on how we have already characterized our normalization principles.  I think that language preserves optionality, whereas the alternative language could limit our flexibility to begin the process sooner if we wanted to.  That would be my suggestion.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is offering their own thoughts and opinions, without directly challenging or opposing any of the other speakers.


Passage number 102.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I strongly agree with President Williams’s comments about this.  I really think this is a big subject.  I was surprised during the July meeting’s discussion to hear so much sentiment for holding on to a much larger portfolio than I thought we were contemplating a year or two ago.  If we get on the road to thinking through a strategy in which we’ve got a big buffer stock, that will be the third normalization strategy for us to adopt over the past three years—we had one last year and one a couple of years before that. I was glad to hear there was a fair amount of recognition that on the cost side, there were some political-economy issues and questions involved, and I think those are very important.  I won’t go into them.  I think a “global” assessment of the costs and benefits of different approaches needs to take that into account. As for language, I was uncomfortable with “well under way”—it suggests a long time after we raise rates.  “At least during the early stages”—I wasn’t clear on how we are dividing up normalization into stages, but I guess it’s just a figure of speech that means “early.” I liked the sound of President Mester’s suggestion about “until normalization is further along.”  Before the benefit of a more thorough discussion that convinces me that a bigger buffer would be useful, I’m more in the camp of wanting to end early, as I was at the July meeting.  But these are important issues and deserve some careful consideration.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing agreement with some points made by President Williams and sharing their own thoughts and preferences on the topic at hand.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 103.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  It’s been a very rich discussion already.  I have to admit that I was pretty surprised at the July meeting when it became apparent that more than a few FOMC participants viewed halting reinvestments as being a decision that would be very costly to reverse by reinitiating purchases or by beginning reinvestments again, as President Mester suggested.  I think this lack of reversibility is pretty crucial in terms of how we think about the appropriate long-run size of the balance sheet, the matter President Williams raised. If, as President Bullard and President Mester suggested, we’ll just turn on this tool when we need it and, if we hit the effective lower bound and we need more accommodation, we’ll begin reinvestments again or we’ll begin active purchases again, then I think it’s a very different question than if we view halting reinvestments as having enormous costs associated with it.  And then we have to weigh the political economy—assuming that those costs are coming from political economy considerations—against the political economy considerations that President Lacker pointed to, which are also very real in maintaining a large balance sheet.  These are very, very challenging issues. If we take as given this lack of reversibility—and that’s the way the memo drafted the problem and, in light of what I heard at the July meeting, I am very sympathetic to that way of drafting the memo—this irreversibility leads to worse economic outcomes if we have to return to the effective lower bound.  As I argued at the July meeting, to me this means we should only be willing to halt reinvestments at a point in time when we’re willing to increase the effective lower bound on interest rates.  Basically, halting reinvestments is taking a tool away from yourself.  You should only be willing to do that if you are actually willing to take away another tool, which is to increase the effective lower bound on interest rates.   My own thinking is, in light of where I think the long-run neutral real rate is going to be and given our recent experience, I’m pretty loath to throw away these kinds of tools at this stage. My preference at this point would be to leave out any reference to reinvestment policy at the time of liftoff. I thought President Kaplan raised some great points, too, about the learning that’s going to occur.  He hasn’t been involved in these conversations before, so he hasn’t gotten totally into the “inside the tent” kind of thinking that we all have about this, and I think that’s good.  I think that having an opportunity to learn about how this process is going to work before starting to talk about a new thing that we aren’t sure how it is going to work is wise counsel. At the time of liftoff, the Chair could say that this matter remains under study by the staff and principals.  I think it allows us an opportunity to dovetail our thinking about reinvestments with the longer-run operating framework exercise that the Chair initiated. One comment on the normalization principles.  The normalization principles certainly have indicated that the Committee likes having a smaller balance sheet. On the other hand, the normalization principles have also said we want to keep as large a balance sheet as is necessary to be able to conduct effective monetary policy.  That could be a lot larger than we thought it was going to be three or four years ago—it might be larger than we think it is today.  I think this Committee will have to engage in some serious conversations about that. Now, assuming the Committee does want to make a reference to reinvestments, I’m concerned about the vagueness of what’s in the draft of alternative C.  If Committee members can agree among themselves to the idea of tying reinvestments to something specific in the outlook, something specific regarding the federal funds rate, as was done in the memo, it would be really great to offer that kind of clarity.  President Evans was chastising me for smiling at Chris’s suggestion that we rely on the speeches of the presidents to elucidate what the Committee means by this language. The intermeeting period has not given me the kind of confidence that maybe I would like to have with that as a communications device.  [Laughter] As I’ve indicated before, I think if we can agree on a tie to something like the federal funds rate, it would be really good to be able to make that connection as opposed to relying on everyone’s interpretation of what that might mean.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses surprise at the view of other FOMC participants regarding the costs of halting reinvestments, and then discusses the different perspectives and considerations surrounding this issue.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 104.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.  The language in the normalization principles that you referred to—large enough to conduct monetary policy effectively—my recollection is that the meaning of that was effective control of the funds rate, and I didn’t envision it to be this large. But this wouldn’t be the first time different Committee members had different readings of the same phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker expresses his disagreement with the interpretation of the phrase "large enough to conduct monetary policy effectively" by stating that he didn't envision it to be as large as it currently is. He also implies that different Committee members often have different readings of the same phrase, suggesting a history of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think that the language is capable of bearing multiple interpretations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, believes that the language in question can be interpreted in multiple ways, suggesting that there is disagreement or contention about its meaning.


Passage number 106.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  As does most of our language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious statements or conflicting viewpoints. It simply mentions that laughter is a common characteristic of language.


Passage number 107.
  MR. TARULLO.  Which is precisely what it’s doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that something is happening.


Passage number 108.
 MR. EVANS. We’re expecting to have effective control of the funds rate with a very large balance sheet from the outset, and if not from the first move, then certainly pretty soon thereafter. So I’m not sure exactly how determinative that is for this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 109.
 MR. LACKER. You remember, it was the idea that in a corridor system you’d need lower reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement recalling an idea.


Passage number 110.
MR. EVANS.  I just think we’re bringing more assumptions to bear on what we mean by that.  That’s all. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Evans is simply expressing his opinion about bringing assumptions into the conversation, and Chair Yellen responds without indicating any disagreement.


Passage number 111.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m sympathetic with the substantive policy leaning that Bill and Stan and others have articulated, which I think is consistent with the memo, although not necessarily foursquare with all of the details of the memo. My concern is the one I raised at the July meeting, which is about potential contingencies.  I think President Williams’s caution—to be clear about costs as well as benefits of keeping the balance sheet where it is—is important.  As people probably don’t recall, but I’ll remind you, I raised a couple of things that might happen—which I don’t expect to happen, but which might happen—in the early stages after liftoff.  One could be a blowing-out of the ON RRP program beyond what we currently expect.  Another would be a flattening, or even inversion, of the yield curve. Under those circumstances, an earlier cessation of reinvestment might be among the more efficacious tools at our disposal. In the interest of clear communication, if we’re going to say something in the statement, I hope we can find a way to put in an appropriate qualification that allows the public and markets to understand that our default position is that we’re going to let rates go up for a while for the reasons Stan said, but that if some dodgy things start happening in financial markets, we might take a somewhat different approach.  I don’t have a formulation for that, Madam Chair—I apologize.  But I think it’s going to be something like that, with that phrase that we always used to stick in—“in the context of price stability.” We used to talk about 19 things we were going to do “in the context of price stability,” which gave the message that if  inflation started to go too far one way or the other, it might vary what we were going to do.  Maybe people could come up with a similarly euphemistic phrase that would do the trick. I hope we can go in sequence here, and I hope we can get some of the benefits that Beth and Chris were talking about in their memo, but I think we need to allow for the possibility that we won’t be able to keep as pristine a separation of the two policy tools as we would like.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses sympathy with the policy leaning of others but raises a concern and suggests finding a way to address it in the statement.


Passage number 112.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a strong desire, which I assume is widely shared, to avoid returning to the effective lower bound.  I also suspect that the possibility of doing so is uncomfortably high. On gearing up quantitative easing again, I want to say a couple of things.  First, I think we’ve never looked at asset purchases as other than a second-best tool.  I think that’s been the way it’s been talked about since the very beginning—uncertain as to its effect, uncertain as to bad effects, and certainly uncertain as to political economy characteristics. I would put a decision to end reinvestments and then a decision to reverse that as not at all akin to a decision to start asset purchases again.  To me, they’re two completely different things.  I think if the Committee were to decide to end reinvestments and then six months later there were a shock, I think it would be an easy decision to begin reinvestments again on the grounds that we would have so little to work with in the way of rate cuts to make.  So I look at those decisions as very different. Those things lead me to a strong preference for the “until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way.”  I could learn to like the 1 percent or 2 percent thresholds.  I will say that the real economy effects are tiny, and, if I’m right they would be even smaller if,   in fact, the irreversibility assumption is really not right as a practical matter. But I’m open to learning more about those.  I’d prefer to work with interest rates until we get way away from the effective lower bound.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own preferences and opinions, but there is no argument or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 113.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My judgment is animated by, first, a desire to maintain the parsimony and clarity of our policy framework and, second, by what I believe to be asymmetric risk-management considerations over the period that we are considering.  Those considerations lead me to favor a 2 percent quantitative target. The policy framework that we’ve agreed to over the past year makes the federal funds rate the focal point for our policy stance.  It’s clear, it’s familiar to market participants, and it’s empirically well understood, and I’d like to keep the focus on that.  In addition, we’ve spent considerable effort over the past several meetings trying to make the public understand that our policy framework is based on the economic outlook and not on a calendar.  I’d be very reluctant to have our reinvestment policy in any way migrate back toward a time-based framework. I think the most parsimonious way to capture economic developments is to condition our reinvestment policy very clearly on the behavior of the one variable that we have focused on, which is the federal funds rate. It summarizes information from a wide variety of economic indicators on progress toward our goals. With regard to risk-management considerations, I think the staff analysis did a very nice job of laying those out.  Like others, I don’t believe the bar for reinitiating QE is at all similar to a bar for a 25 basis point cut, for instance, or turning on and off reinvestment.  So I do believe that that effective lower bound constraint is a very important one.   For all those reasons, I would like to see the reinvestment conditioned on a 2 percent rate. I think it’s clear, it gives us that cushion, and we can easily avoid the notion that you turn off reinvestment permanently once you’ve hit 2 percent by making clear that only while you’re above 2 percent would reinvestment cease.  I think that would be pretty easy to introduce into the language.  That would be my strong preference.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Is there anybody else who’d like to comment.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Brainard, expresses her judgment and preference regarding the policy framework and reinvestment policy. She does not directly address or refute any opposing views.


Passage number 114.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This is not only because I failed to thank the staff for their very good work the first time around, so I asked for a second time.  Thank you for the quality of the work you did. I think the issue of whether we can stop running off the portfolio at a certain point is critical to this discussion.  President Bullard made it sound like it was very easy, but I think it will actually take some thought about how to present that before we can get that as part of the solution.  What Governor Brainard just said is possibly the solution and what we need—that is, we can begin reinvesting again if the federal funds rate goes below a certain level, and 2 percent sounds attractive.  That gives us a conditional reinvestment policy, which I think makes a lot of sense in terms of combining the risk-management feature, as I think Governor Brainard and Governor Tarullo called it, with our desire to reduce the size of the portfolio. We need to think about what’s going to happen as the portfolio starts getting down to the target level. What happens, in that case, if we suddenly find ourselves heading off in a direction that we don’t want to go with the interest rate beginning to decline for a variety of reasons and this leads us to begin to worry.  We then actually want, at that point, to start buying assets, I think—that is, to do quantitative easing before it’s quantitative easing at zero interest rates,  which is a bigger problem.  This is just another way of saying we need flexibility on the issue of when we’re allowed to increase the size of the balance sheet in terms of the conditions we place on ourselves. I think that’s something the staff can work on very well.  My conclusion from this discussion is that not everybody, but quite a few people, have referred to the possibility of turning on and off the end of the reinvestment process and that the 2 percent level is a good one.  And then we might need to specify in more detail what it is that will happen that will allow us to explain why we’re turning it on and off in terms that are clear, understandable, and acceptable to the public. I think this has been an extremely useful discussion.  What has come out of it is a way of rethinking our principles for reducing the size of the portfolio.  Do we have to stick by what we said when we haven’t actually implemented anything.  If we have found a better way, are we not allowed to use it because we hadn’t thought of using it until now.  There must be an elegant solution. Last night, I was watching an interview of Justice Souter by Charlie Rose, and there was a discussion on the topic, What do words mean. Charlie Rose kept inventing complicated situations and asking, “Is that acceptable under the law.”  And Souter kept saying, “Well, words are not precise, and that’s why the law can work.  If there are ways of doing what needs to be done and that everybody understands needs to be done, we need to find a way within the words that exist.” Well, I wonder if we can do that for ourselves as well.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Any further comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for the work of the staff and discussing different ideas and potential solutions for reducing the size of the portfolio. The speaker also references a discussion on the interpretation of words and suggests finding a way within existing words to achieve their goals.


Passage number 115.
 MR. TARULLO. Just a question, Madam Chair, for Simon, to return to a consideration that a few of us talked about last time.  Simon, the consideration is the size of the maturations  that are actually occurring at any one time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 116.
  If I recall correctly, we have about a two-year window from around the middle of next year to 2018 when the amount maturing is relatively small with an occasional month that’s— MR. POTTER.  That’s in the Treasury securities market, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply confirming and agreeing with the statement made by Mr. Potter.


Passage number 117.
 MR. TARULLO.  But then, in 2018, it picks up quite a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 118.
 MR. POTTER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage.


Passage number 119.
 MR. TARULLO.  If we ended up delaying cessation of reinvestment until 2018 or later, do you anticipate that would be, in operational terms and in terms of effect on markets, significantly more challenging than if it were to happen during that two-year window.  Or does it depend on so many other factors that it’s probably not worth using as a criterion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a hypothetical question and seeking clarification on the potential challenges and considerations of delaying cessation of reinvestment.


Passage number 120.
 MR. POTTER. The operational part for Treasury securities is not that difficult because we’re rolling over at auctions. To reinvest the MBS—remember that we’re purchasing in the secondary market, so that has operational cost to it.  But it’s the same costs that we have right now, and we also have the experience.  There’s one issue, which is that if we stopped reinvestment and had to restart, we still have to have the experience to restart.  And that’s something that we should think about after the discussion today. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. This has been a useful discussion.  If somebody asks me at the press conference tomorrow, I’ll stick with what’s in our normalization principles while we consider this further.  For the moment, I’m probably best saying this is something the Committee is discussing and no further judgments have been made yet.  But I think this has been very productive.  President Bullard, did you want to add something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion among individuals where they are sharing their thoughts and considering different perspectives, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 121.
 MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair, how do you want to proceed on this.  Because, it seems to me, this would be a change in the normalization principles or a change in what we said. CHAIR YELLEN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing his disagreement or uncertainty about how to proceed, suggesting that it may require a change in the normalization principles or what they have previously said.


Passage number 122.
  I will stick with what’s in the normalization— MR. BULLARD. For today.  I mean, moving forward, is there going to be some future discussion of normalization principles. CHAIR YELLEN.  I assume we’ll need to consider what came out of the discussion today and return to you with further proposals or options.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers mention that there may be further discussion and proposals regarding normalization principles in the future, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention among them.


Passage number 123.
 MR. BULLARD.  And what would be the goal with regard to when we would want to aim to be able to tell market participants what we have in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 124.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, we certainly know the Chair would be asked after liftoff about reinvestments.  So the more definitive we could be at that moment the better.  That’s a goal. CHAIR YELLEN.  Right.  And that was the purpose of today’s discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It discusses a goal and the purpose of a discussion, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict between the parties involved.


Passage number 125.
 MR. BULLARD.  Arguably, we have to do this soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "arguably" suggests that there may be different viewpoints or opinions, but it doesn't indicate any active disagreement in this particular sentence.


Passage number 126.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Well, I think that’s a goal. CHAIR YELLEN.  It’s a goal. We could always say, “We don’t have anything new for you now.  It’s a matter that we continue to discuss, and we’ll let you know further details when we make decisions.”  We don’t have to provide the information, but I agree it would be desirable to be able to do so.  But we need to think through what the way forward is after today’s discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the idea of providing more information but also acknowledges the need to think about the next steps after the discussion.


Passage number 127.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Let’s go to the staff briefings on the economic outlook.  We’ll begin with David Wilcox.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the next topic of discussion, which is the staff briefings on the economic outlook.


Passage number 128.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thanks for the briefing, as always. I found the discussion of the alternative scenarios in Tealbook A quite informative, as usual.  I was struck by how many of them seemed to me as downside alternatives, especially in terms of the price stability mandate.  If the staff were asked to talk about scenarios that might give rise to an overrun in inflation, what would that potentially look like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they found the discussion informative and expressing curiosity about potential scenarios that could lead to an inflation increase.


Passage number 129.
 MR. WILCOX.  We actually contemplated putting in one of those.  The one that I think is plausible for us is that there’s some drift that occurs in inflation expectations. We debated whether the more plausible direction of drift in inflation expectations is up or down.  But I do think that an upward drift of inflation expectations is certainly within our confidence intervals. At the moment, the more natural mechanism, it seems to me, is that the little bit of extra transitory restraint that’s in the inflation pipeline from the dollar and the oil prices is going to put a little more gravitational pull downward on inflation.  And so my own assessment is that while I see inflation expectations drift in either direction as quite plausible, I think it’s a little more likely   downward.  But if I were to put my finger on one scenario that could provide for some upward lift on inflation, I’d point to that one, importantly out of our collective professional ignorance about the basic mechanisms that form inflation expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different possibilities and acknowledging uncertainty, but they do not express disagreement or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 130.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 131.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  David, let me pick up where you left off there, and thanks for panel 3 on output gap estimates, which makes my question a little more relevant because you mentioned the FRB/US model. When I was looking through Tealbook A, on page 79, I came across alternative models and the FRB/US model.  I noticed that the core PCE projection coming out of the FRB/US model has 2017 inflation moving down to 1.0 percent, whereas in the June Tealbook it’s at 1.5 percent. I wonder what features of the data and the model are generating that somewhat aberrant behavior.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 132.
 MR. WILCOX. The FRB/US model has a different wage-price mechanism than the judgmental forecast does. The model pays attention to compensation trends.  There’s an equation for price markup over marginal cost in the FRB/US model.  I’m going to look here for confirmation from my former FRB/US colleague.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the FRB/US model has a different wage-price mechanism and pays attention to compensation trends. They also mention that they are looking for confirmation from their former FRB/US colleague.


Passage number 133.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Reifschneider simply acknowledges that the statement made is correct.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 134.
 MR. WILCOX.  I don’t think we provide you with a graph of the markup of price over marginal cost in your Tealbook materials, but in putting together our inflation projection, the staff has pretty much written that relationship off as noninformative.  The FRB/US model, partly for a bit of intellectual diversity, hasn’t chucked that specification overboard and views the high level of prices over marginal costs as posing a downside impetus on inflation.  And so that’s mainly what’s generating this difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a difference in opinion between Mr. Wilcox and the FRB/US model regarding the significance of the relationship between price and marginal cost in forecasting inflation. Mr. Wilcox dismisses the relationship as noninformative, while the FRB/US model sees it as a factor that could potentially lead to lower inflation.


Passage number 135.
MR. EVANS.  So the forecast was already pretty low in the June Tealbook at 1½ percent for 2017, but the differential data coming in seem to have moved it downward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the forecast for 2017 has been lowered based on the new differential data.


Passage number 136.
 MR. WILCOX.  Yes.  My guess is that two things are going on there.  One—probably the more material of the two—is the recent tranche of disappointing compensation news that we got.  The other—which I suspect is quantitatively tiny, but might be there in principle—is that there was a tiny upward revision in nonmarket prices in the annual revision.  So the FRB/US model might be picking up on that, but I’m guessing that the larger of those two is the compensation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two possible explanations for a situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 137.
 MR. EVANS.  Just to close this out, is it fair to say that this implementation of the FRB/US model is putting less weight on the longer-term inflation expectations anchor than other analyses that we normally are looking at or the preferred inflation model that you’re using.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests contention or disagreement. The phrase "putting less weight on the longer-term inflation expectations anchor than other analyses" indicates a difference in opinion regarding the importance of longer-term inflation expectations in the FRB/US model.


Passage number 138.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think so.  There’s an inflation objective for policymakers in the FRB/US model, and that has complete credibility.  So households and businesses don’t question the 2 percent objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wilcox, expresses his belief about the inflation objective in the FRB/US model, stating that it has complete credibility and is not questioned by households and businesses.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
 MR. EVANS.  I’m sorry.  Let me clarify.  Yes, it has that feature in there, but that’s not enough to pull up the inflation forecast given the other countervailing data developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is saying that the feature mentioned is not sufficient to support the inflation forecast due to conflicting data developments.


Passage number 140.
 MR. WILCOX. Yes, that’s evident in the projection that you’re pointing to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 141.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions. [No response]  An unusually quiet crowd today.  Okay.  Seeing none, I suggest we take a coffee break, maybe until 3:45—20 minutes. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Let’s return to it and get started. We’ll start our go-round with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange between Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen, with Chair Yellen making a comment about the quietness of the crowd before suggesting a coffee break.


Passage number 142.
  MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Since our previous meeting, we have seen further improvement in labor markets, although the recent data on wages and prices are consistent with the continued persistent undershooting of our 2 percent inflation goal.  Earlier evidence of accelerating compensation in both average hourly earnings and the employment cost index has been revised away, resulting in almost all wage measures continuing to rise at a surprisingly steady 2 percent.  Because both aggregated and disaggregated data on wages and prices continue to come in quite low, my own forecast does not expect us to reach our inflation target within two years.  This is qualitatively consistent with the staff forecast of inflation in the Tealbook. Because wages and prices have not responded to much-improved labor market conditions in aggregate or, really, even in the disaggregated data, I have lowered my estimate of the longer-run unemployment rate to 4.8 percent.  In addition to the evidence from wages and prices, this estimate of the longer-run unemployment rate is consistent with the rising share of the workforce that is more highly educated and older, demographic groups that historically have had lower unemployment rates. However, the most pertinent data for this meeting are probably not the government data releases on wages, prices, and real activity, but rather the financial data that have been unusually turbulent since August 24.  Stock markets in many parts of the world are down 5 to 10 percent, with some emerging markets down appreciably more in dollar terms.  In addition, volatility has risen significantly not only because of the sharp stock price declines, but also because of rising interday and daily volatility. During periods of significant financial turbulence the FOMC has tended to follow easier policy, a point that will be made in a Boston Fed paper to be presented at our October conferenceon financial stability.  After Black Monday in October 1987, the FOMC had daily calls through the end of that month to monitor financial and economic conditions and lowered interest rates.  Recent stock price movements have been much more modest.  On Black Monday, the stock market fell 22 percent, whereas on August 24, the Dow opened with a decline of over 1,000 points, or about 6 percent, but ended the day down a bit over 3½ percent.  Nonetheless, the stock price declines did receive significant attention. It is certainly possible that some of the eye-catching declines have more to do with problems related to financial market structure rather than a change in the economic outlook.  On August 24, with the Shanghai index down a little over 8 percent, the New York Stock Exchange imposed Rule 48, which allows market makers to not post prices prior to opening.  Along with a 1,000 point drop at the opening, a large number of individual stocks, ETFs, and other exchange-traded securities hit circuit breakers, with trading halted over 1,200 times across 466 securities, with 300 of the securities being ETFs. In addition, the prices of a surprising number of large ETFs declined dramatically, with 188 declining in excess of 30 percent.  Some ETFs declined by more than 50 percent.  In some instances, two ETFs with similar strategies experienced materially different interday price movements.  Further, the affected securities spanned different sectors and sizes—that is, they were not singularly focused.  This, again, speaks to potential fragilities in the financial market structure. It’s quite possible that Rule 48 and circuit breakers in individual stocks complicated normal ETF arbitrage, leading to unusually large temporary declines.  Ironically, the circuit breakers were implemented in response to May 2010’s flash crash in which the Dow experienced an interday decline of over 1,000 points.  In a manner similar to August 24’s events, many stocksand ETFs experienced sharp price declines that reversed within a short period.  If problems with market mechanics explain much of the recent volatility in financial markets, we have some significant financial stability analysis that needs to be done to better understand both the role of market mechanics and, possibly, regulatory policy solutions. But, for now, the appropriate response to this financial upheaval is to reflect the realized loss of wealth and exchange rate movements in our model equations and assume the additional economic information content is modest.  Of course, there is some risk in doing so, as it is not yet clear how persistent asset price movements will be and, generally speaking, households and firms tend to respond to such price movements only when they persist for some time.  In any event, this is roughly how we folded the events into our own baseline forecast. However, there is a darker potential story.  Our models do a poor job of integrating financial market information, something that David mentioned and something we were all too aware of in 2008.  It is possible that financial markets are reflecting weaker global growth or other more-fundamental problems that we do not fully understand.  In this case, my modal forecast is too optimistic, and the downside risk should be significantly elevated.  Unfortunately, I do not think we have enough time to fully process recent market turbulence.  We certainly do not want to begin our first tightening amid a global slowdown.  I can also imagine the difficulty of keeping the reverse repo facility small during a period of very elevated market turbulence, as many might flock to this convenient source of safe short-term financing during a time of financial tumult. Although my baseline forecast involves the assumption of relatively modest effects from the recent financial turbulence, with magnitudes similar to those of the Tealbook, I think it would be wise to wait for more data that can validate the assumption of modest disruption before takingaction based on that assumption.  I will discuss this in more detail tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their analysis and forecast based on available data.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll start with a few observations from our District contacts over the past few weeks.  Those contacts were representatives of businesses and, this time around, of state and local government. Sentiment in the business community continues to be almost uniformly positive regarding conditions and the outlook.  Retailers reported good sales activity and optimism about future sales prospects.  Homebuilding and commercial real estate industry participants are upbeat. Auto industry contacts remain delighted with sales, trends, and prospects. Enough of our interviews occurred during the recent period of market volatility to give us a read on concern raised by those developments.  We detected little concern that momentum will be disrupted by global economic and financial events. Over this intermeeting cycle, we were attentive to perceptions of general conditions in labor markets and, especially, wage trends.  We got the clear impression that hiring challenges persist and have intensified.  A number of our contacts described significant labor shortages and are implementing new strategies to attract personnel—for example, referral and signing bonuses. Firms are increasingly willing to spend on employee training to address skills requirements.  This was the fifth consecutive cycle of contacts in which we heard comments on growing wage pressures for selected job categories or in selected geographies or both.  It was noteworthy that, this past cycle, the District contacts yielded a more generalized sense of rising wage pressures. Turning to my outlook, my baseline forecast for growth falls in the 2½ to 3 percent range over the next few years, which puts me on a stronger growth path than the current Tealbook.  My growth outlook is accompanied by continued absorption of labor market slack, broadly defined, and accelerating measured wage pressure.  I continue to have confidence that inflation will move to target in the medium term, but I’m not very optimistic we’ll see much improvement in the inflation trend this year.  I expect transitory factors, such as oil and commodity prices, will exert downward pressure on headline and core inflation measures for the next few quarters at least. This view lines up with the Tealbook. The only meaningful change in my assessment of the economy from the July meeting pertains to my sense of the balance of risks.  The recent volatility in the markets, apparently a response to increased uncertainty triggered by global economic and financial developments, has not subsided entirely as of this meeting date.  It’s too early to know whether this episode amounts to a bona fide shock or just a nervous spasm in the markets.  It’s also too early to detect any significant effect on the real economy.  I’m not projecting a material effect, but evaluation of that question will require some time.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The passage presents two different perspectives regarding the outlook for the economy. On one hand, the representatives of businesses and state and local government are positive about current conditions and future sales prospects. On the other hand, the passage also mentions concerns about market volatility and the potential for disruption in momentum due to global economic and financial events.


Passage number 144.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no passage provided for analysis.


Passage number 145.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  There’s a two-hander. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are simply acknowledging and confirming that there is a two-hander.


Passage number 146.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I don’t want to ask President Williams to give away his punch line from tomorrow, but I was wondering what you have in mind when you talk about the economy boiling over.  Are you talking in terms of inflation, or are you talking in terms of low unemployment leading inexorably to, unfortunately, very high unemployment.  On the real side, or on the nominal side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification from President Williams about his views on the economy.


Passage number 147.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 148.
 WILLIAMS.  I’ll give a very short answer to that.  I am thinking in this case about an economy that’s basically becoming unsustainable—living off froth, if you will—and then when it turns, it turns into recession. I’m really not thinking about the inflation aspect in this particular case, but more that the economy is running off a cliff and then falling.  So that, really, is the example.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own perspective and explanation without challenging or contradicting any other viewpoint.


Passage number 149.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement between the speakers. Mr. Kocherlakota thanks Chair Yellen, indicating agreement or cooperation, and Chair Yellen responds politely.


Passage number 150.
 MR. HARKER.  Well, thank you, Madam Chair.  As President Mester just pointed out, in the Philadelphia District we don’t have a luxury cruise ship, but you can spend the night on the Battleship New Jersey if you want to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply responding to a statement made by President Mester and sharing information about the Philadelphia District.


Passage number 151.
  [Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Sounds attractive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of laughter and the phrase "sounds attractive" suggests a positive and agreeable tone.


Passage number 152.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Tenth District economy expanded only modestly since the previous meeting, as weakness in commodity prices and a stronger dollar continue to weigh on the region’s energy, agriculture, and manufacturing industries.  As a result,  District bankers are monitoring closely their loan portfolios and reviewing collateral values.  Our business contacts continue to note difficulty finding qualified labor, and with this, along with the headwinds in the agricultural and energy sectors, we are seeing slowing in employment growth throughout much of the District. Turning to the national outlook, since our July meeting, the recent revisions in incoming data have led me to slightly raise my overall expectations of 2015 growth.  After expanding only modestly in the first quarter, output growth bounced back significantly in the second quarter.  I expect more modest growth in the third and fourth quarters that is sufficient to push 2015 growth to 2.1 percent, which is about 0.3 percent higher than my previous forecast.  And although I see current growth as somewhat above trend, I did mark down my longer-term estimate of growth to 1.8 percent, incorporating some of the soft productivity readings and recognizing the demographic factors pulling trend growth lower over the next several years. Labor market indicators, as others have noted, continue to signal further improvement and a return, in many cases, to pre-crisis characteristics.  The NFIB survey, for example, reported almost half of its respondents as seeing few or no qualified applicants for job openings, and that almost 30 percent of businesses are not able to fill some positions.  Both of these indicators are above their July 2007 levels and consistent with reports from our District contacts. Likewise, the number of unemployed people per job opening is near its pre-crisis level. And if you consider the pool of unemployed workers plus people who want a job but are not in the labor force, that measure is also near its pre-crisis level.  These factors not only point to ongoing labor market improvement, but also support expectations of stronger wage growth. Given projected growth and labor market advances, I continue to see reasonable evidence that inflation will rise over the next few years toward 2 percent. Although market-based  measures of inflation compensation have softened, both the median CPI and PCE survey-based five-year, five-year forward measures of expected inflation rose slightly in the most recent SPF. Over the past six months, core PCE inflation has been running at 1.7 percent, compared with a 0.8 percent pace last January. I also find it encouraging that over the past six months, the trend in the broad components of the PCE price index appear to have shifted.  For example, in February, the services component was running at 1.6 percent, its softest six-month pace since 2011.  Most recently, the annualized six-month change is 2 percent.  The patterns are similar for durables and nondurables. In general, there is a distinct bottom based on the six-month change in inflation since last January.  Since that time, the broad components of core PCE inflation have all moved higher.  In addition, the BEA revised up inflation in 2012 and 2013 by about ¼ percentage point each year, which means that the price level is about ½ percent higher than we thought it was at the time of our July meeting. In terms of emergent risk, the recent concerns regarding global growth are worth keeping in mind.  The downward trend in the New Export Orders Index from the ISM manufacturing survey suggests exporters are facing real headwinds.  As a result, I have taken a bit softer export growth into my baseline forecast. Concerns about global growth have also spilled into financial markets, as is evident from the recent stock market volatility.  Markets have priced in some headwinds through lower equity prices, although not enough to cause me to alter my forecast for consumer spending.  In addition, the VIX is already back to what can be considered a relatively normal range, so any knock-on effects to the real economy from the recent bout of market volatility are likely to be rather modest.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an analysis of the Tenth District economy and the national outlook, with some cautious optimism about growth and monetary policy.


Passage number 153.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Before I go into my prepared remarks, I will offer a brief comment on remarks that others have made.  I thought President Bullard offered some great perspectives on how financial market data should be influencing this Committee.  I think it is important that we use financial market data only as a signal of the underlying real conditions and not as a driver of policy itself, which I took to be his admonition. The one point on which my perspective might diverge most sharply from his is on interpreting the behavior of market-based measures of inflation compensation—or inflation expectations, I would say.  I continue to be quite concerned about the downward movement there.  It certainly influenced my Summary of Economic Projections submission.  Some of you might have noticed that I am number 13, and I offered a negative funds rate as being appropriate monetary policy.  I think, in view of the decline we have seen in longer-term inflation expectations, this is an appropriate response.  Obviously, the consensus of the Committee is to view this decline with sanguinity.  I hope that that turns out to be the correct attitude. In terms of the flight-to-quality issue, one way to get rid of that issue that President Mester noted is in Treasury breakevens is to look at zero-coupon inflation swaps, which are not contaminated by that.  Zero-coupon inflation swaps are also showing that same downward movement, really going back at least a year, possibly a year and a half.  So I think these are, at least to me, markers of real concern to take from financial market data. Now, Madam Chair, for the rest of my time, I really ask for the indulgence of the Committee, as I intend to spend my time today in a somewhat unorthodox fashion.  And for the benefit of Presidents Kaplan and Harker, I advise you don’t try this at home.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 154.
  [Laughter] Rather than speaking about the current state—  MR. TARULLO.  Actually, if they are going to do it, they should do it at home.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 155.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just going back to President Kocherlakota’s comments, I don’t remember November 2009 quite that way.  Just for the record, we didn’t have tools at the time that could generate a more rapid return, and we were gradually inventing them. CHAIR YELLEN. We had already cut the funds rate target to zero.  We had already engaged in some asset purchases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their own recollection and clarifying a point.


Passage number 156.
 The way I remember it, I think it’s fair to say, it took a while before we decided we could and should really scale up our asset purchases— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes. We learned by doing. CHAIR YELLEN. —yes—and use more unconventional forms of forward guidance that would push expectations way out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply recounting their memory and expressing agreement with the idea of scaling up asset purchases and using unconventional forms of forward guidance.


Passage number 157.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Our toolkit today has a much better, deeper set of tools to help us achieve our objectives than the one we had in November 2009 did.  I remember that, at the time, we were very uncomfortable with actually buying Treasury securities.  And the initial Treasury purchase program was quite small, if I remember correctly, because we weren’t even sure how markets were going to react to that purchase program and whether we were actually going to get the desired effect in terms of financial market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement reflecting the speaker's recollection and opinion about the effectiveness of the toolkit they had in November 2009 compared to the present.


Passage number 158.
  But anyway— MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  This is a great conversation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 159.
  We should continue it— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. We can take it offline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply suggests continuing the discussion and potentially addressing it offline, which implies finding a better time or place to continue the conversation.


Passage number 160.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I will say that the framework the Committee had in place shaped the way market participants were thinking about when interest rates would rise. A lot of   the surveys, for example, done by the Open Market Desk had a number of primary dealers seeing interest rates going up when the unemployment rate was still in the 9s.  There were tools that were under our control and at our disposal.  But I think this is certainly something we can talk about over drinks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the framework and tools available to the Committee and suggests that this is something that can be further discussed informally.


Passage number 161.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair. My views about the likely trajectories of economic activity and inflation are not very different from the views I held in July.  I believed then that we were closing in on full employment, and I believe that is even more true today.  And I said then that I was reasonably confident that inflation would move back toward 2 percent in the not-too-distant future, and that is still my view. However, like most of you, I’ve become more concerned about the situation abroad over the past several weeks, and this leads me to attach more downside risk to my projection than I would have done at our previous meeting.  The effect of foreign developments has been reasonably small so far, though, of course, these developments may well take longer to affect us than the short period since China’s exchange rate adjustment, and we shall simply have to keep monitoring these developments. There has been a lot of discussion about inflation over the intermeeting period and during this meeting so far.  That is no surprise, considering that this is the part of our mandate on which we are most obviously missing our target, and so I’d like to focus the remainder of my remarks today on inflation. Many discussions of inflation start with the 12-month core PCE inflation rate, which is currently 1.2 percent and projected to be 1.3 percent by the end of the year, although total PCE inflation is projected to be only 0.3 percent at that time.  The main reason for the 1 percentage point difference between the core and the total rates of PCE inflation arises from the recent declines in oil prices, which are expected to be temporary.  However, changes in oil prices have an effect on PCE prices that goes beyond the prices that are excluded by using the core PCE inflation rate.  Oil prices affect the cost of production of many goods.  Moreover, the appreciation of the dollar has direct effects on the prices of many goods. The additional effect of recent changes in oil and import prices on the inflation rate— over and above what’s picked up in food and energy prices—is estimated by staff at approximately 0.4 percentage point this year.  Accordingly, we can conclude that the declines in oil and import prices together have reduced the overall inflation rate by approximately 1.4 percentage points.  More-rigorous methods of stripping out the transitory factors, such as using the Dallas Fed trimmed mean PCE or a weighted median PCE price index and other measures, yield a reasonably similar conclusion on balance. But regardless of the exact figure we use, I think that a good portion of the factors holding down underlying inflation are transitory, the result of changes in oil and other commodity prices and of the exchange rate.  If the exchange rate stops appreciating, and that is highly likely, its downward pressure on core inflation will gradually stop. Similarly, if the price of oil eventually stops decreasing, its drag on core inflation will also abate.  Although it’s difficult to predict when the exchange rate and the price of oil will stop rising and falling, respectively, it is almost certain that current trends in these two variables will stop in the medium term.  As a result, I am reasonably confident that inflation will move back toward 2 percent in the medium term.  I leave the rest for tomorrow, Madam Chair.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their views and acknowledges that there has been discussion about inflation, but does not directly disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 162.
 MR. ROSENGREN. I have one quick question on the middle-left panel of exhibit 2, “Probability of Tightening the Day before the FOMC Meeting.”  My memory of the 1994 tightening cycle was, not only was it a little bit of a surprise when we started, but also that the pace was somewhat surprising.  As a result, the 10-year rate went up quite abruptly.  How do you think about not only the start of tightening, but also the pace of tightening once we begin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a question and a memory of an event, but there is no apparent contention or disagreement.


Passage number 163.
 MR. LAUBACH. In fact, there is, as you may have noticed, a box in Tealbook B that looks in greater detail at some of these events. It’s interesting that, actually, the pace of tightening expected over the first six months in 1994 wasn’t all that rapid, and, as you point out, there was then a substantial surprise over the course of the year.  So that clearly could lead to stronger market responses subsequently over time.  Here, in my exhibit, I try to focus essentially on the liftoff event, not on, say, the six months or a year following that event.Now, while I certainly don’t want to downplay potential financial stability challenges for some institutions if such a scenario came to pass, I think it is still noteworthy that that, of course, happened basically against the backdrop of an economic situation that was more favorable than expected.  So that should be a positive, all else being equal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing additional information and discussing various aspects of the situation.


Passage number 164.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there other questions.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange of dialogue where Mr. Rosengren asks a question and Chair Yellen asks if there are any other questions. President Evans is not mentioned as having any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 165.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Simon, could you give us any indication—do market commentators or the people you talk to provide any information about how the SEP funds rate numbers might inform their assessments of the pace of liftoff or anything like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage neither presents any disagreement nor does it indicate any contention among the individuals mentioned. It is a simple question posed by Mr. Evans to Simon, requesting information about how the SEP funds rate numbers can affect assessments of the liftoff pace.


Passage number 166.
 MR. POTTER. We added a new question to get numbers back on the SEP medians, because you’re now presenting the medians.  In terms of the dot plot, I’d say that the medians we got back from the responses look pretty close to what will be published today.  They’re basically expecting about 25 basis points to be knocked off the medians, and that’s what I think the SEP shows.  Could you just repeat the second part of your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing the addition of a new question and discussing the expected results.


Passage number 167.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without further information.


Passage number 168.
 Will the dispersion of the dots or anything about the distribution of what we give them and how they— MR. POTTER.  I think they’ll be focused on how many participants have moved liftoff to 2016. I’d say that, having read some of the commentary, the notion of four participants putting liftoff in 2016 is probably about what market participants expected—I know this sounds a little bit strange because I’m talking about your choices here.  There will be focus on dots 4 to 7, and that’s where a lot of people look for a median, as opposed to taking the median of all 17 responses. My answer was probably a little bit confusing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of thoughts and expectations from Mr. Potter.


Passage number 169.
 MR. EVANS.  No, that’s helpful.  We’ve said things like that before, too.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a conversation between Mr. Evans and Chair Yellen, where Mr. Evans acknowledges that the information shared by Chair Yellen is helpful and that they have also said similar things before. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 170.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question.  Conditional on not moving today, where do you think the probability mass for today would shift, based on how B is currently written and the SEP dots.  This question is for either Thomas or Simon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for someone's opinion or analysis.


Passage number 171.
 MR. LAUBACH. The one thing that struck me when reading the dealers’ responses was, I did not find a lot of evidence for the, as it has come to be called, “one or none” view—namely, that not moving in September would immediately lead dealers to assume that, therefore, there is not going to be any move over the remainder of this year.  So I didn’t find in the write-ups anything that pointed in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 172.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage with the given information.


Passage number 173.
 Do you think the mass would move to December so that December would go up a lot, or would it be spread across— MR. POTTER. You’re seeing a little bit more weight on the next meeting.  Part of that will depend on how they assess whether there has to be a scheduled press conference for a move at the October meeting.  What I think Thomas was saying is, we definitely expect mass to go to December.  We’re unsure, and it might depend on the press conference, exactly where it goes relative to October.  And then some mass will go into next year, and that’s basically because stuff can happen over the next few months.  There are a lot of things that can happen regarding the debt limit that will push people to move further out, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing their expectations for the movement of a certain mass in relation to upcoming meetings and events.


Passage number 174.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 175.
 MR. FISCHER.  I would guess that what will happen to the market’s views depends very heavily on what is said in the press conference and what guidance we give for the coming months.  So I’m not sure we get a very good guess independent of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the market's views and clarifies that their guess is dependent on the information provided in the press conference and future guidance.


Passage number 176.
  MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Although I think the policy decision at this meeting is a close and difficult call, I support the policy decision in alternative B. I will also support the statement as written. I have sympathy for Chair Yellen regarding the challenge, even the danger, associated with significant editing of the statement on the fly, particularly just before a press conference.  So I will not suggest any changes, even though I think the statement, and the Committee’s communications more generally, may fall short of what’s needed—a point that I’ll get to in a moment. By the standard of some further improvement in the labor market, I believe liftoff is justified.  At the same time, I do accept that the inflation data on their face could discourage a liftoff decision at this meeting.  The combination of declining year-over-year core PCE inflation and weakening market-based expectation measures is troubling.  Nonetheless, I was prepared to look through the inflation data and base a liftoff decision on an assumption, obviously a critical assumption, that the positive forces at work in the economy will eventually result in upward inflation pressures pushing us toward target in a reasonable time frame. Why not lift off with the decision at this meeting.  As I stated in the economic go-round, recent global economic and financial developments have raised the risk to the outlook, in my estimation, and present a challenging environment for executing liftoff.  This is the deciding factor for me.  The uncertainties that are the likely cause of the recent market volatility justify delaying liftoff a meeting or two.  A delay would give the Committee time to gain confidence that the real economy is not being derailed by these developments. Let me turn to post-statement communication of an alternative B decision and communication in general.  I increasingly feel the statement, and our approach to communicationmore generally, requires a rethink as we approach the next couple of meetings.  Said differently, I’m concerned about our approach to forward guidance, and I’d like to offer some thoughts in that regard.  I’m concerned the Committee’s communication has contributed and is contributing to market volatility.  I’m concerned we have allowed our mantra of “data dependence” to become a liability.  The shift from strict time-dependent guidance to a more flexible approach based on economic conditionality was appropriate.  Over the past several months, however, data dependence has become, effectively, the barest-minimum practical guidance.  The phrase provides too little basis for the public to grasp what will drive the Committee’s decisions in the near future.  I perceive the need for an attempt to achieve greater consensus on what will both trigger liftoff and drive rate decisions of the Committee as we go forward and then find a way to communicate that consensus to the public.  My concern is that, without firming up our guidance, we will continue to fall short of providing the needed clarity about our policy intentions.  I’m concerned the guidance status quo will work at cross-purposes with attaining our objectives.  We will continue to foster a guessing game in the markets that could contribute to unsettled conditions. I recognize the impracticality of trying to engineer substantial statement changes in the remainder of this meeting.  To offer something concrete, however, I suggest that in the intermeeting period, building on our answers in our SEP submissions 3(c), the Committee conduct a virtual go-round on options for forward guidance as captured in a variety of statement alternatives.  This discussion might also include statement language at liftoff. Again, I will not suggest actual changes to the alternative B statement.  But if asked what, concretely, I have in mind to make guidance more substantive, I would have liked to see, after the first sentence of paragraph 3, something in substance more along these lines:  First, “the Committee is satisfied that there has been sufficient improvement in labor market conditions.”  Next, “the Committee expects that, with continued improvement in labor markets and momentum in economic activity more generally, inflation will rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term.”  Finally, “in making its policy decision at this meeting, the Committee recognized the elevated risks associated with recent economic and financial developments.  When the Committee views these risks to have dissipated—and absent material negative changes in economic conditions—it is prepared to initiate increases in the federal funds rate range.” Because I see an alternative B decision at this meeting as a deferral or a delay, not just a normal course “no decision” in which the Committee holds off for more or better data, I prefer communicating a strong predisposition—with the usual caveats, of course—to lift off at an upcoming meeting.  Statement guidance substantively along the lines of what was just suggested would serve this purpose, in my view.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Those are very interesting suggestions. We will follow up.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 177.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 178.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I did not view this decision today as a close call.  With little time to process recent financial market movements and international concerns, we need more time to understand whether there’s been a more significant underlying change in economic fundamentals.  The first footnote in Tealbook A makes clear that the economic effect of delaying a tightening by a meeting or two would have a de minimis effect on variables we care about. Tightening at this meeting, with excessive volatility and using new tools to get us off the zero lower bound, risks a much more complicated start to our tightening cycle.  It also risks the possibility of tightening at the start of a more significant global slowdown, which is not in my modal forecast but is now a more elevated risk. Reasonable risk management leads me to want to see more data before acting. That said, I do view the time to raise rates as being near.  While the U-3 unemployment rate is not a sufficient statistic to summarize labor market conditions, it also should not be ignored.  Employment growth has been pretty strong this year, and broader measures of slack— U-4, U-5, and U-6—have also improved significantly.  As we’ve underestimated how quickly unemployment rates would decline, it is possible that we will face much tighter labor markets sooner than I have in my forecast.  If that were to happen, I would expect less delay in reaching our inflation target. In light of the recent market volatility and the uncertainty about the inflation forecast, I would prefer that our tightening, whenever it begins, be quite gradual.  A risk to waiting too long to lift off is that we may need to tighten more quickly than is in my SEP forecast.  For example, waiting until next year risks a more pronounced decline in unemployment than is in my modal forecast and a more rapid return to 2 percent inflation than we currently envision.  Under those conditions, we would be caught behind the curve and need to make a more rapid adjustment to policy.  I’d prefer to avoid such a circumstance. I would like each of the meetings, whether they coincide with an SEP release and a planned press conference, to be live.  If the domestic and global economy is slowing down, there will be no need to tighten.  However, if labor markets continue to improve and the recent financial market turbulence does not leave much trace in the data going forward, it seems prudent to me to begin a gradual tightening process relatively soon. I have a couple of quick comments on the reinvestment discussion.  I didn’t comment yesterday because I wanted to process people’s comments.  I had a couple of quick takeaways. First, when we don’t know what we will do, I don’t think we should provide forward guidance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 179.
  [Laughter] MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I disagree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are expressing opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 180.
  [Laughter] MR. ROSENGREN.  I can imagine a scenario in which we actually sell long-term assets. It is the tabletop scenario, where we meet our dual-mandate goals but commercial real estate and residential real estate are in a bubble, somewhat like what President Williams was talking about.  In that case, I would certainly consider selling long-term assets, with the very purpose of steepening the yield curve. I can also imagine a scenario in which we maintain a large balance sheet.  If the equilibrium real federal funds rate is low, we may want to keep long rates low and short rates higher than otherwise to minimize the chance that we return to the zero lower bound.  It has been costly to be at the zero lower bound.  I would prefer to minimize the chance that we return there. If we are not willing to raise our inflation target, we should consider maintaining a higher balance sheet.  The discussion yesterday was very good but implied to me that we should maintain balance sheet flexibility as prudent risk management.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different scenarios and possibilities for the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, but there is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 181.
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I believe there’s a strong case for moving the federal funds rate up at this meeting.  The Committee has laid out two criteria for liftoff—some further improvement in labor markets and reasonable confidence that inflation will move back to our target of 2 percent over the medium term. In my view, those conditions have been met. Labor market conditions certainly continued to improve over the intermeeting period, and, in my view, the economy is at or nearly at full employment from the standpoint of the Fed’s dual-mandate goal.  The inflation criterion for liftoff is appropriately based on the expected path of inflation and not on its current level.  No doubt inflation has been running below our goal of 2 percent, but the effects of last summer’s oil price decline and fall in import prices have been passing through to the headline inflation numbers.  This, combined with the fact that the labor market has been tightening faster than expected and inflation expectations have been generally stable even in the face of commodity price declines, should give us more confidence in our inflation forecast.  Starting normalization before we reach our dual-mandate goals is prudent if we want to minimize the risk that we’ll have to move rates up considerably more aggressively than we’re currently anticipating. We’ve been indicating for some time that we expect a gradual path.  I would like us to take actions that help maintain the credibility of that scheme.  As Governor Fischer said at our July meeting, the data control the gradualness.  However, our policy actions can influence the data by influencing how the economy evolves. Now, should the recent volatility in financial markets give us pause.  I think not.  The economy has fared well through it.  Volatility measures and risk spreads remain elevated but are moving back down.  As Chair Yellen pointed out, the decision to act depends on an assessment of the risks.  I view the change in financial conditions and reassessment of global growth since   our July meeting as a downside risk to the outlook rather than implying much change to the modal outlook.  But we’ve taken out insurance against this downside risk by keeping interest rates considerably lower than almost all of the policy rules suggest, even as the Tealbook-consistent equilibrium interest rate has been rising—in this Tealbook it’s now 0.47 percent. I believe that Chair Yellen’s insightful leadership of the Committee has prepared the public for liftoff.  In the current environment, after keeping the funds rate at zero for over six years, I would expect some residual uncertainty surrounding the decision.  The fact that there’s not unanimity across market participants and forecasters that liftoff will occur at this particular meeting doesn’t deter me.  Most are still expecting a rate hike this year, and a resolution of some policy uncertainty might actually be viewed favorably.  In addition, no matter how well we have prepared and signaled such a change, I’d expect some volatility in the markets at liftoff.  I don’t think we should be too bothered by that, either. What would concern me more is if, on liftoff, the public’s expectation about the path of policy after liftoff changes and becomes much steeper than the path we’re currently anticipating.  In other words, might liftoff be read as the beginning of rate increases at each meeting thereafter so that we have a steep path going up. The Chair has emphasized that the Committee anticipates that economic conditions will evolve in a way that warrants keeping the funds rate below its longer-run level for some time. This certainly shows up in our SEP.  But the market path implied by market data is considerably shallower than in the SEP, which suggests that the message of a gradual path is coming through loud and clear.  Thus, while there is some risk that the act of liftoff may appreciably change policy expectations, I believe appropriate communications at liftoff will be sufficient to mitigate this risk. Chair Yellen and the Committee have navigated some very difficult waters over the past year, as the start of normalization is near.  With considerable effort, we’ve reached a point at which there is a favorable alignment of expectations of a rate increase and the data that support such an increase.  I don’t believe this is something we should take for granted.  Current economic circumstances are very favorable in terms of being able to communicate the rationale for action and post-liftoff policy, and careful communication is a crucial component of a successful liftoff. Yes, there are risks to moving.  But there are also risks to not moving, including having to move more aggressively later on if we delay too much further.  Action is going to send a signal, but so will inaction.  We may not see such favorable conditions for communications for some time.  Thus, I believe we should seize the day and act.  Of course, I do understand that this is not the majority view, and I respect colleagues who see things differently.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Mester, is presenting her own view and acknowledges that it is not the majority view. She also expresses respect for colleagues who see things differently. Overall, she is making a case for moving the federal funds rate up at the meeting.


Passage number 182.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Given my economic forecast, I continue to hold the position that it is quite important that monetary policy begin to raise rates.  However, I am not adamant that it be done at this meeting. The recent turbulence in financial markets and the softening of energy prices and price pressures in general probably make this meeting less than optimal for liftoff, although I expect these are temporary headwinds.  It is, however, my strong belief that we should begin our normalization process sooner rather than later, and that the process should be gradual.  At the least, the statement language should make clear that if we continue to see improvements in the labor market over the next couple of months, the Committee will move to raise rates.Earlier liftoff makes a gradual path of policy firming more likely, and it will still allow us to maintain an accommodative policy stance for some time. I’m becoming concerned that we will find ourselves treating every bump in the economic road as a reason for delay, with the effect that monetary policy moves further and further from what can reasonably be viewed as normal.  The longer we wait in anticipation that all signs point in the same direction, the more likely it will be that future policy adjustments will need to be very aggressive, and I worry about the economic consequences of being in that position. Beginning normalization should send a reassuring message and will underscore the belief that the economy is on solid footing, and that inflation will return to target.  It seems that the least normal element of the current economic environment is our inability to return monetary policy to a more normal mode of conduct. Like Presidents Williams and Rosengren, I also encourage the Committee to consider every meeting, including October, as a potential and appropriate time for liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Harker, acknowledges that it may not be the best time to raise rates at the current meeting due to recent turbulence in financial markets and softening of energy prices. However, he strongly believes that normalization should begin soon and should be done gradually. He expresses concern that delaying the normalization process further could lead to more aggressive policy adjustments in the future and has worries about the economic consequences of being in that position. He also agrees with Presidents Williams and Rosengren that every meeting should be considered as a potential time for liftoff. While there may be some nuances in their views, overall there is no clear disagreement or contention.


Passage number 183.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Based on economic data and the outlook for the economy discussed yesterday, I do believe we’re at a point at which it’s appropriate to begin the process of removing accommodation—if not today, then very soon. I do support alternative B today because I am of the view that economic conditions abroad might have the potential to spill over to the United States, thereby increasing the uncertainty about the U.S. outlook and negatively affecting data in the months ahead.  However, I would say that I believe these non-U.S. economic uncertainties will continue for some extended period.  That is, I don’t believe the overall level of this uncertainty is going to diminish in the  coming months.  The nature of the weakness and spillover threats from abroad relates to deeply embedded, in some cases, structural, demographic, and other issues that are likely to take years, versus months, to manage and address.  So my preference would be that we soon begin the process of removing accommodation and address these potential spillover threats by adjusting the expected path of accommodation, versus delaying much further the start of the process. In my view, delaying for too long the start of the process of removing accommodation at this stage carries a cost. While a lower unemployment rate, of course, is desirable, it has the potential to create unhealthy imbalances if it’s supported by artificially accommodative financial conditions.  Such conditions maintained for too long may encourage investment and borrowing decisions that cannot easily be reversed or unwound when policy eventually normalizes, as it must.  This increases the chances, in my view, of a hard landing, which, to me, means excess investment, inventory buildup, and financial asset valuations that are more likely to lead to negative economic effects later when more normal policy is put into place.  In my experience, imbalances like these are often not obvious until after the fact, and they need not be accompanied by above-target inflation.  So I would say that, on the upside, prudent risk management dictates that we begin the process of scaling back accommodation as the economy approaches our best estimate of potential. I can and do support alternative B as written at this meeting, though, because I believe that it is prudent to use the next several weeks or months to confirm that conditions for liftoff are sustainable, allowing us to act in October or December. But I would suggest that, in the statement, we send a signal that the economy has moved closer to satisfying the conditions for liftoff by substituting the word “approaching” for the phrase “continuing to move toward” in the third sentence of paragraph 2 in alternative B. So, in that third sentence, it currently says “continuing to move toward,” and my suggestion is to instead substitute the word “approaching.” Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It is a statement of Mr. Kaplan's views on the current economic conditions and his preference for removing accommodation in the near future.


Passage number 184.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Alternative C aligns with my own views of the economy’s continued expansion, even in the face of various headwinds over the past several years—an economy that warrants a continued accommodative stance of policy but not zero interest rates, in my view. The benchmark policy rules that supported the Committee’s decisions to add accommodation via LSAPs several years ago are the same ones that have been signaling for some time that a shift in policy is appropriate. However, for a Committee that has lacked reasonable confidence to begin a gradual normalization over the past few meetings, the prospectsof liftoff in the face of global growth uncertainty and the related headwinds to the United States are actually less compelling, I think, today. I understand the desire to wait for a few more meetings, with the intention of having a clearer picture of the outlook.  Waiting for more certainty over the course of a few more meetings may seem comforting and costless.  I think it carries its own cumulative risk. The potential exists to get caught in a time-inconsistency trap by projecting liftoff in the near future but, when the time comes, lacking the conviction to carry out the policies underpinning our projections because of wanting to see just a few more data points. I’ll offer three brief thoughts for today’s decision.  First, in view of the continued improvement in labor market conditions, the decision not to lift off at this meeting must surely reflect the Committee as not yet having reasonable confidence that inflation will return to 2 percent over the medium term.  If this point is not emphasized, markets may view our reaction function as now incorporating things like market volatility and foreign developments into our near-term decisionmaking process. Second, I believe the heavy emphasis on data dependence is injecting substantial uncertainty into markets and is too backward looking.  So, in addition to data dependence, monetary policy needs to emphasize being forward looking.  We should place more emphasis on how incoming data are affecting our assessment of the outlook rather than inadvertently sending a message that we’re responding to the most recent data points. Finally, postponing liftoff increases the probability that rates will have to be increased more rapidly than we currently anticipate.  Waiting until inflation is nearer to 2 percent and unemployment is below its longer-run normal rate may put the Committee in a difficult positionof having to adjust rates more steeply and, as a result, create heightened risk around financial stability and our growth outlook.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. George is giving her own views and opinions but there is no mention of any disagreement or differing opinions with others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 185.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m going to do the risky thing here and try to be more reactive to comments that have been offered around the table than I customarily would be. I will start with what President George just said, which is that the Committee should do more both internally and externally to emphasize the need to condition monetary policy on the outlook.  We should always be seeking to make policy to align the medium-term outlook for our goal variables of prices and employment with our longer-term objectives.  Now, when I say the term “outlook,” I mean to include risks to that outlook as well.  As President Evans emphasized, those risks really are all asymmetrically on the downside at this stage because of the zero lower bound and our inability to be able to respond effectively to those risks. What I heard from many around the table is a desire to incorporate other considerations besides the outlook into our thinking.  President Lacker started off by talking about how the Taylor rule had given very good outcomes for us in the past.  Embedded in the Taylor rule is a sense of the desirability to have interest rates close to their long-run normal level. President Lockhart talked about being satisfied with gradually moving back toward 2 percent over the medium term.  I think we want to be aligned between our medium-term outlook and our long-run goals.  We have to be more aggressive than that.  We want to be actually back to 2 percent. And, as President Evans suggested, taking into account the closeness to the effective lower bound, we might want to be willing to have some overshooting in the medium term in terms of our modal inflation outlook, just to guard against those downside risks.  Several people talked about being concerned about disliking rapid increases in interest rates.  Again, this is introducing a non-goal-oriented consideration into your policy decisionmaking.  To offer some context, when we’re talking about rapid increases in interest rates, we’re talking about increases faster than 25 basis points a quarter.  I want to offer that the baseline in the SEP is 25 basis points per quarter.  I think the Committee—again, as President Evans mentioned—would have a better alignment between its medium-term outlook and its long-run objectives by waiting and then raising rates at a slightly faster pace.  Something more like the 2004–06 pace, which I believe was actually viewed as fairly measured, would deliver a better outcome. The next few meetings and the decisionmaking around liftoff are really critical not just for the course of policy in the near term and how it’s going to affect the economy, but also in terms of setting up the strategic framework of how the Committee is going to think about policy. We continue to be overly influenced by a collection of Taylor-like rules.  I suggested yesterday that this had served the Committee extremely poorly during the course of the recovery. To try to clarify one of my points in that discussion about November 2009, that was not a QE meeting.  It was a meeting in which the Committee had terminated QE1, and was thinking about, how do we best time the removal of accommodation—specifically, the increase of interest rates—with the improvement in the economy so as to best support the recovery.  The debate within the Committee, shaped by Taylor rules, had the dovish side in the 8s in terms of the unemployment rate and the hawkish side in the 9s.  I was there.  I was on the Committee at the time, so this is about self-reflection and self-criticism as much as anything else. This is about the problem with our framework that was in place before 2008 imprisoning the Committee into an unduly slow recovery.  We do not want to have that happen again.  The  way you don’t have that happen again is by conditioning the policy decisions now about liftoff and afterward much more firmly on the outlook for prices and employment and by building in, I think, risk protections along the lines that President Evans has suggested. I look at what’s happening in the world, and we look at all of the experiences countries have had in trying to escape the zero lower bound.  And I am drawn, Madam Chair, to alternative A.  I do not think that this is the time to be considering liftoff.  I look at what’s been happening with regard to how financial markets are considering the credibility of our target.  Without meaning to be overly critical, as I listen to this debate, I can understand why financial markets are doubting the credibility of our target, because there’s just a comfort level with, “Eventually, we have to get back to 2 percent.  It’s got to happen.”  That only happens if we make decisions to make it happen.  That is how we get credibility for our target.  That’s how Paul Volcker got credibility for the target in the 1980s.  That’s how we have to get there.  It’s through our decisions. If we remove accommodation now, with inflation running as low as it is and projected to take as long as it is to get back to target, we are not sending the right message about credibility. I am drawn to alternative A.  I think that will set us up better to have a framework that is explicitly goal oriented.  It’ll allow us to respond more effectively to shocks going forward, as opposed to putting weight on having interest rates at some normal level.  The only thing that “normal level” should mean for this Committee is that we are hitting our price and employment objectives over the medium term. I’ll close in terms of President Williams’s point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, disagrees with the idea of raising interest rates now and argues for alternative A, which suggests not considering liftoff at this time. He believes that raising rates now would send the wrong message about credibility and that the Committee should focus on aligning policy decisions with the outlook for prices and employment. He also criticizes the use of Taylor-like rules and argues for a more goal-oriented framework.


Passage number 186.
  I thought it was a very telling and compelling one, in part because I bought a house in June 2005, so it really— MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 187.
 WILLIAMS.  It hurts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is expressing subjective feelings or emotions and does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 188.
  [Laughter]  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It did hurt.  This is a challenging issue, and it deserves a lot more attention from the Committee.  Is the fact that house prices are 30 percent overvalued right now a reason to be less accommodative.  It’s a subject that should be discussed. I will point out that, as I’m sure President Williams knows, if the Laubach-Williams natural real rate is going to be low for a long time to come, house prices are going to be elevated relative to historical norms, and that’s something we’re going to have to live with if we want to hit our goal variables. That’s the only comment I’ll offer on that. Madam Chair, I appreciated your setting out the alternatives at the beginning, but I felt you left out the most compelling one, which was alternative A.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of one speaker expressing their opinion and providing additional information related to the topic at hand. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or any disagreement with what is being said.


Passage number 189.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B today as written.  For me, this has been a close call, and I do think you can make the case in a pretty strong form on either side of this decision for today.  In fact, that’s exactly what the Chair did in her opening remarks. The Committee has guided markets to expect liftoff by the end of this year, subject to incoming data.  Those data have been, on balance, perhaps a little better than expected.  But we have additional disinflationary forces arriving, albeit ones we view as transitory, and a higher risk of a global slowdown.  In addition, U.S. financial conditions have tightened since the July meeting by well more than 25 basis points, according to well-publicized external estimates.  So there’s no sense of the Committee getting behind the curve.  To me, it makes sense to defer liftoff for this meeting to let both the inflation picture and the global situation settle down. I do not view the situation as it exists today as justifying a lengthy delay before liftoff.  I don’t see a need to see the rates of inflation or nominal wage growth rising prior to our liftoff.  I would be satisfied with at least some reasonable stability in the dollar, so that we could be sure that the recurring temporary factors holding down inflation are finally abating.  I would, of course, also need to see continuing growth to support ongoing tightening in the economy.  Frankly, if real GDP growth is strong enough, then I might be persuaded to lift off even in the absence of other factors.  Turning briefly to the Committee’s two-part test for liftoff: I view the first part of the test—some further improvement in the labor market—as met for this meeting.  There’s been substantial improvement in the labor market.  And, while there’s no doubt additional slack, unemployment is now at or near most estimates of the natural rate.  Even if the natural rate— either the short-term rate or the longer-term rate—is significantly lower than current estimates, which is a distinct possibility, we’re already on a path, it seems to me, to unemployment in the mid-to-low 4s by the end of 2016.  So, from this perspective solely, I think it’s getting to be about time to start raising interest rates.But the inflation test is more complicated.  In the Tealbook baseline, inflation returns to 1.9 percent in 2018, which, one might argue, is itself a decent argument that the test is met.  After all, the test is appropriately about the medium term. But today inflation is not just well below the 2 percent objective.  It’s also very likely to decline in the coming months, albeit due to factors we view as transitory.  So declaring the inflation test to be met would require the Committee to look through a substantial transition period and place a great deal of weight on the Phillips curve. To put it simply, intermeeting developments have not increased my confidence of inflation moving toward 2 percent in the medium term.  I see this as a problem, and I see a risk of sending a signal to markets that the Committee is not serious about the 2 percent objective. For me, delaying liftoff for a meeting or two may provide some evidence that we’re serious about reaching the 2 percent objective and allow time to understand the evolution of global developments. There’s been some discussion of a so-called dovish raise, whereby the Committee would raise interest rates at this meeting or a subsequent meeting, but then wait for some time to let the effects settle in. The sense of this is that the Committee’s communications have been confusing to the markets—you hear this from market participants quite a bit—and that we’re, in effect, getting in the way of the economy now, as the Chair referenced in her remarks, and causing trouble in the markets.  That will become increasingly the case if uncertainty increases, and we ought to just lift off get it over with. Now, I don’t support that approach at this meeting, but I do think that if either the October meeting or the December meeting provides a reasonable opportunity to go ahead and lift off, I would be inclined to look very carefully at that and take it, if possible. We had a chart today that Thomas presented that showed the distribution of expected timing of liftoff by FOMC meeting.  I’d really like to see the likelihood of liftoff be way north of 50 percent by the time we lift off.  In fact, in my perfect world, it would be 100 percent.  But I realize that’s not likely in a world in which the Committee is of different views and in which we’re being very data driven.  I’d still like to see that be much higher than 50 percent, and I think it would be very unwise to lift off at a time when the market is not expecting it.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Powell, is expressing his support for alternative B and discussing his views on the timing of liftoff and the inflation test. He also mentions the possibility of a dovish raise, but states that he does not support that approach at this meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair. I support alternative B as written.  I was hoping that I could support lifting off at this meeting for two reasons.  First, it would have meant that we had satisfied our criteria of labor market improvement and confidence that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective over the medium term.  Second, as I said at earlier meetings, September is a better month to begin normalization than December, economic conditions and outlook being equal. Unfortunately, the global economy has not cooperated.  I think there are significant risks to the growth outlook that make it uncertain whether we will see further improvement in the labor market and whether we will see inflation returning to our 2 percent objective over the medium term.  In terms of what happens from here, I hope the international outlook improves and financial conditions stabilize.  If this happens and U.S. growth stays on track, then I could support lifting off relatively soon, certainly later this year.  I’ve argued that December is not ideal in terms of market functioning considerations.  I don’t think that should be sufficient by itself to deter us if everything else lines up in support of moving. With respect to moving in October, I don’t believe we should rule that out as an option. But if we did move in October, that might demonstrate an urgency that would be difficult to  reconcile with the fact that we have relatively sluggish growth and still-too-low inflation.  People might be confused.  What’s the rush of moving in October. I see the bar for moving at a meeting without a press conference as somewhat higher than that for moving at a press conference meeting.  I just think that’s the reality.  So I’d be surprised if, in six weeks’ time, we got data that push us over the bar. I am very supportive of Governor Powell’s comments. It would be good for the market to have a very high probability when we actually move.  If things cooperate and everything moves in a nice way, what I would prefer, rather than moving in October, would be to have a very “hawky” statement in October that pointed very strongly to December, so that you could get all of that probability mass on December, and then just go in December.  I think that would be a better way to go.  Now, whether the world is going to cooperate like that, we’ll have to see. Finally, I had a couple of comments on the so-called Yellen put.  We really have to disabuse people of this notion.  We care about the economic outlook.  Financial conditions matter in terms of affecting the outlook when they change, and if those changes in financial conditions are sustained, then we need to take them into consideration.  We need to explain that to people over and over again. I’m sympathetic with Jim in the sense that this is a risk that people will take this reaction as a response to financial markets, but I don’t think it is.  My views of why we should wait at this meeting have nothing to do with the fact that the stock market is a little weaker than it was before.  It has to do with the fact that there are actually some real things going on that are affecting financial conditions, and those changes have a risk for the outlook.  I think we need to explain that over and over again.  Thank you, Madam Chair.CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  I heard one suggestion in the go-round for a language change in alternative B, but I think most of you who support alternative B indicated your preference to go ahead with it as written.  So unless I hear a groundswell of support for some change, I’d like to propose that we vote on alternative B as written. Matt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement and differing viewpoints on whether to lift off in October or December, as well as discussion on the impact of financial conditions on the economic outlook.


Passage number 191.
 MR. LUECKE.  This vote will cover alternative B on pages 6 and 7 of Thomas’s handout and the directive on page 11 of that handout. Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard Yes President Evans Yes Governor Fischer Yes President Lacker No President Lockhart Yes Governor Powell Yes Governor Tarullo Yes President Williams Yes CHAIR YELLEN.  I recognize that, around the table, there is considerable support for moving—if not today, then in the near future—and I promise that in my press conference, I will do everything I can to emphasize that.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as all the individuals mentioned are in agreement with the statement.


Passage number 192.
 MR. LOCKHART.  My staff argued me out of raising a bunch of questions around December, and Vice Chairman Dudley just addressed this.  Could I ask Simon and Lorie to comment.  Sitting far from it, should I be concerned about what we’ve heard before regarding the thinness of the market.  Should I also have some concern about whether you have any staffing issues or whether you’re just going to declare that everyone will need to cancel all of their plans and be there for that period. In addition, I’d like to know whether there are other execution considerations in December that, as we get conceivably closer to it, could cause us to get more nervous that it’s too tricky.  Could you address that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a series of questions and concerns being raised by MR. LOCKHART.


Passage number 193.
   MR. POTTER.  I’ve got no concerns.  If you want to lift off in three days’ time, we can do it.  So I don’t think you should take that into account.  I believe Vice Chairman Dudley’s viewpoint is, markets tend to be a little bit thinner in December, and some of the impact on financial conditions could be harder to control.  If it’s the case that, leading into that date, markets are pretty sure liftoff is going to happen in December, then desks will be staffed for some of the things that you’re interested in.  People staff their desks to get cash invested at year-end, because a lot of cash arrives at year-end. We have complete capacity to do that at any time.  There are no staffing issues.  Most of my staff wouldn’t know what decision the Committee has made until the statement is released.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 194.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Another point is, if we do get to a situation in which the expected probability of a December liftoff are quite high, people are going to staff their desks appropriately.  So getting that probability up actually could have a benefit of minimizing some of those risks. CHAIR YELLEN. With respect to October, if I’m asked if it’s a possibility, I’m not announcing now that I will have a press conference.  But I will give the response that I’ve given in the past—which is that we have the capacity to hold a press briefing if we decide to move.  Then, since every meeting is a “live” possibility, if we decided to move in October, that is what we would do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


