Passage number 1.
 Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on January 26-27, 2010 January 26—Afternoon Session  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  This will be an FOMC meeting for the first six items because it is an organizational meeting, and then at that point, if Matt reminds me, we will make it a joint meeting with the Board.  This is the annual organizational meeting.  Let me first recognize the Presidents rotating into voting status: Presidents Bullard, Hoenig, Pianalto, and Rosengren. Organizational item number 1 is the election of Committee officers.  Let me recognize Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward announcement of the agenda for the meeting and the recognition of the rotating Presidents.


Passage number 2.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you.  It is a pleasure and a privilege to nominate Ben Bernanke to be Chairman of this Committee.  I can’t think of a better person to herd all of these cats.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their admiration and support for Ben Bernanke's nomination as Chairman of the Committee.


Passage number 3.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Is there a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage is a simple statement of appreciation and a request for a second. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 4.
 MR. WARSH.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the word "second" without providing any context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other nominations.  Without objection.  Thank you very much.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It solely expresses gratitude.


Passage number 6.
 MR. KOHN.  It is also a pleasure and a privilege to nominate Bill Dudley to be the Vice Chairman of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses pleasure and privilege in nominating Bill Dudley for the position of Vice Chairman of the Committee.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 8.
 MR. WARSH.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "MR. WARSH." simply identifies the person speaking, without indicating any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Item 1C is staff officers.  Would you please read the list, Matt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is no disagreement or contention. The rest of the passage is a request to read a list, which does not imply any disagreement either.


Passage number 10.
 MR. LUECKE.  Secretary and Economist, Brian Madigan; Assistant Secretaries, Matt Luecke, David Skidmore, and Michelle Smith; General Counsel, Scott Alvarez; Deputy General Counsel, Tom Baxter; Assistant General Counsel, Rich Ashton; Economists, Nathan Sheets and Dave Stockton; Associate Economists from the Board, Tom Connors, Bill English, Steve Kamin, Larry Slifman, and David Wilcox; and from the Banks, Christopher Waller, Mark Sniderman, Simon Potter, Jeff Fuhrer, and Alan Barkema.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply lists the names and titles of various individuals within an organization.


Passage number 11.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any questions or comments.  If not, may I have a second for the motion that we approve these officers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply requesting a second for the motion to approve the officers, and is open to receiving questions or comments before proceeding.


Passage number 12.
 MR. KOHN.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any conflicting or contradictory statements, opinions, or arguments. It simply presents an individual's response without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 13.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  All right.  Without objection.  Item number 2 is a proposed revision to the program for security of FOMC information.  You received a memo from Scott and Matt.  There is an essentially expositional change to add a summary of the rules that govern noncitizen access to FOMC information.  Are there any questions for Scott or Matt about this memorandum.  [No response]  Could I have a motion to adopt the revision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about a proposed revision to the program for security of FOMC information and asking for a motion to adopt the revision.


Passage number 14.
 MR. TARULLO.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "MR. TARULLO. So moved." does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests agreement or support for a previous statement or action.


Passage number 15.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without being able to see the specific passage you are referring to, I am unable to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage for a more accurate response.


Passage number 16.
 MR. WARSH.  Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 17.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Item number 3 is the selection of a Federal Reserve Bank to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account.  I have been informed that New York is again willing to serve.  Do we have a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and asks for a second on a proposal.


Passage number 18.
 MR. KOHN.  I second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Kohn seconded something, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 19.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We are rethinking that now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply indicates a change in thinking without any opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 20.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Number 4; now we are getting to the controversial items—selection of a Manager of the System Open Market Account.  Brian Sack is the incumbent.  Are there other nominations.  If not, any objections to naming Brian Sack the Manager.  [No response]  The New York Federal Reserve Bank will have to find that acceptable.  We trust that they will.   Next, item 5 is a review of the authorization for domestic open market operations.  Let me turn this over to Brian to present the items.  There are four items here.  Would you like to discuss them briefly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 21.
   MR. SACK.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Committee reviews the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations at its first meeting each year.  I propose a few amendments to the domestic authorization for the Committee to consider.  These changes were described in the memo that I sent to the Committee on the subject ahead of the meeting.  Let me highlight two major changes. First, I am proposing that the Committee expand the securities eligible for the repo pool offered to foreign, international, and fiscal agency account holders to include securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the United States.  This change would, in effect, expand the range of SOMA assets to be used in these transactions to agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as opposed to the current authorization’s restriction to only Treasury securities.  This wider set of securities corresponds to those that are eligible for outright purchases or sales by the Desk.  This change would allow the Desk to optimally allocate the SOMA’s asset holdings across different tools and facilities going forward.  In particular, it would provide the Desk with additional collateral to offer as a repo facility to our customers, allowing Treasury collateral to be used as needed in other facilities or transactions. Second, I am proposing a change to the language in section 4.B so that it is more consistent with other sections of the authorization.  These changes include clarifying the term “agency securities” to explicitly refer to both agency debt and agency MBS securities.  Note, however, that operations under section 4.B are not currently in use.   In addition to these items, I would like to update the Committee on four issues related to the authorization.  These items do not require changes to the domestic authorization.  First, I recommend that the Committee keep suspended the guidelines for the conduct of System operations in federal agency issues, because the agency and agency MBS purchase programs are still under way.  Second, in the policy directive to be discussed at the end of the meeting, I propose that the Committee authorize the continued use of dollar roll transactions to aid in the settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS purchases that will be conducted through March.  As I will explain in my financial market briefing, there have been considerable settlement failures in the MBS market in recent months.  The ability to conduct dollar roll transactions allows the Fed to defer settlement, if necessary, in order to facilitate the smooth process for achieving delivery of our purchased securities.  I anticipate that the use of this tool would continue to be relatively limited in nature, between an estimated $10 billion and $30 billion in activity per month, with the final dollar roll in this context likely to be executed no later than August.   Third, the current authorization allows the Desk to transact in agency MBS for the SOMA through agents. We are working to bring agency MBS administration, trading, settlement, and risk analysis in house, but this process is likely to be lengthy, and I am thus asking that this authority be retained through 2010.  Lastly, in November the Committee authorized the Desk to conduct small-scale reverse repo operations as needed to ensure the operational readiness of this tool across a broad range of collateral types and counterparties.  We successfully conducted a series of operations in December, which increased the Desk’s confidence that tri-party reverse repos could be quickly implemented.  However, these operations did not employ agency MBS collateral and did not involve an expanded counterparty list.  Thus we anticipate a need to conduct at least two additional programs of small-scale operations in the first half of 2010 to further improve our operational readiness.  These operations are covered under the current resolution.  We need a vote to approve these changes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing amendments and providing updates, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 22.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian.  So we will need to vote on the first item, which allows the use of agency debt and agency MBS in the collateral pool for foreign counterparties.  Let me just comment on the suspension of guidelines.  This is the step we took when we began to purchase the MBS—I guess it was more than a year ago now.  I think at this point we can’t really revisit this as long as our program is continuing, but we won’t wait until next January to look at this again when the time comes, so let me just commit to that.  Are there any questions or comments for Brian on any of these items.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 23.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Just to clarify your last comment.  Does this have to be reviewed formally every year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question for clarification.


Passage number 24.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  This authorization has to be reviewed every year.  This is part of the authorization.  So at a minimum, we would have to review it next January, but we will look at it again at the appropriate time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the authorization needs to be reviewed annually and will be reviewed again in January and at the appropriate time.


Passage number 25.
   MR. PLOSSER.  That’s fine.  I just wanted to make sure that I understood the criteria.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser simply wants clarification on the criteria.


Passage number 26.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do I have that right, Brian.  We’d have to look at this again in any case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply requesting clarification and suggesting the need to review the subject again.


Passage number 27.
 MR. SACK.  That’s correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Sack simply confirms that something is correct without any contradicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions or comments.  [No response]  All right.  If not, then we need a vote to allow agency debt and MBS to be used as collateral.  Are there any objections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there are any objections or comments regarding the proposal to allow agency debt and MBS to be used as collateral.


Passage number 29.
 MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any points of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any objections.  [No response]  Okay.  Thank you.  All right.  Brian, foreign currency operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker asks if there are any objections, but there is no response, indicating that everyone is in agreement. The subsequent phrases "Okay," "Thank you," and "All right" further suggest a lack of disagreement. The mention of Brian's foreign currency operations does not indicate contention either.


Passage number 31.
 MR. SACK.  On the foreign side, the Desk operates under the following Committee guidelines:  the authorization of foreign currency operations, the foreign currency directive, and the procedural instructions with respect to foreign currency operations.  I recommend that all three be renewed without amendment.  In doing so, I am proposing that the list of currencies in the authorization remain unchanged this year, under the view that it reflects the current foreign exchange market structure.  We need a vote to reaffirm these instruments.  The vote to reaffirm these documents will include approval of the System’s warehousing agreement with the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sack, is recommending that the three Committee guidelines be renewed without amendment and is proposing the unchanged list of currencies. He is calling for a vote to reaffirm these documents and the warehousing agreement with the Treasury. There is no opposition or disagreement presented.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there any questions for Brian.  [No response]  Okay.  If not, we need a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is no response to the question and moves on to the next topic.


Passage number 33.
 MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply instructing someone to move.


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  All right.  The authorization for foreign currency operations is approved.  I need a motion to close the Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrases "Without objection" and "All right" indicate a lack of disagreement. Additionally, there is a request for a motion to close the meeting, which suggests that the approval of the foreign currency operations has already been agreed upon.


Passage number 35.
 MR. KOHN.  So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement indicating a request to move.


Passage number 36.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  All right.  So we now have a joint meeting of the FOMC and the Federal Reserve Board.  We turn to item 7, which is a briefing on financial developments, and I turn, once again, to our new Manager of the Open Market Desk, Brian Sack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply provides information about the agenda of a meeting and introduces a new member.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Brian.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that suggest contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of polite acknowledgments and a request for questions directed towards Brian.


Passage number 38.
 MR. FISHER.  Brian, I want to go back to your chart 4 on exhibit 1.  I just have a question.  If I understand it correctly, one of the great things that has happened is that people have used the high-yield market and the rally we have had in the high-yield market to rebalance their balance sheets.  If my numbers are correct, above 70 percent of the issuance in 2009 was used for that purpose and to push out maturities beyond that wall of maturity in 2012 that we were kind of worried about.  But if my soundings are correct, toward the end of the year we began to see some old behaviors reassert themselves—payments in kind, self-payment of dividends, covenant-light issuance.  So this is just a judgmental question.  Are we reaching a point at which some of this old, abusive behavior is beginning to reassert itself.  I am just curious as to what you are detecting, and is my observation correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and sharing their observation.


Passage number 39.
 MR. SACK.  I think we are hearing reports of those types of activities at least at the fringe—issuance to make dividend payments and other structures that may be somewhat questionable.  I think we’re perhaps at the edge of worrying about some of that.  Those instances are pretty isolated; they’re certainly not widespread at this point.  And in many ways we are not back to the froth in the markets that we saw before.  We don’t see that froth in terms of financing abilities.  Repo haircuts are still relatively high and differentiated across asset classes.  We don’t see it in the complexity of structures.  We don’t see it in the intent of the issuance broadly.  So we are certainly not back to where we were, but I think we are starting to hear more and more reports of those types of activities.  Very much like other valuation measures, the valuation measure I showed suggests that we have moved a long way back, but we are not to levels that look overextended.  But it is certainly putting us back into that historical range where I think we need to pay more attention to valuations and then to worry about things like that.  And these anecdotes about activity suggest that is where we are as well, getting back to the fringe of a range where we want to pay attention, but not at a level that is alarming today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there have been reports of questionable activities at the fringe, but overall, they do not see widespread issues in the market. They mention various indicators like financing abilities, complexity of structures, and intent of issuance to support their assessment that the market is not back to where it was before. The speaker also mentions that valuation measures suggest the market has moved a long way back but is not overextended. There is a sense of caution and the need to pay attention to valuations and activity, but no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 40.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply shows gratitude or acknowledgement towards someone named Mr. Fisher.


Passage number 41.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence only mentions President Bullard without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 42.
  MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, you spent a lot of time on the survey results, and I guess my question about that is, What do you see as the repercussions of this.  I mean, a lot of this to me reads as though I asked financial market participants what they expected us to do, and they said, “Well, we are not really sure what the Fed is going to do, but we’ll fill in some answers.”  I guess the key question would be, Is there anything that is precluding us from saying, “Okay.  We are going to adopt what we think is the optimal policy,” inform the markets, and then they will fall into line.  Then if you redid the survey, they would come out at whatever the Committee said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the repercussions of the survey results and suggesting a possible alternative approach.


Passage number 43.
 MR. SACK.  I am certainly not suggesting that you need to choose a strategy that follows the market’s expectations.  As I said, I think that the market is increasingly looking for guidance on what the strategy will be.  So I do think it’s important to begin to formulate a strategy and communicate it, but it certainly does not have to match market expectations, and you could shape those expectations with your communications. I do think, though, for some questions that hearing the views of market participants may be quite informative—to choose one example, gauging the possible gap between the funds rate and the IOER rate.  As we highlighted in the memo, there is no sample; there are no data from which to empirically investigate that relationship.  We have never been in an IOER regime with this level of reserves where we have tried to increase the IOER rate.  So there are no empirics we can throw at the question, and we are left to conjecture what may happen.  In that regard, it is probably useful to talk to market participants who are very involved in funding markets and who have their own views on balance sheet usage, arbitrage activity, and the types of things that will affect that spread to hear what they think.  So I do hope you can extract some information from how markets may behave, in addition to just understanding what they expect we are going to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the importance of formulating a strategy and communicating it to the market, as well as the potential value of gathering information and perspectives from market participants.


Passage number 44.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm not able to analyze the content of the passage or provide explanations.


Passage number 45.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the briefing on balance sheet and market developments that you distributed, Brian, I came across the following sentence I’d like to read.  “Market participants have suggested that the full potential of supporting the agency MBS market has already been reached and that further purchases would continue to reduce available MBS supply and endanger smooth market functioning going forward.”  It has been my experience on the Committee that the System Open Market Account Manager and the New York Fed in general are avidly interested in ensuring smooth market functioning.  So I half expected to have you come in and recommend that we suspend our mortgage-backed security purchase program at this meeting.  So I wanted to ask you why you didn’t do that.  And do you agree with this assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Lacker followed by a question to be answered by someone else.


Passage number 46.
 MR. SACK.  Well, I am sorry to disappoint you.  [Laughter]  I agree with the assessment.  There is no doubt that early in the program, when markets were strained, our purchases helped to restore market function and improve liquidity.  Then at some point, that relationship switched sides, and our purchases began to impair liquidity as we removed so much supply from the market.  And that’s continuing because the amount of issuance in the market has been so light.  So even though our purchases are winding down, we continue to put a lot of pressure on the market.  I think in general the market is functioning okay.  Trading volumes are decent.  Other measures of liquidity are okay.  But we are seeing these fails, and certainly our presence is noted.  I do think the market will function better as we back away from it, and I think that has been the tradeoff.  We have wanted to have sizable purchases for other purposes—because we thought they helped to lower longer-term interest rates—and perhaps toward the end of the program that has come at the cost of some modest impairment of market functioning.  But we are on a course of tapering these purchases, and they will soon be over.  So I think probably from this point forward the least disruptive path to the markets is just to continue what they expect and be out of the markets by the end of March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 47.
 MR. LACKER.  If I could follow up, Mr. Chairman—in your presentation you mentioned the practice of dollar rolls, that when someone is going to fail to deliver it to us, you essentially say, “Oh, you can wait a month to deliver it.”  In this context, given the timing—and we’re going to hear a briefing a little later that is going to include a discussion of the possibility of asset sales—is it conceivable that we dollar roll a bunch of delivery obligations into a time period at which we are also selling assets or these MBS ourselves.  And would you advise us against that.  Would it come to a point at which you would want to just give up on the dollar rolls and let them fail to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 48.
 MR. SACK.  I don’t see anything necessarily wrong with that.  I think we should make the dollar roll decision based on what we think is best for the market for settling the purchases that are already scheduled through the end of March.  What we are proposing is modest dollar rolls just to give the markets a chance to smooth out settlement for several months.  As I said in my remarks, we won’t be conducting dollar rolls more than a few months after the end of the purchases. I think the decision about whether to sell assets is different, and you could make that no matter what we are doing with the dollar roll book.  That decision depends much more on whether you think the market can handle the Fed’s putting duration and prepayment risk back into the market.  The market is already going to have to adjust to find purchasers for the amount of issuance to replace the Fed as we back away, and the issue is, Do you also want to sell assets and force the market basically to find an even larger amount of purchasers, and what kind of price action, what kind of yield movement, will be required to accomplish that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their opinion and explanation of their thoughts on the matter.


Passage number 49.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Governor Warsh" without providing any information about his actions, statements, or any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 50.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, when looking at the spreads in charts 15 and 16 that we’ve been talking about, MBS and agencies, we can tell a bunch of different stories in explaining why these spreads continue to tighten even as the tapering is going on.  I wonder what the spreads are for Federal Home Loan Bank paper or Farmer Mac paper as securities where the government is most certainly involved and which have different degrees of explicit or implicit support but where the Fed is less involved.  I wonder if there were any lessons learned from a comparison of Fannie and Freddie paper to those or any other sort of quasi public-backed entities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for information and posing hypothetical questions, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 51.
 MR. SACK.  I think it is a great suggestion.  I don’t have the answer at my fingertips, but I agree that makes sense.  As you know, there is much debate taking place in the markets and in the academic community about how rich or how narrow these spreads are.  Could it reflect a shift in the government guarantee of these entities.  We have been skeptical that that shift in the guarantee accounts for all of the movement that we have seen in the spreads, but I agree.  The more measures we can look at to confirm that would be useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 52.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a simple phrase in which Mr. Warsh expresses gratitude towards the chairman. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only mentions President Rosengren without providing any information about his statements or actions that might indicate contention or disagreement. Without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 54.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Brian, I was wondering if in your survey there was an open response section in which the dealer community could talk about whether the fed funds rate was an appropriate policy target when volume is small and GSEs are a significant part of the market.  Did anybody venture as part of an open response that they thought that the policy target at least during this transition period would not be the fed funds target.  And just a second part to that, when I look at the implied fed funds rate in your chart 7, presumably that is both what they expect us to do and our ability to do it.  Given the very steep slope to the fed funds rate, it seems that they are not that concerned about our ability to actually get the fed funds rate up in a reasonable time frame.  So given the discussion we are going to have in the next part of this meeting, would you draw that inference from this and your discussions or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking questions and seeking clarification.


Passage number 55.
 MR. SACK.  To start with the second question, it’s hard to definitively draw that inference because, of course, the IOER rate could be set in a way to produce that fed funds path even if the spread between the two measures widens out.  So I don’t necessarily want to draw any inference about the tightness of the fed funds–IOER spread just from the expected path of the fed funds rate.  On the first issue, yes, we had an open comment section.  It is actually in the summary of the survey.  Broadly, I think there is a lot of discussion about what the right policy instrument is and whether the federal funds rate will be kept as a policy instrument.  And I think a lot of it focuses on whether the IOER rate now should be considered the policy instrument.  So my take is that the market does see this as an open issue at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Sack is discussing different perspectives and opinions on the policy instrument and the federal funds rate. He does not express any disagreement or contention himself.


Passage number 56.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 57.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, this question may be more appropriate for the next discussion, but looking, again, at your last chart, number 30, first to make sure I understand what this is telling me—if we had set the interest rate on excess reserves at 200 basis points and had $1 trillion of excess reserves, then fed funds would likely trade between 20 and 50 basis points below the interest rate on excess reserves.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 58.
 MR. SACK.  That is correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That is correct" simply indicates agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 59.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Preserving, in effect, the kind of situation we have today.  And assuming for the moment that we were at the stage where we were trying to implement a corridor system and the fed funds rate target would be above the interest rate on excess reserves, then the gap between where fed funds were trading and where the target would be could be 75 basis points or more conceivably, worst case.  Is that a credibility problem.  If that situation persisted, how would the market react to a chronic situation of setting a target and being that much off the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a hypothetical situation and discussing the potential consequences of it.


Passage number 60.
 MR. SACK.  I would imagine that such a situation would be quite confusing to the markets because it is not clear what the federal funds target rate actually means in that case.  So it seems to me that, if the Committee maintained a federal funds rate target as its operating instrument, the market would expect the Fed to set the IOER rate as needed to hit the federal funds rate target, and that given the patterns indicated in the table, that may well require setting the IOER rate above the federal funds rate target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and making a logical argument about the relationship between the federal funds rate target and the IOER rate.


Passage number 61.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Or it would involve adjusting the quantity of reserves sufficiently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement by Mr. Madigan, without any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply presents a potential solution or action.


Passage number 62.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other questions.  If not, we are going at this point to have a briefing and discussion on exit strategies.  Let me propose an organization for the next part of the meeting and see if everybody is okay with it. We’ll first have a briefing by Bill Nelson on discount window facilities and the TAF, and he will make recommendations about how we might proceed on these two areas.  After his briefing we can have Q&A.  We will then have a briefing by Jim Clouse and Spence Hilton on broader issues of removing policy accommodation, sequencing of excess reserves, sequencing of draining operations, asset sales, use of the interest rate on excess reserves, and so on, followed by more Q&A.  I propose that, at that point, we just do a full go-round because everyone is going to want to give their views.  Is that acceptable to everybody.  On the full go-round we will ask your views both on the discount rate and on the sequencing and structure of the exit strategy. Let me say, just so I don’t forget, that, first of all, I will, of course, have the semiannual monetary policy testimony the last week of February, and we just learned yesterday afternoon that the House Financial Services Committee would like to have a hearing on the Federal Reserve’s exit strategy on February 10.  So we will have at least two opportunities to provide some communication here.  I think we will need to have some sense around the table about what we are comfortable with my saying and what we are not comfortable with my saying, but I just want to put that on the table because we will have an opportunity to report to the public some of what we conclude today. All right.  Then without further ado, let me call on Bill Nelson to brief us on the discount window facilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mostly a description of the upcoming agenda and plans for a meeting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 63.
 MR. NELSON.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will discuss the staff’s recommendations for normalizing the terms on the primary credit facility and reducing TAF auction amounts to zero.  We are not requesting any decisions from the Board at this time. Turning first to primary credit—primary credit was established in 2003 as a no-questions-asked lending facility available only to sound financial institutions as a backup source of funds.  In order to encourage institutions to use the facility as a backup funding source without a need for the Federal Reserve to administer credit requests, the funds were provided at an above-market rate and generally on an overnight basis.  When the facility was established and during the years prior to the financial crisis, the primary credit rate was set at 100 basis points over the target federal funds rate.  Analysis of the available information had suggested that a 100 basis point spread would make primary credit at least a bit more expensive than similar funds for almost all depository institutions. These terms on primary credit appeared to have been largely successful in accomplishing the Federal Reserve’s objectives for the program.  Except in rare instances, depository institutions used the facility as a backup source of funds and appeared to be willing to use primary credit when the federal funds rate rose above the primary credit rate. Easing the terms of primary credit was one of the Federal Reserve’s first responses to the financial crisis.  On August 17, 2007, the Federal Reserve narrowed the spread of the primary credit rate over the FOMC’s target rate to 50 basis points and lengthened the maximum maturity to 30 days.  On March 16, 2008, the Federal Reserve lowered the spread to 25 basis points and extended the maximum maturity to 90 days. The substantial easing in the terms of primary credit was a necessary step to provide liquidity to banks during the financial crisis.  However, there is now a significant misalignment between the terms of primary credit and the intended use of the facility in routine circumstances.  In particular, primary credit is too inexpensive for the interest rate alone to motivate depository institutions to use the facility as a backup funding source, and loan maturities longer than overnight encourage depository institutions to use primary credit as an ongoing funding source.  Currently, about 20 depository institutions have been borrowing primary credit continuously for over three months, and five have been borrowing for more than a year.  A branch of Depfa, a German bank, which alone accounts for more than 90 percent of primary credit, has been borrowing continuously for 15 months.  Several Reserve Bank discount officers have expressed concerns that some depository institutions have become overly reliant on discount window funding. With conditions in bank funding markets approaching pre-crisis levels, the staff recommends that the terms on primary credit be adjusted back toward their pre-crisis configuration.  The Federal Reserve took a first step in that direction on January 14, when the maximum maturity on primary credit loans was reduced to 28 days.  A second step in normalizing the terms on primary credit could be an increase in the spread between the primary credit rate and the top of the fed funds target range to 50 basis points, which would set the primary credit rate at 75 basis points if the target funds rate is unchanged.  In one scenario for such a move, the Chairman could foreshadow an increase in his monetary policy testimony in late February; if they so desired, Reserve Bank boards of directors could then recommend an increase; and the Board could approve the recommendations shortly thereafter.  Any increase could be announced using language that made it clear that the move was not a signal about the outlook for the stance of monetary policy.  A third step in normalizing the terms on primary credit could then be to shorten the maximum maturity on primary credit loans to pre-crisis levels—overnight for all but the smallest institutions—perhaps in early spring.  The announcement of such a change could indicate that the Board expects depository institutions to use primary credit as a backup source of funds. The Board and Reserve Banks might elect to defer any further tightening of the primary credit rate spread for several months in order to assess the experience with a 50 basis point spread.  If a spread of 50 basis points is sufficient to limit use, it may be preferable to a wider spread, in part because it might help reduce stigma:  A narrower spread would likely result in somewhat more frequent use of the window, which, by making borrowing less unusual, might help overcome the negative views about borrowing on the part of bank management, supervisors, and market participants. Turning now to the term auction facility (TAF)—on January 11, the Federal Reserve auctioned $75 billion in 28-day TAF credit.  The auction was again substantially undersubscribed, with depository institutions requesting only $39 billion.  As a result, the funds were provided at the minimum bid rate of 25 basis points, the rate paid on excess reserves.  The Board has indicated on its website that there will be an auction on February 8, but no amount has been specified. In light of the continued improvement in bank funding markets and the resulting diminished demand for TAF funds, the staff recommends that TAF auction amounts be reduced to zero relatively quickly.  In particular, the staff recommends that $50 billion be offered in February and $25 billion in March and that the auctions be discontinued subsequently.  Reducing TAF auction amounts to zero would be consistent with the ongoing normalization of Federal Reserve liquidity operations, would ensure that no bank currently using the facility remained reliant on TAF funding, and would help to reduce reserve balances modestly in advance of a period in which the FOMC might be tightening policy.  The staff also recommends that the minimum bid rate on the TAF be increased to 50 basis points if the primary credit rate were increased to 75 basis points so as to preserve the spread between the primary credit rate and the TAF minimum bid rate.   An alternative approach would be to auction small amounts of TAF credit on an ongoing basis so that the TAF could be ramped up immediately in a contingency.  However, responses to a survey of the Subcommittee on Credit Risk Management and feedback from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York staff members who conduct the auctions suggest that the TAF could be ramped up from zero with a delay of at most a couple of weeks.  Because regular discount window credit, potentially at a reduced rate, would remain available as a first line of defense against heightened credit strains in the early days of a severe crisis, the added benefit of auctioning a small amount of TAF credit on an ongoing basis might be less than the benefits of reducing TAF auction amounts to zero for the intermediate term.   Even if the auction amounts are reduced to zero, the TAF would remain authorized in Regulation A.  Whether to have a permanent TAF and, if so, in what form is an issue that could be addressed further in the future, when the Federal Reserve’s post-financial-crisis monetary policy framework becomes clearer.  That concludes my prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The staff recommends reducing TAF auction amounts to zero, while an alternative approach would be to auction small amounts of TAF credit on an ongoing basis. This suggests that there is disagreement about the best course of action for the TAF.


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Do we have questions for Bill.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first two sentences are expressing gratitude and seeking clarification, while the third sentence seems to be introducing another person named Governor Kohn. However, without further context, it is not possible to determine if there is any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 65.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you.  Bill why did you decide to wait to change the maturity from 28 days to 1 not until the spring.  Was it to keep it lined up with the TAF.  Why not do both the rise of the spread and the narrowing to 1-day maturity at the same time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a series of questions seeking clarification or understanding.


Passage number 66.
 MR. NELSON.  I think it was just to continue our process of gradually removing our liquidity accommodations.  It seemed more pressing to raise the discount rate spread a bit to get some daylight between the market rates and the rate that we are charging and encourage institutions to depart.  That moving first just meant making the second adjustment later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and suggested strategy for gradually removing liquidity accommodations.


Passage number 67.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 68.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the original memo I thought you also proposed—maybe I just missed this in your commentary—that we withdraw the “renewable on request” clause.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, questions whether the proposal includes the withdrawal of the "renewable on request" clause.


Passage number 69.
 MR. NELSON.  That’s right.  That would, in some sense, send the message that we are looking for primary credit now to be used again as a backup source of funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Nelson, expressing a viewpoint or suggestion.


Passage number 70.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Wouldn’t keeping the “renewable on request” clause conceivably have the effect of treating this stigma problem.  It is “no questions asked.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a statement made by Mr. Lockhart without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 71.
” MR. NELSON.  Yes, and primary credit was already renewable upon request.  It was a no-questions-asked facility.  Our internal administrative guidelines, which we put together before the financial crisis, recognized, however, that for a large institution that had a variety of sources of funds with a primary credit rate of 100 basis points over the target, borrowing several times in a row for a long period suggested that perhaps they didn’t, in fact, have access to alternative funding sources.  So there is just inherently some tension between operating it as a no-questions-asked facility and the requirement that it be used as a backup funding source if we see repeated uses of credit.  That situation was somewhat ambiguous and would remain somewhat ambiguous in the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the inherent tension between operating the primary credit facility as a no-questions-asked facility and the need for it to be used as a backup funding source if there are repeated uses of credit. They also mention that the situation remains somewhat ambiguous.


Passage number 72.
 MR. LOCKHART.  The way you proposed this as an incremental step—I guess to see if there is some adverse reaction that we didn’t anticipate before probably going back to the full 100 basis point spread—what adverse reaction are we concerned about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lockhart is simply asking for clarification about the potential adverse reactions that they might not have anticipated.


Passage number 73.
 MR. NELSON.  The reason we recommended observing the 50 basis point spread is that there are costs to having too high a spread as well as costs to having too low a spread.  If the spread is too high, the primary credit is a less effective facility for limiting spikes in the federal funds rate.  It is also a less helpful facility for institutions to use as a backup liquidity source.  When we chose a spread of 100 basis points at the outset and used that, it worked fairly well.  Nevertheless there was a fair amount of uncertainty, and there remains uncertainty, as to what the minimum spread is that could enable the spread alone to encourage institutions to use it as a backup funding source.  So it might be a good idea, as we move back up, to observe what happens at 50 basis points to see if that spread alone is sufficient to encourage institutions to use it as a backup funding source.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the reason behind recommending a 50 basis point spread and expressing the need for further observation and evaluation to determine its effectiveness.


Passage number 74.
 MR. MADIGAN.  There has been at least some evidence in the financial crisis that 50 basis points could be enough to achieve the goals.  You may remember a little chart in the memo that illustrated that it was only when the spread was reduced to 25 basis points that borrowing really began to move up a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents evidence that suggests that 50 basis points could be sufficient to achieve certain goals, but it does not indicate any explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 75.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 76.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  This is just a follow-up to Governor Kohn’s question.  What is the cost of having the minimum bid on the TAF be the primary credit rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a follow-up question to Governor Kohn's question.


Passage number 77.
 MR. NELSON.  At this point there is probably little cost one way or the other.  But because the staff is recommending that the TAF amounts be reduced to zero quickly so that they would be at zero in two months, there did not seem to be a lot of benefit to making that change at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is explaining a staff recommendation and stating that there does not seem to be much benefit in making the change at that specific time.


Passage number 78.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  It is just that, given the similarity of the programs, getting a lower rate seems a curious characteristic for longer-term financing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that getting a lower rate for longer-term financing seems curious given the similarity of the programs.


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s just a question of logistics here.  An option would be to announce, say, for the last auction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply discusses a logistical issue and suggests a potential solution without presenting any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 80.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  And so if you time it simultaneously, it’s immaterial.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the timing of an action being immaterial.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think your point is right that it seems a little incongruous to have the TAF at a lower rate than the discount window, but it is just logistics that we could make that work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement with a previous point made by someone else.


Passage number 82.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "President Plosser" simply states the name of a person without any indication of disagreement or disagreement.


Passage number 84.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I think my question was answered.  I really wanted to pursue the notion, when we think about what the penalty rate should be, of some theory that tells us what the right spread is—whether it is 50, 100, or 150 basis points.  It seems to me that we don’t really have a lot of evidence on that point.  I just wondered.  But I think you and Brian both answered my question of what it is we know—and it might not be very much—but it seems to me that, if we think 100 is the right spread, then we ought to get there quicker rather than not.  But you answered my question, so I won’t ask it again—unless you had something more to add onto it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Plosser expresses his curiosity and acknowledges that his question has been answered. He does not disagree or argue with anyone.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement. The phrase "Other questions" is a neutral statement that does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints. The mention of "Governor Duke" does not provide sufficient information about their stance or any potential disagreement.


Passage number 86.
 MS. DUKE.  I run the risk here of demonstrating that I’m totally confused on this, but we weren’t paying interest on reserves when we started lowering these spreads, were we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. DUKE is simply expressing her confusion and seeking clarification on a specific topic.


Passage number 87.
 MR. NELSON.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a statement made by Mr. Nelson without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 88.
 MS. DUKE.  How did those two go together, and when did the interbank fed funds market begin to disappear.  My question is, Is there a possibility that some rate will be necessary to induce banks to lend to each other.  In other words, the 25 basis points are certainly not at this point enough to induce banks to lend to each other.  So it may not be an incentive to leave the market so much as an incentive for somebody else to enter the market and offer to lend those funds at a cheaper rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions and statements expressing curiosity and speculation.


Passage number 89.
 MR. NELSON.  I think that is probably a question more of where to set the IOER rate than the primary credit rate, if I understand your question correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Nelson is simply expressing his understanding of the question and stating his opinion.


Passage number 90.
 MS. DUKE.  Well, I am talking about the spread on it.  For instance, if a bank can sell unlimited funds to us at 25 basis points, at what rate are they willing to sell them to another bank.  Where do they have to bid it to be able to borrow from other banks.  At this point, the banks are not lending to each other, correct.  They are borrowing from us, and they are lending to us, but not to each other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements and questions about the lending practices of banks.


Passage number 91.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Governor Duke, I think we see that primarily as a consequence of the very large level of reserves in the system and the fact that they have IOER as an outlet for their funds or a place where they can leave their funds and earn interest because bank borrowing from the discount window is relatively infrequent.  And we have assumed it will become even more infrequent.  I think at the margin that does not have much effect on their willingness to lend to one another because it is set at a penalty.  So it is not a source of funds to lend to other banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Madigan is simply expressing his opinion and explaining the reasons for a certain behavior regarding bank lending.


Passage number 92.
  MS. DUKE.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 93.
 MR. NELSON.  As we move back to a more normal configuration, it will be important that the primary credit rate be up and above market sources of funds if our objective is to have institutions lending to one another and have the market operate initially rather than their coming to us and borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing the importance of having the primary credit rate above market sources to promote lending among institutions.


Passage number 94.
 MS. DUKE.  Yes.  The only condition I can see where we actually have a fed funds rate is when they are actively lending to one another.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply makes a statement and expresses gratitude at the end.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  Okay.  When it comes to the go-round, we will be interested in your advice on whether to raise the primary credit rate and, if so, when.  Do we want to do it intermeeting, for example, along the lines we have discussed, or do we want to delay that.  How would you like to proceed with that.  Then on the TAF, are you comfortable with the recommendations to reduce the auction sizes but either keep in reserve what we are going to do after it goes down to 25 or state now that it is going to zero.  Those are two options, but we would appreciate your comments on any aspect of that.  Let me now call on Jim Clouse to brief us on tools for removing policy accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for advice and recommendations on various topics related to monetary policy. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 96.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for Jim or Spence.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply expresses gratitude and indicates that there are questions for Jim or Spence, possibly suggesting they are the ones being thanked. The mention of President Lacker does not indicate contention or disagreement either.


Passage number 97.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.  I have two questions.  First, Mr. Clouse, you said that the staff was considering reviving work on the reserve collateral accounts proposal.  Several months ago you advised us that you were suspending work on that.  What changed your mind.  Why should we revive work on that now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 98.
 MR. CLOUSE.  Well, the decision to suspend work really wasn’t a decision that it wasn’t worth pursuing.  It was just that there were constraints on various resources—particularly, the same resources that would be developing the RCAs are the ones that are currently being employed to develop the term deposit facility.  But as we are now getting closer to an implementation date for the term deposit facility, we feel as though we are in a position to again take up the work on reserve collateral accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the reasons for suspending work and the current circumstances that may allow them to resume it.


Passage number 99.
 MR. LACKER.  I see.  I made the suggestion last time, and I hope the work group takes it up, to look at both the theoretical fragility of the model that suggests this is a good thing to do as well as the sense of what magnitude of welfare costs this would alleviate.  I understand the symbolic value of having a federal funds rate that does just what we want it to if that’s what we want to have guide policy, but I am just deeply skeptical of the value of this project, and I would urge you to approach it with a skeptical eye. The second question I have is that we have these two memos, one on asset sales and one on alternative reserve-draining strategies using term deposit facilities and reverse repurchase agreements.  The latter presumes that we use them at some time and seems disconnected from the former.  So I was wondering if the staff had any view about an option in which we don’t use these reverse RPs or term deposit facilities at all and rely instead on asset sales to drain reserves.  The staff memos contain no information on that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their skepticism and asking for alternative options, but there is no contention or disagreement with any other person or group.


Passage number 100.
 MR. HILTON.  I interpret the first option that is given as a strategy for the sequencing of draining to include that, if I understand you correctly, in that it would use those temporary reserve-draining tools only if it is observed that control over the market rates by adjusting the rate paid on excess reserves is not sufficient.  So it doesn’t presume in that case that we would necessarily consider it a contingent use.  They are there.  We have them, but that strategy says, Don’t use them until it is proven that you need them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Hilton explaining his interpretation of a particular strategy for the sequencing of draining reserves.


Passage number 101.
 MR. SACK.  But you are suggesting that the asset sales could be aggressive enough to achieve the reserve-draining needs—is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not showcase any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question and does not indicate any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 102.
 MR. LACKER.  Right, and that, if this question arises in this contingent strategy, we turn to further asset sales rather than turn to these reserve-draining tools.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a course of action to be taken if a particular question arises.


Passage number 103.
 MR. HILTON.  One of the points in the asset sales memo was that there may be risks or issues associated with an aggressive sales strategy that might preclude you from using that on the scale that you would need in order to achieve an objective for short-term interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement about a point mentioned in the asset sales memo.


Passage number 104.
 MR. SACK.  Right.  That memo has an entire section on the concerns about an aggressive approach, and actually one of the four options considered is an aggressive asset sales approach.  So I think it is covered in the memos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the concerns about an aggressive approach and the consideration of an aggressive asset sales approach are covered in the memos.


Passage number 105.
 MR. LACKER.  Well, it’s kind of apart from the relative value of these two tools, right.  I mean, you have these two sets of tools:  One, we issue debt; the other, we sell assets.  We sort of never got around to comparing the two, the way I read the two memos.  That’s why I was asking you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply stating that the two sets of tools (issuing debt and selling assets) have not been compared in the memos, and he is seeking clarification on this matter.


Passage number 106.
 MR. HILTON.  I think that there are externalities potentially with using asset sales on a large scale in a short period of time that set it apart from possibly using the temporary reserve-draining tools.  So it’s an option, but it’s one that would, I think, be used only recognizing that we could be limited in terms of the scale in which we could use it in a short period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the speaker's opinion and acknowledging the potential limitations of using asset sales on a large scale in a short period of time.


Passage number 107.
 MR. LACKER.  Did you say “externalities”.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as it only asks if the speaker said "externalities".


Passage number 108.
 MR. HILTON.  In terms of potential market disruption of trying to sell a large amount of assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact or inquiry about potential market disruption.


Passage number 109.
 MR. LACKER.  Oh, market disruption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Oh, market disruption" does not indicate any argument or disagreement, but rather serves as a possible response or acknowledgment to a situation related to market disruption.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Pecuniary externalities.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only provides the topic of pecuniary externalities and mentions Governor Kohn, but does not provide any statements or opinions that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 111.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On page 2, you have the reserve balances with alternative assumptions, and it takes a long time to get down to $200 billion of excess reserves.  But suppose you didn’t have that time.  If we told you, Brian, next September or October, “Start draining reserves today to get ready to raise rates tomorrow,” or whatever, could you get down from $1.1 trillion to $200 billion in a few weeks or a few months.  If the trigger were pulled later, how long would it take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a hypothetical question and seeking clarification on the timeline for reducing reserves.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 112.
 MR. SACK.  I think it’s problematic to go too quickly, especially with the reverse repos, because first of all, the tools are new and the markets have to adjust to them.  Second, when we use reverse repurchase agreements, it requires a reallocation of flows of short-term funding.  We will be taking funds that used to flow, say, into the tri-party repo market.  You will have someone with securities that they used to finance in tri-party repo, and they now have to find the funds from another source.  Ultimately that source has to be the banks because the reserves come out of the banks.  And our view is that the reallocation of flows and the relationships and changes it would require should caution us about thinking we could go extremely fast with reverse repos.  So I think there are advantages to starting early and gradually ramping up the program, especially on reverse repos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sack, believes that caution should be exercised in implementing reverse repos too quickly, while others may have a different opinion and may advocate for a faster implementation.


Passage number 113.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the position of Vice Chairman but does not provide any information about any disagreement or contention related to this position.


Passage number 114.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just have a question for Jim on the table at the bottom of page 3 and the similar table that Brian had—so it’s a good question for both of you.  This is the belief system of the survey respondents, and there’s empirical evidence of a relationship between the spread and the amount of reserves, but there is really no empirical basis that the spread increases as the IOER rate goes up.  So is there any theoretical basis for thinking that the spread should increase as the IOER rate goes up.  The reason I am asking is that it is one thing to have people believe something, but if there is basis for the belief, I would put more weight on it than if there is not basis for the belief.  So do we have a story that explains why the spread might widen as the IOER rate goes up since we have no empirical basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a request for clarification and an inquiry about the theoretical basis for a particular belief.


Passage number 115.
 MR. CLOUSE.  I may have one story, but I bet Brian has better ones.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Clouse acknowledges that he may have a story, but he believes that Brian has better ones.


Passage number 116.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "Okay" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply an expression used to acknowledge or affirm something.


Passage number 117.
 MR. CLOUSE.  Presumably that spread should reflect whatever impediments there are in the arbitrage process.  So if you think there are credit constraints of the type that Jamie McAndrews has discussed or you just don’t want to be seen borrowing in the overnight funds market for fear of being seen needing funds or if there are capital issues, then all of those things might lead to a gap between the market rate and the IOER rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the factors that could potentially lead to a gap between the market rate and the IOER rate, such as credit constraints or capital issues.


Passage number 118.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with that, but why does that arbitrage become less effective as the IOER rate climbs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with a statement and questioning the reasons behind a certain phenomenon.


Passage number 119.
 MR. CLOUSE.  Right now you’re very compressed between the IOER rate and the zero bound, which is a very effective zero bound.  But as you raise that, it is a good bet that there is one-way risk on where it will go.  So I can’t tell you whether it will be an S-shaped curve or whether it is an exponential curve, but it is a pretty good bet that it will be wider as we raise the IOER rate.  And in fact, it was wider, as you know, when we first started.  Those were tumultuous times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential outcome of raising the IOER rate, stating that it is likely to result in a wider curve.


Passage number 120.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That was in the middle of chaos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "That was in the middle of chaos" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a situation of chaos.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser, you had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply addressing President Plosser and referencing a two-handed action.


Passage number 122.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Well, no.  There was a memo or paper on a bargaining model that someone on the New York staff had done that had a theory that gave you a story.  I am probably not in a position to tell you what that is, but there was one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 123.
 MR. HILTON.  A paper by Morten Bech, and I think he presented it as a bargaining model between bank borrowers and those they are borrowing from, who do not have an option to just sit on excess reserves, and the outcome of that bargaining could depend on what the level of the interest rate was.  I think that was probably what you were referring to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply summarizing the content of Morten Bech's paper and acknowledging that it relates to the bargaining model between bank borrowers and lenders.


Passage number 124.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So does this staff believe this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is asking if the staff believes something, without providing any conflicting opinions or indicating any disagreement.


Passage number 125.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the passage itself is incomplete. The mention of "President Fisher" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 126.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I have three quick questions just for clarity.  Jim, you talked about floors, and Spence, you talked about, on your pages 8 and 9, the degree of confidence to use the IOER rate to control short-term rates.  My question is, given that the GSEs are major suppliers of overnight funds and they don’t qualify for IOER under the current law, as I understand it, doesn’t this make the floor somewhat permeable.  And doesn’t it reduce our control as long as those conditions exist.  If so, what do we do about it.  That’s the first question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and posing a question for discussion.


Passage number 127.
 MR. CLOUSE.  I think that is absolutely a key question.  To your first question, it certainly does make the floor permeable, and that’s what we have observed so far.  But I come back again.  The GSEs have an incentive to lend below the IOER rate, but there’s also some impediment to arbitrage that prevents other borrowers in the market from buying up lots of funds and bidding the rate up to the IOER rate.  So at least in a perfectly competitive, frictionless market, the fact that the GSEs don’t have access to the IOER rate shouldn’t result in a funds rate that is markedly below the IOER rate because it would just get competed away.  But we’re not seeing that for a variety of reasons evidently.  But I think your question is right on target, and it’s kind of a major question around what will happen to these widening spreads.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the GSEs have an incentive to lend below the IOER rate, but also mentions that there is an impediment to arbitrage that prevents other borrowers from bidding the rate up. The speaker also agrees with the question being asked.


Passage number 128.
 MR. FISHER.  You also on your pages 8 and 9 have the risks at some period in which the funds rate could well be below the IOER rate.  Doesn’t the IOER rate—I’m having trouble saying that—have to be at or below other market rates by statute as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question asking for clarification about the relationship between the IOER rate and other market rates as per statute.


Passage number 129.
 MR. CLOUSE.  It cannot be higher than the general level of short-term interest rates, but that’s a term of art that is being defined in the regulation—in particular, the list of short-term interest rates that are included in the regulation include the primary credit rate, which will likely be somewhat above the general level of many market interest rates.  So as a general matter probably it will be the case that the Board and the Committee can envision setting the IOER rate where they wish and not be constrained by that feature of the statute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the IOER rate can be set at a desired level and is not constrained by the general level of short-term interest rates.


Passage number 130.
 MR. FISHER.  And then one more statute question, Mr. Chairman.  Jim, you correctly mentioned that by statute it would be the Board that would set the IOER rate.  I’m curious—and this is a question probably for the Chairman of the Board—in terms of this Committee setting monetary policy, how do you square those two if the IOER rate were to be our principal monetary policy tool.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being asked for clarification.


Passage number 131.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, under the traditional approach, the Board set the discount rate, which was obviously tied closely to the federal funds rate target.  So I cannot conceive that the Board is going to defy the FOMC and set the rate at a different level.  We need to work collaboratively, obviously, but my anticipation is that we will collectively decide where monetary policy needs to be and how we should achieve the degree of tightness that we need.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their anticipation that the Board will work collaboratively with the FOMC and collectively decide on the appropriate monetary policy.


Passage number 132.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply shows a person expressing gratitude.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Tarullo, but there is no mention of any contention or disagreement involving him.


Passage number 134.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate that you all are having to operate based more on analysis and thought experiment than on experience with all of this, so you may not be able to shed much light on this question.  But I wonder to what degree you think the efficacy of, and the risks associated with, each of these tools and strategies would vary depending on the conditions in which we began to undertake the strategy.  So, for example, if we began during a period in which there was a noninflationary, even disinflationary, environment as opposed to one in which we were beginning to feel inflationary pressures, or an environment in which there was a lot of strain within the mortgage markets or not.  As best you can tell, is the sequencing and optimality of various tools more or less independent of the particular conditions and the particular sources of concern that might be motivating us to start the exit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question being asked and seeking clarification on the efficacy and risks of different strategies.


Passage number 135.
 MR. HILTON.  I would be inclined to say that, as far as sequencing of strategies for using draining tools, it would largely depend on conditions in the short-term funding markets, and as long as those were reasonably stable, even if there is uncertainty about some of the broader macro issues, I don’t think that those would have much bearing on, say, the relationship between where short-term rates are and the rate paid on excess reserves.  Obviously, if conditions are disruptive in funding markets as they were in late 2008, the story would be different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreements or contention. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion about the sequencing of strategies for using draining tools in relation to the stability of short-term funding markets.


Passage number 136.
 MR. TARULLO.  One presumes that those are not the conditions under which we would start to exit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply states a presumption about the conditions under which an exit would occur, without challenging or contradicting any other information.


Passage number 137.
 MR. HILTON.  Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response is agreeing with or confirming something that was previously mentioned.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 139.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  I was wondering:  There seemed to be a presumption in the memos that we would require aggressive sales in order to reach a point where we could feel confident in the connection between the interest rate on excess reserves and the fed funds rate—getting our reserves low enough to where we would feel confident about that connection.  So I am going back and looking at an old memo.  It goes back to December 9.  Some of these estimates might be out of date.  It is by Keane, Remache, and Sack on reinvestment policies.  One of the policies prescribed there—or thought about there, I should say—is redeeming all Treasuries, agencies, and agency MBS, and under that, by the end of 2010, reserve balances fall to less than $900 billion, and by the end of 2011, which is the Greenbook’s estimate of how long we will wait to raise rates, reserve balances fall to $626 billion.  So it seemed just by redemptions alone—because this is without using sales, without using any reserve-draining techniques—that we can really get pretty close to this $850 billion point, where we start to see some slope in the graph.  Are you saying that we have to get well below $850 billion, or am I just misreading something in this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is questioning whether they have correctly understood the information and is seeking clarification.


Passage number 140.
  MR. SACK.  Well, at $850 billion, as you can see in the scatter plot on page 3, as you point out, you enter into the point where you see some upward slope, and that tells you that further reductions in reserves tend to move the funds rate up toward the IOER rate.  It doesn’t exactly identify what happens when the IOER rate goes up and whether the funds rate tracks it closely, and that is, I think, the policy issue that you face.  As has been discussed, that’s what is hard empirically to assess given the lack of experience.  The survey would say that, indeed, you do not achieve a tight, one-for-one linkage at those levels of reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and discussing a policy issue.


Passage number 141.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  But I guess my question is really, at the end of the day, how far down do we have to get reserves.  It seems as though redemptions are getting us down only to, say, $700 billion or something roughly like that by early 2011, mid-2011.  How much further do you think we have to be down to have some confidence about being able to move market interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question asked by Mr. Kocherlakota and does not involve any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 142.
 MR. SACK.  That’s a good question.  I think that redeeming everything, as you point out, gets us to those ranges by 2011.  Actually, if allowed to run its course, it gets us back to no excess reserves in 2015 or so.  At a minimum, redemptions would reduce the amount of ground we would have to cover with other operations to ensure that the relationship between the fed funds rate and the IOER rate is maintained, but we just don’t know.  On the strategy of draining reserves ahead of time to get to a different starting point for raising the IOER rate, in the memo and in Spence’s presentation, we threw out a number of $500 billion, but basically there is very little analysis that you can use to nail down that level.  So I think it’s really going to come down to how you weigh the costs of the risk that there could be more slippage than we anticipate and how quickly in that case we could actually turn around and drain reserves to tighten up that linkage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts and uncertainties about the redemption of reserves and the strategy of draining reserves. They mention the lack of analysis to determine a specific level and acknowledge the potential risks. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention between the speaker and others in the passage.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 144.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have one question about the “early reserve drain” strategy, which is on page 8 in the middle.  I guess my question about this, and a lot of the discussion about this, is that under this scenario you’d be doing the reserve-draining operations considerably before you’d be trying to raise overnight rates.  But in order to do that, you are really putting upward pressure on short-term interest rates anyway, say, 30-day rates or other short-term rates.  So in a macroeconomic sense, how much difference is there really.  Aren’t you really saying that you’re raising one type of very short term interest rate so that you don’t have to raise another type of very short term interest rate.  Most of what we look at macroeconomically speaking is at a quarterly level anyway.  So, how much difference is there really.  If I vote for this strategy, am I not just voting for higher short-term interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is questioning the effectiveness of the "early reserve drain" strategy and expressing doubt about its impact on short-term interest rates. He is suggesting that voting for this strategy would result in higher short-term interest rates.


Passage number 145.
 MR. HILTON.  I would say that, in voting for the strategy and thinking about how to operationalize it, what impact that beginning to drain and draining successively larger amounts would have on short-term rates should have some bearing on how we should operationalize it.  That is, we may want, to present an example, to employ the tools of temporary draining on a larger scale until we observe it beginning to have some noticeable effect on short-term rates.  The chart that Jim presented on page 3 suggests that, from current levels of reserves, we could actually drain several hundred billions of dollars and perhaps not have any observed effect on short-term rates of the kind that you’re describing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the potential impact of draining larger amounts of money on short-term rates and suggesting that they may need to observe the effects before deciding on a strategy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 146.
 MR. BULLARD.  Oh, no, no, no, no.  You have a 30-day Treasury out there, and now you’re saying that I’m going to give banks an option to deposit at the Fed at some rate.  So suppose you have to go to 75 or 100 basis points on your term deposit in order to get it to attract enough reserves in there.  Isn’t that an alternative for the bank as opposed to going and buying the 30-day Treasury.  So you’re putting upward pressure on rates no matter how you cut it.  Forget about the overnight rate.  No one is trading at the overnight rate.  And the macroeconomics for that, if you’re writing papers about it, you would not worry about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Bullard is expressing disagreement with the idea that banks should have an option to deposit at the Fed at a certain rate instead of buying the 30-day Treasury. He argues that this alternative option would put upward pressure on rates, which goes against the argument being made. He also dismisses the idea of the overnight rate and suggests that it is not a concern in macroeconomics.


Passage number 147.
 MR. HILTON.  Well, one possibility with the use of term deposit rates, the question would be, What would be the incremental increase in rates before you paid on excess reserves that would be needed to induce banks to transfer a lot of the reserves from excess reserves into these term deposits.  If it is a large level of reserves, most of which are not really providing any particular, say, liquidity protection, I think that at least initially you could drain a substantial amount of reserves through that mechanism by offering just a very small spread over the rate paid on excess reserves, one that would not necessarily have any effect on broader market rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of using term deposit rates to induce banks to transfer reserves from excess reserves into term deposits.


Passage number 148.
 MR. MADIGAN.  If I could add something, directionally I think we would agree with you that clearly we are putting upward pressure on rates by doing this.  But I am presuming that the Committee would not want to use these tools to push the fed funds rate above the upper limit of its existing 0 to 25 basis point range, for instance, at least initially; that its purpose might be to push it up to the vicinity of the upper end of the range, and that is only something on the order of 15 basis points or less.  So at least as viewed through the lens of overnight rates, the magnitude of the increase would likely not be very much initially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea that the actions being discussed will put upward pressure on rates.


Passage number 149.
 MR. BULLARD.  The magnitude of the increase in the overnight rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents a statement made by Mr. Bullard about the magnitude of the increase in the overnight rate.


Passage number 150.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Overnight rates would presumably be limited to something like 12 to 15 basis points because you wouldn’t be trying to push the fed funds rate above your currently existing target of 0 to 25 basis points, I’m assuming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Madigan is making an assumption about the limit of overnight rates, and there is no clear contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 151.
 MR. BULLARD.  I’m saying tightening is tightening is tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating a repetitive and assertive statement about the concept of "tightening."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 152.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It depends on where the money is coming from.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests that there may be disagreement or different perspectives depending on the source of the money.


Passage number 153.
 MR. BULLARD.  You have a spectrum of rates.  Okay, and I can see there’s a sort of term structure at these very short rates, but these are funding options for banks, and you’re putting upward pressure on that, and that is inducing them to possibly keep funds on deposit as opposed to lending them out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making an observation about the impact of the rates on bank behavior.


Passage number 154.
 MR. MADIGAN.  I don’t think we would disagree with that.  In recent months as the fed funds rate has ticked down, even as the Committee has kept its target range for the fed funds rate the same, in some sense that’s been a slight easing of monetary policy.  So it’s the mirror image of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges and agrees with the statement made.


Passage number 155.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, there’s very little trading going on at that, and we know there are special factors there because of the GSEs.  So in a macroeconomic sense, how important is that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is very little trading going on and acknowledges the presence of special factors related to the GSEs. It then poses a question regarding the macroeconomic importance of the situation.


Passage number 156.
 MR. SACK.  I think we don’t anticipate pushing up overnight interest rates much, and we wouldn’t anticipate the situation you described where the term rates—say, a 30-day term rate—would have to be as high as you suggested.  We should keep in mind that investors are holding 30-day bills at anywhere between minus 2 and plus 4 basis points of return, and so I think it’s possible that we could entice, especially with the reverse repos, a decent amount of reserve draining without having to push term rates up as much as you suggest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply offering different information or perspective on the situation.


Passage number 157.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman, did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking the Vice Chairman if they have a comment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 158.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  It depends in part where the money comes from.  Imagine a bank that every day has excess reserves, and then you have a term deposit facility, and it just moves some of those excess reserves that it has every day into the term deposit facility.  Well, that is not going to really affect anything else.  It’s really if the money is getting pulled from other sources.  If that bank were selling bills to fund the term deposit facility, it would be something different.  So I think it really depends on where the money comes from.  I think the argument is that, at the very beginning of this process, the money is probably moving from an overnight bank reserve to the term deposit facility and nothing else really is going on, so the pressure is de minimis.  But as you go further, then you are starting to rearrange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The author presents differing perspectives on whether the source of the money affects the impact on other sources and the level of pressure. One perspective is that if the money comes from excess reserves within the bank, it would not affect anything else. However, if the money comes from selling bills, it would have a different effect. The author ultimately suggests that the impact and pressure depend on where the money comes from.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage merely mentions Governor Kohn without providing any context or indicating any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 160.
 MR. KOHN.  I would think that the expectational effect would dominate whether this interest rate goes up a little or that interest rate goes down a little.  Once we start draining reserves, people will build in a path for some rate—the federal funds rate, some market rate—and I think that will really be much more important than whether 30-day Treasury bills are higher or lower by 10 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The speaker is suggesting that the expectational effect will have a greater impact on interest rates than changes in specific rates such as 30-day Treasury bills. This viewpoint may be contrary to the belief of others who believe that specific interest rates have a more significant influence.


Passage number 161.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  As usual our outstanding conversation is stretching the limits of our available time.  I am getting a little concerned about that.  Why don’t we take 15 minutes for coffee.  I hope that everybody will use the 15 minutes to think about how to be as concise as possible.  [Laughter]  In particular, it is not necessary to address every single question that has been presented.  I hope you will focus on the things that you consider most important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a concern about not having enough time for their conversation and suggesting a break for coffee. They also provide a suggestion for the participants to use the break to think about being more concise in their responses. The inclusion of laughter after the suggestion indicates a light and friendly tone.


Passage number 162.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I am starting at 2017 and working back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a chronological order in which they will proceed.


Passage number 163.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fifteen minutes for coffee.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that there will be a break for coffee and expresses gratitude.


Passage number 164.
   [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you for returning promptly.  We are ready for a go-round on comments on sequencing, and also don’t forget to mention the primary credit rate.  We will start with President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply provides instructions for a discussion on sequencing and mentioning the primary credit rate. President Yellen will be the first to speak.


Passage number 165.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me begin with the discount rate.  I support the staff recommendation for normalizing terms on primary credit as well as the TAF proposals.  My main concern is that the message of liquidity normalization could be misinterpreted as a message of monetary tightening, so I think it is critical that we be clear that this is an action that is essentially a technical adjustment reflecting better market functioning.  I strongly urge you to proceed as you indicated you would in floating this in testimony.  If you have multiple occasions to do it, that’s good. In terms of timing, to me what would be natural is for the Board to take this action at our next meeting and to make it part of our next statement.  But I could support doing it at an earlier, intermeeting, time.  I would hope that all of the Reserve Banks would recommend this action because I think, if we all did it together, it would be clearer that the move is intended as a normalization of the operation of the window. Okay.  Next, let me turn to the seven questions on exit strategy, and I am sorry, I probably won’t be as brief as you would like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Yellen expresses her support for the staff recommendation and urges the Chairman to proceed as indicated. She also discusses the timing and coordination of the action, but there is no disagreement or conflict mentioned.


Passage number 166.
  [Laughter] MR. EVANS.  You are setting the standard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention as it only includes a single person speaking and there is no indication of any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 167.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Thank you, President Rosengren" does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude to President Rosengren.


Passage number 168.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks to the staff.  I thought they framed the questions very well, and I thought the memos did a very nice job of framing the issues.  I know this is a difficult set of questions and issues to be dealing with because we don’t have a lot of empirical evidence.  So I thought it really was quite exceptional what they put together. In terms of my own strategy, I would redeem all Treasury and mortgage-backed securities, but I would keep an open mind as to whether additional purchases will be necessary, depending on how the economy evolves.  I would look to interest on excess reserves for the initial increase in interest rates when that becomes appropriate.  I expect that market rates will respond to the increase in interest on excess reserves, as the international evidence highlights, but if not, future tightening can be accompanied by removal of excess reserves. I would engage in asset sales only if the economy is growing too quickly, an event I view as quite remote over the course of this year.  In particular, for asset sales, if market participants fear that we intend to unload our mortgage-backed securities, possibly quite quickly, then the resulting downward pressure on mortgage-backed-security prices could cause a significant rise in mortgage yields at a time when the still-fragile housing market will be losing important government support.  So I don’t want to underestimate the potential impact of deciding to do asset sales.  And just thinking in my own instance, if I were to be on the other side of the trade, with a trillion dollars looming that could possibly be dumped, I would be concerned that there would be a significant market reaction. I would also note that the primary reason for reducing reserve balances is to regain control over the federal funds rate.  However, the market for federal funds has become small and specialized, and the federal funds rate has become dominated by GSEs.  As a consequence, I believe the focus of our attention should be on the interest rate paid on excess reserves, as well as our communication strategy, rather than on the federal funds rate.  In short, we may well be able to sufficiently decrease monetary stimulus, when that becomes appropriate, just by increasing the interest rate on reserves.  If the Committee does decide to substantially reduce reserves, I would wait to take that action until after the removal of the “extended period” language because I have the same concerns that President Yellen highlighted. In terms of the primary credit rate, I, too, want to emphasize that it’s a technical change.  I think there are three elements to that.  One, I think it is important that it is unanimous among the Reserve Banks.  Second, I think it is important that we halt the term auction facility at the same time that we are changing the primary credit rate, and those things as technical changes going together makes sense to me.  And, third, I think it is most appropriate to announce it at the March meeting as well.  That is a time when we can talk about technical changes, but it is also a bit easier to have a little more extended language to highlight the fact that it is a technical change.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing appreciation for the work of the staff and sharing their own perspective and strategy on the issue at hand.


Passage number 169.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Plosser.


Passage number 170.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 171.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On primary credit, I support the staff’s recommendation for normalization, and on the TAF, I also support the staff’s recommendation on normalization, with President Rosengren’s emendation.  I think it would be a great idea for the Chairman to float these ideas in his appearances on the Hill, but I also agree that I would like to forestall announcements until our March meeting. So I turn to our long-term strategy and talk a bit first about interest rates.  I think that communication in the short run is going to be safest if we target the interest rate on excess reserves.  But the reality is something we are going to have confront, which is that we don’t really understand the details and the connection between the interest rate on excess reserves and market interest rates at the short end of the yield curve.  So we don’t know, if we raise the IOER rate by 200 basis points, what is going to happen to the fed funds rate.  Maybe that does not matter to us, but we don’t know what is going to happen to one-month Treasury bill rates or two-month Treasury bill rates either.  And that source of disconnect is a source of at least discomfort to me.  I agree that markets will correctly—and I think rightly—infer that, when we raise the IOER rate, we are tightening.  But how much we are tightening will be a matter of lack of clarity, and it’s a lack of clarity because we just don’t have the experience to know what that is going to say.  So there is going to have to be some learning by doing in this process, and my own guess, if I had to bet right now, would be that the spread between the fed funds rate and the IOER rate would stay roughly constant if we raised the IOER rate for a fixed level of reserves.  That’s purely guess work, and we’re going to learn a lot more about that as time goes by. So let me turn then to the balance sheet.  I circulated a memo on a reverse taper exit strategy.  What I wanted to accomplish here was to put a concrete proposal on the table, and then the concrete proposal is supposed to indicate that I think we can try to return to normalcy in terms of our balance sheet in five years—“normalcy” meaning excess reserves around $25 billion and a balance sheet consisting only of Treasuries of varying maturities.  And I would be inclined, as President Plosser would be, to have those Treasuries at the short end as opposed to the long end.  Without sales we cannot get there.  So my own preferred strategy that I described here is to use redemptions of anything on our balance sheet right now—Treasuries and MBS and agency debt—in combination with what I would describe as very modest rates of sales. So I will give you some idea of that.  You know, just this week while we were tapering, I think we bought—Brian can correct me if I’m wrong—about $16 billion worth of MBS.  So I am proposing that we sell $5 billion to $10 billion per month for six months beginning in the second half of 2010 and then ramp it up to an alarming rate—using it as a joke—of $15 billion per month in 2011.  So basically going very slowly in this process and being ready to reverse if we start to see large price effects from these kinds of sales.  I think the challenge here, the concern that the staff raises about sales, is that, if we start to indicate our willingness to sell, the market is going to be concerned that we want to sell $1 trillion in a month or over a relatively short period of time, and I think this is a communication issue.  We have to be ready to communicate that this is not the case.  I don’t think this is an impossibility by any means, and I describe in my memo one way to accomplish that communication. What are the benefits of doing this.  The main benefit here is not that it’s going to enhance our control over the fed funds rate.  That’s not what I am aiming for.  It’s that I’m concerned about the connection between the size of our balance sheet and inflation and inflation expectations.  I think we see the evidence for these concerns in the data that Brian presented earlier.  If you look at the break-even inflation rate, as we are used to doing, it is going up.  But if you look for the price of skewness in inflation, which is sort of the price of heavy-tailed risk, which is more what I am concerned about, you start to see that going up as well over the last few months. Those are my concerns.  I think we can accomplish the desirable goal of getting rid of MBS on our balance sheet by the end of 2015, what I would call normalization, so that we have excess reserves down below $25 billion by the beginning of 2015 without using undue amounts of sales and without sales imposing huge effects on prices. The last point I will make is that there are a lot of estimates of the price effect of sales.  One of the things we have to be very cautious about is that we don’t want to use data from this period of chaos, as Vice Chairman Dudley referred to it earlier, of late 2008 and early 2009 to make inferences about what the effect of sales would be.  And so we have to try to use data from the latter part of 2009 or pre-crisis data to make that inference.  There are a couple of memos from the New York Fed that have done that.  One is by Raskin and Sheets, and the other is by Kimbrough and Madar.  If we have any opportunity to talk, I will probably expand upon these points later.  But the basic punch line from these memos is that essentially in these normal times buying $100 billion worth of MBS puts downward pressure on yields of about 3 basis points.  So that means $1 trillion translates into about 30 basis points.  I don’t think this would be a huge tax on the market, especially for spreading this out over an exceptionally long period of time.  But as I say, I’ll expand upon those points probably in my policy remarks.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, the speaker is expressing their support for the staff's recommendations and discussing their own ideas and proposals. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 172.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 173.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I didn’t know what order I was in.  So I wasn’t ready to begin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses confusion and apologizes for not being ready to begin.


Passage number 174.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You have to be on your toes here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "You have to be on your toes here" is a statement advising someone to be cautious or alert in a particular situation.


Passage number 175.
  [Laughter] MR. KOHN.  I spend so much time on my seat that I’m not good on my toes.  [Laughter]  On the primary credit rate, I am in favor of the staff proposal raising the primary credit rate 25 basis points.  I guess I am a little hesitant to go all the way to the 100 basis point spread.  First of all, I don’t know whether we need or want to go to 100 ultimately, and I would like to stage it a bit to make sure that the markets are resilient to what we’re doing.  I think it is important to reduce the incentives for these habitual borrowers and return to the discount credit of last resort type of function. Communications will be a challenge.  It is not a precursor to an increase in rates, but it’s an adjustment liquidity facility.  I am most comfortable doing this with the “extended period” language still in the directive—I will give you a little preview of what I will be arguing for tomorrow—just so it is clear that it is not a rate signal, and I would like to do it after the Chairman has a chance to explain it in testimony and Michelle and the other public information people have a chance to socialize it with the media so there aren’t any misunderstandings.  And I would do it before the March meeting, in part to get it away from the monetary policy decision. I agree with the staff that the TAF minimum bid rate should rise pari passu with the primary credit rate.  I’m in favor of phasing the amounts down and probably out after March.  I guess I would keep a bit of an open mind about whether we go exactly to zero after March, but I could live with that, too. On the other things about the exit here, the premise of my thinking on this is that significant exit actions will tend to tighten financial conditions.  Importantly, this is because of the signaling—expectation effects.  Draining reserves or shrinking the balance sheet significantly would be a strong signal to people that we are close to raising rates, and doing either of these independent of a decision to tighten financial conditions would, I think, tend to confuse people.  I think also sales of long-term bonds would raise long-term interest rates directly and so tighten financial conditions.  So decisions to exit should be based on the usual focus of monetary policy:  How can our actions affect financial conditions and achieve our objectives. On asset sales, I think selling assets would tighten financial conditions.  It would tend to raise longer-term interest rates, and so I would not sell anything until we have decided that we want financial conditions to tighten, that the economy is on a track that we need tighter financial conditions.  I think even announcing gradual or slow sales will tend to raise longer-term interest rates at least a little because I think it’s the stock rather than the flow effect that tends to affect markets, and selling assets or holding open the possibility of selling assets anytime soon would be especially disruptive as we wind down our purchases. I agree that in theory, once we decided to tighten financial conditions, we could go after higher longer-term rates first—that is, assets sales before short-rate tightening.  But I am concerned that it would confuse people, who expect policy tightening to start with short-term rates.  I think postponing the increase in short-term rates would increase perceptions and concerns about the carry trade and what that’s doing to asset prices.  I also wonder what’s going to happen to longer-term rates when we start to tighten short-term rates.  I do not rule out a 1994 type of response, and selling long-term assets on top of such a market response could be pretty disruptive.  So I would wait until after the first short-term rate increase to begin selling assets.  Even before that I am comfortable with redemptions of agencies and MBS, as several others have said.  I think that does point the portfolio down where it sends a powerful signal and ultimately will help by absorbing reserves and tightening our control over the funds rate or whatever interest rate we end up looking at. I’m open on the option of letting the Treasuries be redeemed as well to tilt that curve even further down.  I would like to see some analysis of what allowing Treasuries to be redeemed would do to longer-term interest rates, but we ought to think about that just for the reserve effects; to be sure we would end up with having to buy back Treasuries when we got to the end and we wanted a Treasury-only portfolio.  I think it would shrink the reserve base quickly without selling.  But I’m not comfortable with leaving all the decline to redemptions since we would be left with $800 billion of the MBS and agencies in 2016.  So I would initiate a sort of slow, steady sales program after we begin to tighten policy and we decide that raising long-term rates even more than they have been raised by our policy tightening is consistent with achieving our goals. On the reserve drain–IOER sequence, I think we should start draining reserves before raising the IOER rate to make the latter more reliable.  We do not need it to be precise; we do not need to control the funds rate every basis point or few basis points.  I would feel more comfortable if we had more precise control than I think we will get just by raising the IOER rate.  But not much before we raise interest rates.  Draining will be a powerful signal that higher rates are coming soon.  Intermediate and long-term rates will adjust higher.  So I would start that draining after we essentially decide to tighten, very close to our initial increase in the policy rate. On what our target should be, I expect the funds market to recover as we drain these reserves.  I think that was the experience in Japan, wasn’t it, Nathan.  As they drained those excess reserves, the interbank market, which had gone totally moribund, came back.  It never returned to what it had been before, but it did come back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is an individual's perspective and opinion on various topics related to monetary policy.


Passage number 176.
 MR. SHEETS.  It came back quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that something (which is not specified) came back quickly.


Passage number 177.
 MR. KOHN.  And they could target a market rate.  I am sort of indifferent as to whether that market rate is the funds rate or the RP rate, but I think targeting a market rate sounds better to me than targeting IOER rate.  The market rate and the expected market rates are what should be affecting financial conditions out into the future, and that’s our channel for affecting the economy.  So I would like to stick with a market rate channel.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses his preference for targeting a market rate rather than targeting the IOER rate, as he believes it is a better channel for affecting the economy. There is no discernible disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. It is a polite expression of gratitude to President Bullard.


Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Mr. Chairman.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply addresses two individuals, Mr. Chairman and President Hoenig, without any conflicting opinions or opposing statements.


Passage number 180.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess I’d start out by saying the one thing that’s obvious here is the degree of uncertainty about any of these tools and what their effects will be.  And that suggests that we need to go carefully and gingerly.  But I would say sooner rather than later so that we can begin to see what these effects might be.  On raising the primary credit rate, I am supportive of that.  I think the timing of that is a matter of when we feel we are ready to explain it, and then we should take that action. Beyond that, on the questions, I think a gradual sale of these MBS over a period of time is the right way to go once we get started on this.  I would redeem all MBS and not Treasuries.  As far as the sequencing goes, I think the interest rate on excess reserves will be where we start.  We need to find out if there is a relationship between moving the rate on excess reserves and the fed funds rate, and I think long term we should be moving back toward a market rate as our target.  We have a lot to learn before we get that completely implemented, and so that’s the process we have to begin right now.  I think we just need to begin to see how these tools work in reverse.  I do like President Kocherlakota’s systematic proposal, but I think the first step would be to move the interest rate on excess reserves.  I will leave it at that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude directed towards President Fisher.


Passage number 182.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the normalization of the discount rate.  One additional point I would make is that I would like time to present that to my board and the other boards.  I also support the recommendation of the staff on the TAF.  We have an unusual, idiosyncratic, situation in Dallas, where we have a bank that is properly collateralized, in every single way adhering to proper conduct, except we believe he is gaming the TAF system.  I am eager to get those both closed as quickly as possible if only for that reason, but also because I think it is the right policy to pursue.  I would suggest that you signal to the markets in your testimony of February 10 as well as in your semiannual monetary policy testimony.  I would support, by the way, just to add to President Plosser’s point, which is not on the table, eliminating Freddie’s and Fannie’s access to the discount window.  I’m in favor of a corridor system, constrained on the downside by the IOER rate and on the upside by the primary credit rate. With regard to the size of our balance sheet and draining reserves, the presentation made by Spence Hilton earlier, when he listed the risks of aggressive asset sales, had exactly the kind of questions many of the people at this table raised when we got into this problem.  But we entered this issue and justified it because of the emergency response to having a zero-bound constraint.  I don’t believe that we should be in the business of financing housing.  I think that is a matter for the Treasury and for other authorities, and I would like to get out of that business as quickly as possible.  I realize that we must be careful in the way we do that.  But in general, I would like to see us get back as soon as possible to the status where the private sector, and not the Federal Reserve, becomes the backbone for these markets.  So as to how we do so and how quickly we do so, I will point out that President Kocherlakota not only wrote a good memo but he has been lobbying extremely hard by handing out gifts, such as this Minnesota Vikings hat, particularly to half Norwegians.  [Laughter]  Despite that, I would say, as Governor Kohn has pointed out, when we decide to tighten, then it would be appropriate to begin asset sales in order to remove us from something that we did for emergency purposes but that we did not have business being in in the first place. I would be in favor of redemptions in the intermediate period, but once we begin to tighten, I believe we should be selling those assets.  I believe we should be invested principally in short-term Treasuries, although, again, things have changed over the last 30 years, and there might be other instruments of that shorter-term nature—commercial paper; I’m not sure what—that we might wish to be invested in.  But I would be biased toward short-term Treasuries and getting out of mortgage-backed securities and GSE debt as quickly as possible and as quickly as markets allow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses support for various policy recommendations and explains their reasoning behind their opinions.


Passage number 183.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It is a simple expression of gratitude from President Lockhart.


Passage number 184.
  MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As regards the primary credit rate, I, too, support this.  I think it’s either a partial or a final normalization.  We’ll figure that out as we go forward.  I think the “when” question probably should be after your communication in February, more or less coincident with the TAF announcement.  There is a communications challenge here, and we have to ensure that this is not interpreted as some kind of a signal regarding the policy rate, but just a technical adjustment.  I believe that can easily be done, and the market will acknowledge that.  As President Yellen said, to avoid any misinterpretation, I will just say that it is best that there be no dissents from any of the Reserve Banks, that we basically all do this together and put the requests in together.  So I support the primary credit rate recommendation. As it regards the TAF, I also support those recommendations.  I think they are consistent with eliminating the other credit and liquidity facilities.  I would comment that it’s good that this, as I understand it, has been codified in Regulation A and, therefore, remains on the books so that we can bring it back if economic conditions require that.  Just an interesting point—not a point that has any particular policy relevance, but it was pointed out to me when my staff and I were discussing this—this is actually retiring the third discount window because the Federal Home Loan Bank lending was a second discount window in the process. Turning to the exit discussion, I am going to premise it by saying that this is a preliminary discussion, so I reserve the right to change my mind after more discussion and hearing more about it.  Near term, I would focus on redemptions only.  I think we do not want to take chances with any interpretations that are going to create an effect in market rates.  I think that a redemptions-only policy could last for all of this year, conceivably even longer.  I am open to sales when the market appears that it can absorb the sales, but I do not think that this should be signaled near term.  I kind of like President Kocherlakota’s approach of small, steady, and well-communicated sales when that time comes. Regarding question 2, I think the policy should be to redeem all agencies and MBS and some Treasuries.  As I’m thinking about it, we have a longer-term objective, and that is to change a proportion of MBS to Treasuries in whatever we consider to be the year in which that is adjudged.  So it seems to me that we have to be trying to manage that proportion while, at the same time, we are reducing the balance sheet.  That is the way I would think of that question. Regarding sequencing, this is the key question, and I see arguments on both sides of ex ante and ex post, and I really don’t have a strong conviction yet.  There certainly is a lot of uncertainty about our ability to control the federal funds rate when we get around to rate tightening, and some would argue that it may not even be necessary to control the fed funds rate.  If I had to decide today, I would favor draining relatively close to a point of actually taking a rate action, but some draining in advance, recognizing that it’s very likely going to tighten financial conditions at the longer end of the yield curve.  But I do think it reduces uncertainty and just raises the probability that, if we are dependent on the fed funds rate or we want to affect the fed funds rate, we will be successful at doing so.  And I do think we have maybe some time in the course of this year to explore this question a little further. As regards the longer run, question 5, I prefer moving as close as possible back to previous practice, which would be all Treasuries across the maturity spectrum.  I’m favoring a corridor system.  It may be an open question when we get to that point of whether we are focusing on monitoring or targeting a market rate, but I do think a market rate within the corridor is clearly going to be a centerpiece of how we think about monetary policy.  Again, I think we have some time to consider this further.  My instincts here are to prefer the tried and true if we can get there, and that’s something like a corridor system with the fed funds rate as the market rate in between.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of support and agreement with various recommendations and proposals.


Passage number 185.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite message of gratitude from the speaker to President Lacker.


Passage number 186.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Evans.


Passage number 187.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Pianalto.


Passage number 188.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also support increasing the primary credit rate to a 50 basis point spread, reducing the term to overnight on primary credit, and reducing the TAF auctions to zero after March.  As others have noted, we will have to communicate that these changes are appropriate given the absence of liquidity problems and that they are not a shift in the stance of monetary policy. Turning to the strategies for removing our accommodation, I also want to start by thanking the staff for the background memos, and in particular Jim and Spence for providing a coherent framework for discussing the issues that we face in exiting from the current, more complicated monetary policy environment.  The memos were very helpful to me.  I also think that it is helpful to recall that we had a fairly effective operating regime and communication strategy prior to the crisis.  So I would like to return to the more familiar, less complicated pre-crisis policy regime as soon as practicable.  Because I favor returning to the pre-crisis operating regime—that is, relying mainly on short-term interest rates as our active policy instrument—I prefer to keep the unwinding of our asset holdings in the background. To this end, I favor a very gradual sales strategy to reduce the size of the balance sheet.  Because even a steady and gradual pace of asset sales constitutes some reduction in the current degree of policy accommodation, we may want to commit initially to a more conservative redemption-only policy and then only later announce plans for gradual sales.  The staff memos point out that a very gradual sales strategy enables us to smooth out an otherwise variable rate of asset redemptions.  Some forward guidance about the balance sheet would be helpful to keep market expectations in line with this Committee’s intended path. In answer to question 2, I support the redemption of all parts of the LSAP portfolio including all agency debt and mortgage-backed securities along with some Treasuries.  On question 3, I favor draining reserves with reserve-management tools prior to increasing our primary policy rate.  As noted in the staff memos, lower reserve levels would enhance the effectiveness of our operating procedures by improving the connection between the fed funds rate and the rate on excess reserves.  An additional factor in my preference for early reserve drain is that we do not have much practical experience with these reserve-draining instruments, and therefore, we should allow some time for them to be deployed and the desired amount of draining to build up.  A clear demonstration of these tools intended as technical preparations and not tightening per se would bolster the public’s confidence in our abilities.  Additionally, an early reserve drain may be helpful in containing inflation expectations. The Desk reports were very helpful in my thinking about question 4.  It was reassuring to me to hear both that we likely have the ability to ramp up our use of these reserve-management tools quickly and that this action would not be a surprise to market participants prior to any rate increase.  Still, I think it would be practical to begin with small amounts, like $10 billion to $20 billion, and then to increase the drain steadily toward a more aggressive draining of reserves, as long as, again, the effects on financial markets remain minimal.  If we do undertake this draining of reserves in advance of an increase in our short-term interest rates, it is going to require effective communications, as was pointed out in the Clouse and Hilton memo. My responses to questions 5, 6, and 7 are influenced by my desire to return to a pre-crisis operating regime.  There is already enough uncertainty about our policies and the state of the economy without introducing additional changes.  I would try to move toward an all-Treasury portfolio similar to what we had prior to the crisis.  I also favor working to retain the fed funds rate as our primary policy tool.  That said, I am concerned that the characteristics of the fed funds rate might change or could deteriorate significantly, but I am not so concerned that I would want to introduce more confusion by adding another complicating issue at this point.  I think it is important to lay out a strategy, and I think a return to our pre-crisis operating procedures is a good starting point.  Of course, we may gain experience and discover that we have no choice but to make further changes.  For the maximum effectiveness, as others have said, whatever strategy we choose, I presume that we will find the appropriate forum for laying out our approach in as much detail as we can in advance so that our subsequent actions and statements would be understood within the broader context that we have in mind.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards Governor Warsh.


Passage number 190.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, on the housekeeping items, on the discount window, I share the consensus that most have spoken about.  I think markets will perceive that a bit as though it is a FIFO—first-in, first-out—issue.  We will have to communicate what it means, which is to say that, in spite of our best efforts to separate liquidity policy and monetary policy, I still think that market participants are going to view this, rightly or wrongly, in the eyes of people around the table to be a next and meaningful step.  So we just need to judge accordingly.  On the TAF recommendation, I concur. In terms of the broader strategies for removing accommodation, Mr. Chairman, let me cherry-pick a couple of goals that have been described today, both in the materials and at the table.  In a time when there is a tremendous amount of policy uncertainty here in town broadly and the economy has a lot of uncertainty, I am more attracted to policy prescriptions that provide as much clarity as soon as we can so that we aren’t adding to that uncertainty.  I think of our preeminent goals here as ensuring our credibility so that:  we can increase control and the perception of control over policy rates; we can be perceived to be able to effectively tighten financial conditions; and we can find our way back to a balance sheet and a regime that preceded this crisis.  Those are difficult, and there are tradeoffs.  But those are my priorities in terms of goals. In terms of overall disposition, in which I think the memos really rang true—and I think the memos, at least for me, were particularly useful in being very explicit about what we know and what we don’t know:  that is, the substitutability between our balance sheet and short-term rates is imperfect.  The ambiguity of what we were buying when we were buying these long-term assets, ambiguity on what we are buying when we reduce them, suggests to me that it is not a dimmer switch that we are controlling well but more like an on/off switch made with a couple of levers.  But we are not as certain as possible on that.  So if you take that disposition when conducting policy, I think we have to err on the side of mitigating that ambiguity as much as practicable for reasons of our own credibility and effectiveness.  That prejudices me to want to shrink reserves somewhat sooner and with more force than redemptions alone would allow, so that when we move our policy rate we are more confident as to its effects. With respect to asset sales, I obviously wasn’t crazy about the purchase of the last several hundred billion of them.  So, at some level, I would be thrilled just to exit them quickly and with force.  But I am reminded of that brokerage firm commercial, I think from President Bullard’s home state, where the fellow buys the piece of art and then immediately sells it.  [Laughter]  And I think the policy reaction function, if we were to exit with any dramatic swiftness after this huge increase, would suggest that the policy process seems confused and confusing.  So as attractive as that might be, and hasty, I think it is probably not the best course forward.  I think a more reasonable course forward is to begin sales in the second half of this year as a supplement to our redemptions, by which we would pre-commit to modest levels of sales that could grow over time, perhaps along the lines of what Narayana suggested.  But I think an important distinction for certainty is that it would be the baseline forecast.  There would be a high but rebuttable presumption that the sales under that forecast could change over time, but I think that would bring clarity in the mortgage finance markets and clarity in terms of the size of our balance sheet.  It seems uncomfortable to me that the balance sheet would shrink simply by the rate at which redemptions and prepayments come in on the mortgage-backed securities portfolio.  It doesn’t seem to me to be a pro-active way of making policy.   With respect to redemptions more broadly, I would redeem all agency and MBS and some of the Treasuries.  On the sequencing question, I favor the ex ante strategy—that is, I recommend using these tools prior to an increase in the interest rate on excess reserves.  I think it is useful on the inflation expectations questions that continue to be alive and well.  And it certainly does raise a communications challenge, but I think it is one that we can deal with. On the question of volume, Mr. Chairman, I must say I don’t really have a magic number.  But I would be inclined to push down excess reserves so we can be more effective when we decide we have to make more-meaningful steps to remove policy accommodation. On the question of the long-run balance sheet in the steady state, I think we should “try to go home again.”  It is difficult, but I think that we should try to, and I think we should be pretty explicit publicly about that desire.  I am concerned about the efficacy of our operating target.  I think it is useful to have a market interest rate as an operating target.  I am not wed to the federal funds rate per se but don’t yet see a suitable alternative. And on your final question with respect to the long-run operating framework, I don’t think we need to come out with a grand design.  So what I’m suggesting is that we need to provide clarity and not be a source of policy uncertainty.  But I think from your first op-ed piece in which you outlined an exit strategy, we have pretty smartly gone through the liquidity facilities.  I think we are smartly now going through the next of these.  I don’t mean to suggest that we should unwrap the final game plan until we are totally complete with it, but I think this next chapter over probably the next two meetings will be useful, so that our credibility on exit will be superior and will continue to give us the benefit of the doubt as we move forward through what is no doubt going to be a tough economic environment.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Warsh, expresses his views and priorities on various topics related to monetary policy, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument with others.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude by someone named Governor Duke.


Passage number 192.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like everybody else here, I look forward to the day we can normalize operations.  In fact, having joined this Committee in August 2008, I have a personal objective of experiencing normal here at the Federal Reserve.  [Laughter]  So with that, I think returning the primary credit rate to normal and the communication strategy that has been outlined is the way to go.  It’s important that we tie the primary credit rate to closing the liquidity facilities and make raising this rate effectively closing that as an emergency tool as well.  When I was a banker, I always likened borrowing from the Federal Reserve as borrowing from my father.  And I think we need to return to that sort of a stance.  So whether that is a 50 basis point spread or a 100 basis point spread, I think we need to decide before we make that move, because if we make a quarter move and then a month or two later we decide, no, we want another quarter and we want to spread that, it becomes much more difficult to communicate that it is a liquidity action rather than an interest rate action. When I think about normalizing,—I moved to question 7—I think we need to think about our longer-run operating strategy sooner rather than later.  As we have talked about long-run and temporary draining tools and what those really mean, I look at these projections, and they show us with a very large balance sheet for a very long time.  So it seems to me that the long run is that time period when we are showing right now a projection of a large balance sheet. On question 6, I am concerned about the federal funds rate as an operating target.  It’s not clear to me yet what set of conditions leads to a restart of the federal funds market beyond this GSE market.  And I think we need to have some thoughts about or be prepared for at least a temporary state where there really is no fed funds market.  So we need some way to communicate what our targets are that don’t depend on there being such a market, although I was encouraged to hear Governor Kohn say that the market would come back.  For all of those reasons, I am in favor of the least disruptive ways to reduce our balance sheet as quickly as possible. As for question 2, I would start with redeeming all agency debt, MBS, and Treasury securities.  I think we need to communicate our intention for this large MBS and agency portfolio that we have, and we need to start that communication with the end of the purchases.  At some point—maybe not immediately—we need to make a commitment to exit the MBS and agency portfolio through both maturities payments and gradual sales.  This leads me to question 5, where my preference is for all Treasuries.  Finally, I would favor the use of draining tools prior to raising the rate of interest on excess reserves.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses her personal objective of experiencing normal operations at the Federal Reserve and states her preference for returning the primary credit rate to normal and implementing a communication strategy. She also discusses her concerns about the federal funds rate as an operating target and suggests redeeming agency debt, MBS, and Treasury securities.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply includes a polite expression of gratitude from an individual named Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 194.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think I have Kevin’s criteria and Don’s conclusions.  Let me try to explain why that is where I believe I am, stipulating, as did Dennis, that this is a preliminary discussion from which I assume all of our views will evolve.  The two criteria that I find I have uppermost in mind with respect to all of these issues are, first, credibility, and second, my substantive concern about cutting off too soon what is still a halting and potentially fragile recovery. With respect to credibility, I think there are two subcomponents—one of which many of you have mentioned, quite rightly—communication.  At the risk of a somewhat unpleasant metaphor, I think we need to let the markets, the newspapers, and everybody else masticate, digest, and regurgitate what it is that we are doing so that they are not in a position of constantly speculating, does this little action here mean the following or does it not.  But there is a second part of credibility, which is that we need to be effective and be perceived as effective when we act.  There are a lot of uncertainties here.  Many of you have articulately explained how many uncertainties there are.  But I don’t think we can afford to be seen as doing too much on-the-job training, even in these unusual circumstances, because if we go out there with a proposed course of action and then two meetings later say, “Well, it’s not quite working out the way we thought, and we are going to dial it a little in the other direction,” regardless of the short-term wisdom of that move, I think we will have lost an enormous amount. With respect to cutting off the recovery, I think this is just probably a different substantive analytic and policy predisposition that divides us somewhat.  But my sense, as we will discuss tomorrow, is that the recovery is less well entrenched than probably some of you believe.  With respect to our balance sheet, though, whatever the merits of getting into this position, we are in it now.  We have these assets, and unlike Jeff, I think that, although I know that countless bytes will be put onto disks in the future analyzing these programs, there was an effect and it was a fairly significant effect on mortgage markets and long-term interest rates generally.  And I am concerned about any move—such as significant asset sales—early on that might plausibly lead to a significant disruption of those markets. So implications for just a couple of areas:  On the discount rate issue, I am kind of with everybody on the general point.  But I want to emphasize something that Charlie Plosser and Betsy said, which is, notwithstanding what I think is Kevin’s quite correct caution that we are never going to get everybody to separate liquidity policy and interest rate policy entirely, we ought to try by doing what Charlie suggested—which is to say, let’s wrap up everything that we think is liquidity ASAP, and let’s get our public communication strategy such as to say that is what we are doing.  The discount rate move is tied to the TAF, which is tied to the rundown of the TALF facilities, and that’s basically what we are about.  And if we repeat it enough, we’ll achieve that first end, I hope, of making people really understand.  It has for me the side benefit of taking away the notion that we have to feed the beast and do something every meeting, which appears to be walking backwards.  You know, I don’t think we want to get ourselves in the mode where we have to throw a maiden over the cliff to the dragon at every FOMC meeting.  [Laughter] So, then, what about the longer-term exit strategy issues.  Well, as I said, I find myself most in agreement with Don, not because I had those views when I came in—I had sort of inchoate views—but Don convinced me in just what he was saying a few moments ago.  But I want to cast it slightly differently, with Kevin’s criteria in mind.  I am worried about cutting off the recovery prematurely, and that is why, as Don said, I don’t want us to move until we are really ready to move and we really want tightening to take place, keeping in mind what Kevin and I would harp on, which is the credibility of our actions.  When we move, we have to be really sure that we are seen as having an effect and that the tightening is palpable, and people aren’t sitting there saying, “Geez, you know, they have all these assets and reserves floating around and they’re not having the effect that they want.”  So that is Don’s sequencing of some pre-move, but close to the moment.  Draining plus the move plus asset sales intended shortly thereafter seems to me to use multiple instruments and thereby maximize the chance that we will have an effect.  But with my own caution, I really want to wait until I am convinced that we are not putting the recovery at risk.  My sense is that, when we get to that point, we want to move quite robustly using these multiple instruments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 195.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and "Vice Chairman" are both expressions of courtesy and do not indicate any disagreement or contentiousness.


Passage number 196.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Thank you for a very good discussion, and thanks to the staff again for terrific support.  I am going to try to summarize a bit.  I think I actually heard a good bit of agreement around the table, not complete agreement, and so please understand that I am not trying to represent everybody’s point of view equally.  But let me just try to draw a few conclusions, and we can continue to talk about this. Obviously, whatever we do, I think there was a lot of sense that we need to be as clear as possible, to communicate in advance what we are going to do as much as we can, and to try to remove uncertainty where possible.  There was a lot of agreement on the primary credit rate and on the TAF.  We have potential statements tomorrow that involve announcing the wind-down of the TAF, although the statement is not clear about whether we go to zero or hold the last one in abeyance.  We can discuss that tomorrow, but I think there is agreement that we are going to go down on the TAF.  On the primary credit rate there was also agreement.  People made the point that we need to be very clear and careful about our communications, so in particular I need to introduce this idea in my testimonies.  Another point that was made was that we need to have all of the Reserve Banks requesting this discount rate increase, which I think is also important. What was not quite so clear in the discussion is whether we should try to do this in February or at the March meeting.  What I would like to do is ask Brian Madigan and the staff to consult with all of you after this meeting, and you should think about when your board meetings are scheduled, and just think about logistics, first of all, and what is feasible.  And could we get all of the requests in and then do it all by late February.  Is that feasible.  That’s the first question.  Then, we will poll you and try to find out what the preferences are and, if necessary, we can have a videoconference.  But I hope we can come to some conclusion by just polling the participants.  So that is the primary credit and the TAF, for which we will go ahead and take those additional steps to continue to close down the liquidity facilities. On the ultimate shape of the balance sheet, there was a great deal of agreement that we should go to Treasuries only and either shorter-term or at least a greater variety of maturities than we have now.  We need to continue to discuss the ultimate operating regime.  A number of people mentioned a corridor system, but I think there is a sense that we want to go back to short-term interest rate targeting.  Whether it is within a corridor system or the old system we had before, this can still be discussed, but that’s the direction. On redemptions, I think I heard that everyone wants to redeem all agency securities, MBS and agency debt.  On Treasuries, there are some differences in point of view.  I think the suggestion I would make is that we redeem all of the Treasuries as they come due.  I would leave it to the Desk—and we can discuss this later—to the extent that you want to replace any of the Treasuries, they should be with very short-term instruments, both to shorten the overall maturity of the SOMA and to give us the flexibility to reduce reserves easily in the future if we need to.  That would be my take-away from this. There is a lot of agreement that we don’t want to hold MBS indefinitely, although I would point out that the politics cuts different ways.  On the one hand, it is true that we don’t want to be the third GSE, and I agree with that concern.  On the other hand, I think if we take unnecessary large capital losses, those would also probably be a big problem for us politically.  We can take capital losses if we need to, but I don’t think we should go out of our way to take capital losses if we can avoid it.  So I think we ought to consider something along the lines of what President Kocherlakota described as a reverse taper.  Perhaps we should announce at some point, not immediately, that we are, say, not going to be selling in 2010 or for some fixed period and after that we will be selling in some baseline trajectory.  I don’t think we have to decide this, obviously, in this meeting.  I would like the staff to please look through alternative strategies and try to figure out what the implications would be for the size of the balance sheet, for reserves, for capital losses, and other issues that we might be concerned about.  So let’s proceed that way. On state-contingency, I liked Governor Warsh’s view of a dimmer switch versus on/off switch.  I think we all agree that we want to be state-contingent, but I don’t think we want to be varying purchases and sales by small amounts, according to small changes in the outlook.  But, obviously, if there’s a major change in the outlook, either better or worse, then we would have to be prepared to respond to that.  So, again, we would like to go for a baseline that gets us way down on MBS within a reasonable period, certainly within Betsy’s term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply summarizing the points of agreement and disagreement discussed in a meeting.


Passage number 197.
 MS. DUKE.  You’re going to have to hustle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 198.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  With respect to the draining of reserves, I think there was a lot of agreement, not universal, that we should try to drain some reserves first.  My sense is—and this would be my preference also, and I think this is somewhere near the center of gravity—that we should continue to test our reserve-draining techniques aggressively, to make sure we have a lot of comfort with them.  That would mean at some point ramping them up to some size—again, because small is not the same as large, and we have to be sure that they can operate at some size.  But we should continue to take the posture that these are testing, that we are trying to understand these tools and make sure they work and demonstrate that they work.  When the time comes and we think we are very close to raising interest rates, we ought to then move aggressively and announce a meeting or two in advance that we will be draining more rapidly and hope to get at least a significant decline in reserves at the time that we raise rates, in order to have a more secure effect on the economy.  That said, we all understand this depends on how things evolve.  If things change dramatically and we end up raising rates very soon, then we may not have the luxury of developing this whole process, and we will have to go with what we have.  Fortunately, the IOER rate seems likely to work, but it would be helpful to have some reserve drains. So those are just some observations.  Oh, one last thing on the target rate, I don’t think we are quite in sync on that yet.  There is, obviously, a desire to go back to the federal funds rate, if possible, and it may depend on the tools we use.  If we use the reserve collateral accounts, for example, that might reduce the viability of the federal funds rate.  It seems to me right now that the major alternatives being suggested are either the IOER rate, the IOER rate plus some monitoring of a set of short-term rates, or the federal funds rate.  I think those are the options that are on the table, and we will have to think about them, and that will be part of our thinking about the long-term operating procedure and also the tools that we are going to use to drain reserves.  So there are some observations.  Any questions or comments.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is offering their own observations and preferences, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposition from others in the passage.


Passage number 199.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I think you, as usual, ably summed up everything that people have said.  The one question I had was about redeeming Treasuries and using the proceeds to buy short-term Treasuries, while at the same time draining reserves.  It seems as though we are somehow in the position of both borrowing and saving at the same time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 200.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Buying short-term Treasuries would, of course, add to reserves.  Right.  But if they are very short-term Treasuries, then they can be easily disposed of as part of the draining process as we get close to the moment when we want to raise rates. We now have a decision to make.  We could now go ahead and hear the staff presentation, perhaps without Q&A, or with Q&A, or we could start tomorrow morning at 8:30.  Is there a general feeling.  Can we go ahead and just hear the presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing different options and decisions to be made, but there is no clear indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 201.
 MR. FISHER.  8:00.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. FISHER. 8:00" simply states a time without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  8:30.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 203.
 MR. TARULLO.  8:30, but you have to be brief, Richard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of time.


Passage number 204.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  Hey, I am not a problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is light-hearted, indicated by the laughter, and there is no indication of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 205.
 MR. PLOSSER.  8:30 tomorrow morning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any statements or arguments that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states the time for a meeting without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 206.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I hear sort of a general preference.  I’m sorry.  I apologize to the staff—you have sat here for four hours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is acknowledging that they have heard a general preference and apologizing to the staff for making them wait.


Passage number 207.
 MR. STOCKTON.  We always do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 208.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right, before you walk away, we do have one action we have to take.  Believe it or not, this is a record, four hours into the meeting and we have not yet ratified the domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a neutral statement describing a process that needs to be completed during a meeting.


Passage number 209.
 MR. KOHN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "So moved" is a phrase commonly used in formal settings, such as meetings or legal proceedings, to indicate agreement or approval with a motion.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Thank you.  We will continue tomorrow morning at 8:30 with the presentation by the staff.  Thank you.  There is a reception and a dinner for your convenience available upstairs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the continuation of a presentation and mentions a reception and dinner available for convenience.


Passage number 211.
 [Meeting recessed] January 27—Morning SessionCHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning.  This is the continuation of our joint FOMC–Board meeting.  We are at item 8, the economic situation, and let me turn to Dan Sichel.  And for President Lacker’s benefit, we have Dan Sichel, Mike Palumbo, Dave Stockton, Nathan Sheets, and Brian Madigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. It is simply relaying information about the continuation of a meeting and introducing the individuals who will be speaking on the topic of the economic situation.


Passage number 212.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m sure the rest of the group also benefits from that as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the rest of the group also benefits, implying agreement.


Passage number 213.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Dan, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

No contention or disagreement is present in this passage as it simply involves someone expressing gratitude and requesting Dan to do something.


Passage number 214.
 MR. SICHEL.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the material labeled “Staff Presentation on the Economic Outlook.”  The economic situation since the time of the last Greenbook has, for the most part, unfolded about in line with our expectations.  One wrinkle of note, however, is that the improvement in economic activity appears to be more front-loaded than we had projected in the last Greenbook.  As shown in the top left panel of the first exhibit, we have revised up considerably our estimate of real GDP growth in the fourth quarter and now expect it to clock in at an annual rate of better than 5 percent.  But we have also marked down the first-quarter growth rate.  The panel to the right pinpoints the source of these revisions.  The contribution of final sales to real GDP growth (lines 1 and 2) was revised little in both quarters, but the contribution of inventories (lines 3 and 4) was marked up sharply in the fourth quarter and down in the first quarter.  While part of this revision reflects an accumulation of wholesale inventories of farm products, the revision also appears to reflect a timing shift of production adjustments. The middle two panels provide some additional perspective.  As shown by the black line on the left, firms began to draw down inventories in 2008, and this liquidation became more aggressive in early 2009.  The pace of drawdown appears to have slowed sharply in the fourth quarter as firms apparently became more confident about their prospects and moved production rapidly back up toward sales.  As noted to the right, this slowdown in the pace of liquidation came sooner than we had expected in the December Greenbook as firms across a wide swath of the economy appear to have pulled forward production adjustments that we anticipated would have occurred later. Apart from inventories, the recent data have been consistent with our forecast of strengthening final sales.  The bottom left panel focuses on the goods component of real PCE; the underlying data on retail sales and unit sales of motor vehicles through December point to a moderate fourth-quarter gain, and we expect another decent-sized increase this quarter.  We also expect solid near-term gains in equipment  3 The materials used by Messrs. Sichel, Palumbo, and Sheets are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). purchases.  The panel to the right shows that both orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft moved up recently, on net.  With orders now having moved into alignment with shipments, backlogs of unfilled orders are stabilizing.  Moreover, an important contributor to the recent uptilt in orders and shipments was the tech sector, where falling prices imply that the recent nominal gains will translate into larger increases in real investment.The next exhibit turns to the medium-term outlook.  As shown in the top left panel, we made only small changes to our forecast of strengthening economic activity.  The bullets to the right highlight the main factors that we believe will contribute to the recovery:  accommodative monetary policy, financial conditions that continue to become more supportive of growth, reduced drag from past declines in wealth, and improvements in household and business confidence. Although changes from one Greenbook to the next are often incremental, a more notable upward revision to our outlook is evident when we look further back in time.  The middle left panel compares our forecast for real final sales with that in the June Greenbook.  Final sales now appear to have been considerably stronger in the second half of last year than we had projected last June.  We also have marked up our forecast for final sales growth this year about ½ percentage point. The box to the right highlights key changes between the June and January Greenbooks.  On the positive side of the ledger, financial developments have been more favorable than we had anticipated in the June Greenbook.  As shown in the bottom left, equity prices have moved quite a bit higher, the triple-B bond yield is considerably lower, house prices appear to be on a more favorable trajectory, and mortgage rates are a little lower.  In addition, summary indicators of financial market stress (not shown) have, for the most part, improved significantly faster than we had expected last June; however, bank credit standards remain very tight, and bank credit has continued to contract. Returning to the bullets in the middle right, we also had a bit more fiscal stimulus in the second half of last year than anticipated, and we expect a little more this year.  This extra fillip reflects both the additional package that we assume will be passed this year and other piecemeal provisions that were enacted in recent months, including the expansion of unemployment benefits and the homebuyer tax credit.  In addition, foreign growth has been stronger and the dollar has been lower than we had anticipated in June. On the negative side, we have been surprised on the downside by the extent of the ongoing weakness in employment and some other labor market measures.  For example, as plotted in the bottom right panel, total hours in the nonfarm business sector came in noticeably lower last year than we had anticipated last June.  Michael will now discuss the outlook for individual sectors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a presentation that is laying out the current economic situation and explaining revisions to previous forecasts. There is no clear contention or disagreement among the speakers.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 215.
   MR. SICHEL.  An important element of our outlook is the anticipated pickup in private payrolls.  As shown in the top left panel of exhibit 6, we expect payrolls to flatten out this quarter and then to begin to turn up more definitively in the second quarter.  Final sales have been growing for a few quarters, which should help businesses gain confidence in the resilience of the recovery, a point supported by recent indicators of business sentiment.  In addition, as shown by the blue line in the panel to the right, the recent very large increases in labor productivity have, in our estimation, pushed the level of productivity in the nonfarm business sector well above its structural level (the red line).  We believe that there is limited scope for firms to achieve further outsized gains in productivity, suggesting that hiring will need to commence soon as output continues to expand.   Indicators of layoffs also are broadly consistent with a leveling-out in employment.  For example, the middle panel plots initial claims for unemployment insurance over recent business cycles.  The turquoise bars mark NBER recessions, while the yellow shaded region to the right covers the range that we currently estimate to be consistent with unchanged employment.  As you can see, claims have just entered the upper end of that range.  The bottom left panel highlights some margins of adjustment other than direct hiring that firms tend to use around the time of an upturn in employment.  The workweek (the black line) and temporary-help employment (the red line) both have turned up recently.  While the recent upturns in these series are modest so far, they are in the range of moves that have been associated with employment upturns in the past, with those points marked by vertical lines for the last two episodes.  However, indicators of hiring remain lackluster.  The bottom right panel shows a composite index of help-wanted advertising that blends the old newspaper index with a measure of Internet job listings; this series has flattened out recently and has yet to show clear evidence of an upturn.  Although we view the available information as supportive of our forecast of a pickup in payrolls, considerable uncertainty attends our forecast of imminent employment gains. Exhibit 7 turns to the outlook for inflation.  The red line in the top left panel shows our estimate of the NAIRU plus the effect of extended and emergency unemployment benefits (labeled EEB).  The sum of these two pieces is about 6¼ percent over the forecast period, and the shaded area above the red line shows our estimate of resource slack.  We continue to expect that the wide margin of slack will put downward pressure on inflation.  In our projection, however, this effect is muted by the relative stability of long-run inflation expectations.  As shown to the right, survey measures of inflation expectations (the black and red lines) have been quite stable; although readings on the TIPS measure in recent months (the green line) look a bit elevated relative to earlier years, extracting a signal for inflation expectations remains difficult.  Elsewhere, we see little evidence of significant upward pressure on consumer price inflation.  As shown by the blue bars in the middle left panel, labor costs remain quiescent.  Compensation per hour has decelerated in recent years, and we project that increases in this measure of compensation will remain modest this year and next.  Moreover, given the large recent increases in labor productivity, unit labor costs (the red bars) are estimated to have fallen considerably in 2009.  And we expect these costs to increase only modestly over the next couple of years.  Finally, although core import prices, the middle right panel, are projected to move up noticeably in coming quarters, we estimate that this increase will have only a limited effect on consumer price inflation.  All told, as shown by the blue bars in the bottom panel, we continue to project that core PCE inflation will slow a little further over the medium term, reaching about 1 percent next year.  Overall PCE inflation (the green bars) is pushed up this year by a pickup in energy prices, but we expect the headline index to converge toward the core next year as energy prices decelerate.  Nathan will now continue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The author states that indicators of hiring remain lackluster, while also stating that they view the available information as supportive of their forecast of a pickup in payrolls. This suggests that there is uncertainty or disagreement about the strength of the hiring outlook.


Passage number 216.
 MR. MADIGAN.4  I will be referring to the separate package labeled “Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.”  Exhibit 1 depicts the broad contours of your projections for 2010 through 2012 and over the longer run.  These contours are little changed from those based on your most recent projections, those you submitted in conjunction with the November 2009 FOMC meeting.  Most of you continue to project a gradual economic recovery, with the unemployment rate slowly trending lower and inflation remaining subdued over the next few years. Exhibit 2 reports the central tendencies and ranges of your projections for calendar years 2010 through 2012 and over the longer run; the corresponding information about your November projections is indicated in italics, and Greenbook projections are included as a memo item.  As shown in the top panel, most of you anticipate that real GDP will increase 2¾ to 3½ percent in 2010.  The lower limits of the central tendency and range of your growth projections for this year are both slightly higher than in November.  You see economic growth stepping up by almost a full percentage point in 2011, with a central tendency of about 3½ to 4½ percent, and then staying at about that rate in 2012.  Both the range and the central tendency of your estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of GDP growth, the right-hand column, are the same as in November.   The broad contours of your unemployment rate projections, the second panel, are also much the same as in November.  Your forecasts of the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2010 lie in the range of 8½ to 10 percent, and the central tendency is narrow at 9½ to 9¾ percent.  Underscoring your expectations of a gradual economic recovery, almost all of you expect the unemployment rate to remain above 8 percent at the end of 2011.  Indeed, most of you project that the unemployment rate will be about 6½ to 7½ percent even in 2012, a central tendency that is well above your estimates, shown in the right-hand column, of the 5 to 5¼ percent unemployment rate you anticipate to prevail over the longer run.  Your longer-run projections for the unemployment rate have the same central tendency as in November. As shown in the bottom half of the exhibit, the central tendency of your projections for headline PCE inflation in 2010 is 1.4 to 1.7 percent, not much different from your projections in November.  Nearly all of you project that both total and core inflation through 2012 will stay at or below your view of “mandate consistent” inflation of 1¾ to 2 percent.  A number of you see inflation slowing through 2012, but others see inflation remaining in the vicinity of 1½ to 2 percent.  As a result, the central tendencies and ranges of your projections for core and headline inflation in 2011 and 2012 are generally wide. As can be seen in the top panel, your views on the outlook for economic growth over the next several years differ somewhat from the staff’s outlook:  Greenbook projections for real GDP growth are at or slightly above the upper end of the central tendency of your projections through 2012.  In contrast, the staff’s estimate of longer-run GDP growth—at 2½ percent—is at the lower end of the central tendency of your longer-run growth projections of 2½ to 2¾ percent.  Consistent with the staff’s slightly brisker projection of output growth over the next three years, the Greenbook forecast of the unemployment rate is at or below the lower end of the central tendency range of your projections through 2012.  Most of you see the rate of unemployment that is sustainable over the longer run as close to or just a touch above that projected by the staff.  Even though most of you envision a slower recovery and higher unemployment than anticipated by the staff, your inflation forecasts are generally above the staff’s.  This helps to explain why a sizable majority of you anticipate that it will be necessary to begin moving the funds rate up earlier than envisioned in the Greenbook. As shown by exhibit 3, your views of the uncertainties and risks in your projections have not changed appreciably since November.  Almost all of you continue to see greater-than-usual uncertainty regarding your projections for growth and inflation, the solid bars in the two left-hand panels.  As shown in the top right panel, nearly all of you judge that the risks to output growth are roughly balanced.  Most of you also continue to view the risks to the inflation outlook, the bottom right panel, as roughly balanced.  That concludes our presentation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information about the projections and views of the FOMC participants and the staff.


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there questions for our colleagues.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite statement expressing gratitude and asking if there are any questions for colleagues.


Passage number 218.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just have one question on this last exhibit, and maybe it is a question for the Committee.  Is there any discipline on us to prevent us from saying that uncertainty is always higher than average.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is asking a question and seeking clarifying information from the Committee.


Passage number 219.
 MR. LACKER.  On average, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It states a statement without any opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 220.
  [Laughter] MR. BULLARD.  My experience in the Fed over all these years has been that policymakers are always describing the current environment as a very uncertain one, which is true at some level, but you can’t have above-average uncertainty all the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes the experience of MR. BULLARD in the Fed, where policymakers always describe the current environment as uncertain. There is no mention of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 221.
 MR. LACKER.  Don’t the instructions ask us to respond to that question with reference to a particular historical period—I think the last 20 years—and wouldn’t that allow us to always think uncertainty is higher than usual if it trends up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification about the instructions and suggesting that the question might lead to the perception that uncertainty is higher than usual if it has been trending up in the last 20 years.


Passage number 222.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Uncertainty is always rising.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a general observation that uncertainty is constantly increasing. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 223.
  [Laughter] MR. BULLARD.  Well, I’m just wondering how useful it might really be if we are always going to be describing things as very uncertain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The person is expressing wonder or doubt about the usefulness of constantly describing things as uncertain, but there is no direct argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 224.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We have been giving this information for only how long—a couple of years.  It’s kind of a short sample.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the time period in which the information has been given.


Passage number 225.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement or response from Mr. Bullard.


Passage number 226.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply mentions President Fisher without providing any additional context to suggest any disagreements or contention.


Passage number 227.
 MR. FISHER.  I want to ask three quick questions, if I may, on the economic presentation.  With regard to E&S and cap-ex, which I think is an important variable we are all looking at, when we talk about the survey of capital spending plans and the data that you reported, are you distinguishing between plans domestically or plans overall.  For those who are planning to spend, how much of this is domestic, and how much of it is global.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question seeking clarification on the data presented.


Passage number 228.
 MR. PALUMBO.  We get reports that are mixed.  Some reports will be explicitly about global cap-ex or global IT, and we will report those as distinct from our more domestic reports.  We can usually parse the pieces, but most of what I was referring to were domestic plans for domestic spending.  There is an import component to that spending, which is another piece, so it’s not all domestic production.  But we also think that domestic production in the high-tech area has already been accelerating and that the plans are to continue to accelerate.  So we have some ability to parse those things, but they are really broad indicators as opposed to anything that would add up to something that shows up in the national accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that they receive mixed reports on global cap-ex and global IT, and they are able to parse the domestic reports and differentiate them from the global ones. They also mention that domestic production in the high-tech area has been accelerating and is expected to continue accelerating. There is no conflicting information or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 229.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  The second question is on food prices, which we rarely discuss.  We always talk about oil prices.  If you look at the key food oils as well as at corn, wheat, and some of the other key grains, we have had a complete retracement over the year.  If you talk to the retailers, they are complaining about food-price deflation, and I wonder if you have any comments on the food component looking at it from the standpoint of inflationary pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Fisher, requesting a comment on the topic of food prices.


Passage number 230.
 MR. SICHEL.  I think the broad story on food prices would be that there was the big run-up with commodity prices through 2008 and then we saw the big backoff on crop prices and the underlying food commodity prices.  That’s obviously finished.  With the recent freeze, there is going to be some near-term volatility in food prices.  But we do see food prices rising going forward, not at a rate particularly different from core prices, but we do see increases going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their perspective on the trend of food prices, acknowledging that there may be some short-term volatility due to recent events but overall, they expect food prices to increase in line with core prices.


Passage number 231.
 MR. FISHER.  And my last question, Nathan, has to do with your points on Chinese economic growth as well as on the exhibit you had on fixed asset investment.  I just want to check a data point.  If you talk to the bulk shippers, they will tell you that last year, if you look at the slippage in terms of imports on all but two countries, you had an implosion of roughly 300 million metric tons of imports.  Two hundred seventy million was made up by imports going into China and the remainder into India.  Question:  Even with a slight reduction in what you expect for Chinese economic growth, against the background that this occurred, if you look at the chart on fixed asset investment in China, there is a decline over 2009.  I am just wondering about whatever pickup we have in the rest of the world, and we expect some pickup to take place—I think the presentation captures the overall demand picture fairly accurately—could one expect then to see continued upward price pressure on dry shipments and, if so, to what degree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for confirmation and clarification regarding a data point and speculating about the potential impact on dry shipments.


Passage number 232.
 MR. SHEETS.  That is a pronounced risk.  I think that the key question we have a very hard time getting our hands around, given data limitations, is all of the stuff that was shipped to China over the last year, how much of it has gone into inventories, and how much of it has actually been utilized.  Our thinking about this issue and how we reconcile continued increases in global demand, on the one hand, and global GDP with this flat commodity path, on the other, is that, first, there was an element of inventory accumulation that occurred last year.  As those inventories get replenished, the demand would come down, holding all else equal.  But that is offset by continued growth, so we have some shifting in the nature of the demand that is going on. Then the second thing is that if we really believe that, both for oil and other kinds of commodities, there are some supply-side effects that are likely to come on line over the next few years.  For instance, we were told that the copper industry by historical standards is at a relatively low level of capacity utilization.  So we are hoping—and it really is a hope because we don’t have the data that we want to confirm this—that there will be a different mix of purchases with less inventory replenishment during the coming year and that we will see some supply responses, and for that reason this futures path with flat commodity prices will materialize.  But I think our track record on forecasting commodities shows that any forecast we write down there has considerable uncertainty around it, and my instinct is that there is more upside than downside risk to our commodity prices outlook now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 233.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you all for an excellent presentation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Instead, it shows gratitude and appreciation.


Passage number 234.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the passage.


Passage number 235.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I listened to the presentation, I found myself sort of stuck on exhibit 6, nonfarm business productivity, and I kept staring at that chart because, however you put it, my takeaway was that it seems as if hiring is inevitable.  Actual productivity is higher than structural.  If we are going to get economic growth, we are going to have to get this hiring.  And I just would like to point out at this time that I have not been able to talk to anybody who will move off the proposition they will not be hiring until—and then they won’t tell me exactly when.  This is a big risk, isn’t it.  I mean, how do you feel about these implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 236.
 MR. SICHEL.  I think they are highlighting a very important risk and one that we are acutely attentive to.  As we put the forecast together, we were looking at a number of different things.  We have some indicators that are laid out here that I think provide some sense that, based on the historical record, a pickup in hiring is plausible.  The stage seems to be set for that.  There is a macro story that’s laid out in that top right panel that suggests, conditional on our ability to assess the structural underlying rate of productivity growth, that a pickup in hiring would be imminent.  But as you note, we heard the same stories about business uncertainty, and it does seem that it is going to need to resolve to some degree before hiring begins to pick up. I think some indications that it may be happening—and I don’t want to assert this too strongly—come from some of the business sentiment surveys.  Some of the improvements in financial market indicators suggest that it may be happening.  And we are now in a period when final sales will have been growing for a time, suggesting that there may be some growing confidence in the resiliency of the recovery.  But, boy, that’s a lot of forecast and hope rather than a lot of hard facts to which I could point you suggesting that we really have great confidence that is going to happen.  We think that is the best way to put together the pieces of the macro story, but there’s a lot of risk there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker acknowledges that there are different perspectives and uncertainties regarding the forecast of a pickup in hiring, but there is no direct disagreement or contention.


Passage number 237.
 MR. EVANS.  Yes, back at home I have dubbed this the “inevitability hypothesis.”  The recovery is inevitable, and it will happen.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Evans, is expressing his own belief in the inevitability of a recovery without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 238.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions other questions and President Kocherlakota without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 239.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I am just going to follow up quickly on what President Evans was saying about hiring.  If you look at the hiring rates in JOLTS, the job openings and labor turnover survey, hiring rates have been flat basically since March, and the help-wanted index data that you are showing us here are pretty similar on that.  Until we see that pick up, I do not see how we are going to get to a 263,000 gain in employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the hiring rates and expressing skepticism about the possibility of achieving a certain gain in employment without an increase in hiring. There is no direct contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 240.
 MR. SICHEL.  Again, that is a fair point, something that we have thought a lot about.  I would note that the typical pattern prior to the last two jobless recoveries was that, after GDP turned up, it took employment a couple of quarters to turn up.  That does not mean that it is going to happen this time, but that was the typical pattern. I would also note looking at that help-wanted index, if you look at the vertical lines that show the point at which employment picked up in the past, in those earlier episodes that turn came pretty quickly.  So when the macro forces and the stars lined up the right way, hiring started.  It is kind of an uncomfortable thing for us to have to say that the second quarter here is what we are going to get.  At some point it’s going to happen, and it may happen pretty quickly.  It might not be the second quarter.  It’s sort of uncomfortable to be forecasting that so close, but again, the macro story seems to line up, suggesting that it’s a sensible forecast to write down, subject to all of the risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that there is uncertainty and discomfort in making a forecast, but is presenting an analysis based on past patterns and macroeconomic indicators.


Passage number 241.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context. The phrase "President Bullard" alone does not provide enough information to indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 242.
 MR. BULLARD.  Just one follow-up on that:  This help-wanted index, you do have these Internet problems, and they make comparability to the past recessions before the last two, which were jobless recoveries, pretty problematic.  So I would be a little worried about relying too much on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing a concern about the comparability of the help-wanted index due to Internet problems, and suggests not relying too much on it.


Passage number 243.
 MR. SICHEL.  Yes.  So one thought on that—we have done a lot of work trying to blend, connect, and splice together the current Internet job postings with the old help-wanted index.  You’re absolutely right that doing these long comparisons across time is treacherous because job postings now probably aren’t the same thing that job postings were 30 years ago.  As we look at that index, we really do not try to make much of secular trends.  We really think it’s more useful for identifying shorter-term movements.  Whether shorter-term movements in Internet postings are similar to shorter-term movements in the old newspaper postings is an open question, but we still think that there is some useful information here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that comparing job postings across time is challenging but still believes there is some useful information to be gained from it.


Passage number 244.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You have to be careful of your intuition because gross hiring is always reasonably high even in a recession.  In some sense, a sufficient decline in separations can lead to increased payrolls even if the active hiring process has not accelerated.  So there are some intuitive traps here that we have to pay attention to.  Other questions.  All right.  Seeing none, let me begin with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply cautioning against relying too heavily on intuition when it comes to understanding hiring patterns during a recession.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 245.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like the staff forecast, my outlook has not changed much from the December FOMC meeting, despite a fairly disappointing employment report.  That report highlighted that we are still losing jobs, that many were taking part-time work for economic reasons, and many have had little success in finding work despite being unemployed for some time.  As the recent Massachusetts election has highlighted, people remain quite focused on the very weak labor market and are concerned that economic growth will be insufficient to make much progress in labor markets.  I still anticipate that unemployment will decline only gradually from these very elevated levels, with a trajectory for the unemployment rate that is quite similar to that of the Greenbook. In discussions with business leaders from around the District, there is a clear sentiment that major investment and hiring decisions can wait until there is more clarity on the economic outlook, and many are refocusing their investment programs.  A president of a major university in Boston highlighted that, despite some recovery in its endowment, it remains well below peak and the university remains concerned about future prospects.  Major projects have been shelved altogether, whereas others have been examined for a possible joint development.  A major builder highlighted that lack of credit remains a significant issue but that, given significant vacancies and weak demand for new space, major construction does not make sense as long as the cost of building remains much higher than the cost of buying.  With the CMBS market severely disrupted and foreclosures looming, he sees little prospect for a turnaround in commercial construction in the near term.  Such sentiments highlight that it may be some time before business fixed investment is a significant driver in this recovery.  Despite the New England economy being somewhat better off than the rest of the country, many of the states have significant revenue shortfalls.  Even with stimulus money from the federal government, state and local spending is likely to be restrained for some time. The economy is clearly susceptible to external shocks.  While many of our problems earlier in the recession affected the rest of the world, Chinese restrictions on their lending and mounting fiscal challenges in many of the peripheral European countries could reverberate here.  Until the economy is more self-sustained, negative shocks can have an outsized effect, given that with the zero bound on interest rates and the prospect of large future deficits makes it difficult to offset negative shocks with monetary or fiscal stimulus.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage contains disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses concerns about the weak labor market and the potential impact of external shocks on the economy. They also mention the hesitation of business leaders to make major investment and hiring decisions. This suggests a lack of consensus or disagreement about the current state of the economy and its prospects for improvement.


Passage number 246.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you, President Bullard" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 247.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Overall economic conditions in the Eighth District remain weaker than one year ago, but declines in activity have leveled off and activity has begun to improve in some areas.  District manufacturing activity continues to decline, albeit at a slower pace than previously.  District services activity continues to improve in most areas.  Holiday retail sales were mostly positive, with a slight increase over last year.  Current estimates suggest that District employment in 16 metropolitan statistical areas is down about 3.5 percent since the beginning of the recession compared with a national number of about 5 percent over the same period.  So on this dimension, the recession in the Eighth Federal Reserve District has been less severe than in the nation as a whole, but it is still bad, to be sure.  Employment increased during the second half of 2009 in key District service sectors, including finance, insurance and real estate, professional and business services, education and health, and leisure and hospitality.  District contacts during the fall expressed some concern that momentum from the second half of  may not carry over into the first quarter of 2010.  However, very recent data from large firms in the District seem to indicate that such fears were unfounded.  If anything, business activity for these firms has continued to strengthen so far in the first quarter.  I found this encouraging, and for some of these firms, the international component of their business has led the way. Nationally, my sense is that the economic recovery remains on track and that the real GDP growth rate for the first half of the year will be at or above the long-run average rate for the U.S. economy in the postwar era.  I do think we may be at a juncture in the process today as we speak and over the next few weeks, as markets are reassessing the global policy response to the worldwide recession.  But presuming that that goes okay, I think we are on track.  The pace of recovery that I am projecting is not particularly strong by historical standards, as we have noted here.  Thus, I think that there is some upside potential that the economy may recover more rapidly, better in line with historical experience.  I have hedged my bets on this outcome because I view the shock that hit the economy as one that is largely without historical precedent and because I put some weight on the evidence suggesting that downturns associated with financial crises tend to last longer. Inflation risks in my view are low for the near term but high for the medium term.  I think we have now avoided the deflationary risk that we faced in 2009.  The TIPS-based expected inflation rates are now all very near 2 percent or higher, depending on whether you look the 5 year, the 5-year forward, the 10 year, or the 20 year.  I think one reason these have continued to rise is that people have started to put less and less probability on a deflationary outcome, and I expect that, as the recovery remains on track during 2010, we will see these continue to move up.  I believe that these medium-term inflation risks are manageable but that it will require careful policymaking in the year ahead.  For this reason, I have suggested that the Committee do more to keep options open now so that actions that may become desirable can be taken later in the year without surprising or confusing financial markets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. It provides an overview of economic conditions in the Eighth District and the speaker's views on the economy and inflation risks.


Passage number 248.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by President Plosser does not elicit any opposing views or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 249.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "Thank you. President Lockhart." This is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 250.
   MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In my remarks today, I would like to press two themes:  first, the tentative nature, the fragility, of the recovery and the need to be patient with accommodation and, second, the gap that we are picking up in the Sixth District between anecdotal intelligence and the Greenbook outlook and even some data. Our contacts in the Sixth District over the last two weeks seem more optimistic about the state of the economy.  However, there is still much uncertainty about the medium-term picture, and this is contributing to more restraint than one would ordinarily expect as the economy emerges from a deep recession.  Retailers reported that they are not stocking ahead of sales—that is, in anticipation of improved sales numbers—except where there is no choice in the case of seasonal goods or imports.  The approach to inventory management up and down the production and supply chain is exceptionally cautious.  We heard that the posture of retailers is that missed sales opportunities are an acceptable cost of doing business in the current economic climate.  I continue to hear reports of firms reorganizing their workforce to be more cost effective, and this includes more downsizing.  There is still little appetite to add permanent staff.  I am also hearing that there is considerable interest among stronger companies in cost-reducing M&A activity that would consolidate operations in an industry and improve competitive positions.  I hear little enthusiasm for business expansion requiring new capital expenditure, a view that was confirmed by the recent cap-ex survey we conducted.  Maintenance cap-ex that can’t be postponed dominates business investment spending. As regards the outlook, I expect real GDP growth to moderate significantly this quarter and remain on a path under the Greenbook baseline over the two-year forecast period.  My outlook assumes the continued significant deleveraging of businesses and consumers.  I think firms dependent on bank credit are unlikely to have their credit demands fully met, and in an environment of weakened balance sheets, soft labor markets, and exceptionally heightened economic and policy uncertainty, many simply do not have the appetite for more debt.  A key difference between Atlanta’s updated forecast and the Greenbook is the outlook for business investment.  I am projecting a very modest trajectory for new fixed capital spending this year and next. Now, I have to acknowledge some upside risks to the forecast I submitted.  The pace of spending and production in the fourth quarter suggests that real growth could be relatively strong this year and next.  But this is not what the ground-level economic intelligence I gathered in preparation for this meeting suggests.  I am still getting a sense of a lot of fragility in the recovery with continuing downside risks.  So as I total up the risks to economic growth today, I judge them to be roughly balanced. As regards inflation, risks exist on both sides of the forecast, and uncertainty remains high.  We heard from contacts that price pressures are influencing business decisions in companies with commodity exposure.  We also heard that, while pricing power of businesses isn’t strengthening, price discounting is less intense than at the time of the December meeting. Overall I acknowledge the improving data, and like just about everyone else, I have raised my growth forecast from where it was in October.  But the private sector still faces considerable impediments on the path toward a full recovery, and those impediments continue to have a significant weight on my expectations for the economy over the forecast period.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker's observations and analysis of the current state of the economy and their outlook for the future. While there may be differences of opinion among economists and policymakers, the passage does not explicitly express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 251.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude followed by the mention of the speaker's title.


Passage number 252.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple and polite expression of thanks from President Lacker.


Passage number 253.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me first say that I am very impressed with the breadth of market intelligence reading that President Fisher seems to be able to do.  I may unsubscribe to Goldman-Sachs and begin subscribing to Beer Marketer’s Insights right now.  [Laughter]  It might upgrade the quality of my market intelligence. Reports we have received on the Fifth District’s economy continue to indicate a mixed picture, but the picture has been improving marginally over the last month.  Overall manufacturing, which increased earlier than other indexes, you’ll recall last year, came down to neutral in November and has remained essentially flat since then.  The components of the manufacturing index have been basically flat as well.  The only component that showed any sizable movement was the wage index, which swung from minus 5 to plus 6 in January.  In services, the retail index is neutral this month after having recovered from a very sharp downward dip in December.  There were noteworthy positive signs in the shopper traffic and expected demand six-months-ahead components.  Big ticket sales are still fairly negative, however.  While price trends were stable in the services sector, there was a notable pickup in price trends in the manufacturing sector.  Both prices-paid and prices-received numbers moved up, and the expected trends ratcheted up as well. The anecdotal reports we are getting from our directors and other contacts are still mixed this year.  As I noted in the last meeting, we continue to hear reports that uncertainty about changes in tax and regulatory policy seem to be inhibiting willingness to commit to hiring and investment outlays.  And it’s a bit broader than you might think from the news.  For example, in West Virginia, they report that a wholesale revisiting by the EPA of permits and permitting decisions made over many years is impeding investment in coal and extractive industries there.  But, overall, the reports we have gotten have a noticeably more positive tone since December.  A few examples—temp agencies are seeing a pickup in orders, consistent with the data you showed.  Residential real estate is said to be firming in several markets.  The national homebuilders are said to be gearing up to build inventory.  Stability is visible in the multifamily housing markets.  And tourism is picking up along the Carolina coast. My outlook for the national economy hasn’t changed much since the last meeting.  After smoothing through the usual volatility, real output appears to be on a solid growth path.  Despite the shaky labor market, consumer spending has moved higher in recent months.  Once we start adding jobs, I think we can expect consumer spending to gain a bit of momentum.  Regarding the labor market, I agree with the staff that we are likely to see positive employment growth soon, with the obvious caveats about risks around that outlook.  Business investment in equipment and software is also advancing.  The latest data on new orders are consistent with the view that equipment spending is likely to add to overall growth this year.  And I am positive about equipment and software, just out of a bit of introspection, knowledge of what the national IT infrastructure at the Federal Reserve is doing, just abundant opportunities, not that they are spending a ton of money recklessly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an update on the state of the economy and sharing their outlook, but there is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 254.
  MR. FISHER.  We are holding up the economy, Jeff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement in the passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "We are holding up the economy."


Passage number 255.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  Right.  Spending in a very disciplined way.  But there are just abundant opportunities to improve business processes and rationalize the infrastructure that we have built up over the last couple of decades.  There’s a drag, naturally, from commercial construction, but that is only 3 percent of GDP.  So it looks to me as if the positive factors are going to lead to decent GDP growth this year and better growth next year.  We wrote down 3½ percent for real GDP this year, about the same as the Greenbook, and 4 percent for 2011, which is somewhat below the Greenbook.  My main difference with the Greenbook probably isn’t a surprise.  The Greenbook has us waiting until the end of 2011 to raise rates without having any trouble keeping inflation in check over that period.  The Committee waited a similar two-and-a-half-year period after the end of the last recession before beginning to raise rates, and core inflation rose above 2 percent in 2004 and remained elevated throughout the rest of that expansion.  Overall inflation, of course, was significantly higher.  This time around, I think there is a very good chance that to keep inflation in check we need to raise our rate sooner than late 2011.  And that is why my 2011 GDP forecast is somewhat below the Greenbook’s. Finally, let me say a word about housing, because it is the macroeconomic sector that is probably the most closely related to the discussion we had yesterday afternoon.  The Greenbook has single-family housing starts, as I mentioned yesterday, rising pretty briskly from 0.5 million units to 1 million units by the end of 2011.  But even with that strong recovery, residential investment, given the small size of the sector now, contributes only 0.1 percentage point to real GDP growth in this year and 0.6 next year.  Now, I recognize that stabilizing the market for housing was an important motivation for our MBS purchases, given the aftermath of what in hindsight looks to have been a decade or so of overbuilding in the housing sector.  I realize that stabilizing housing prices probably contributed substantially to stabilizing consumer spending and household wealth over the course of the last year.  But given all of the overbuilding we have seen, the magnitude and the scale of that, it seems to me awfully uncertain just how rapidly we ought to expect homebuilding to recover in this expansion and how much we ought to hope homebuilding recovers in this recovery.  Given how small a share of GDP is devoted to it, I wouldn’t be that disappointed if residential investment were essentially flat for the next couple of years and we didn’t get a recovery in starts and we didn’t get new home demand rising over the forecast as it does in the Greenbook. So this contributes to my willingness to run some risk about what happens to mortgage-backed security rates as we remove stimulus in the next couple of years.  If anything, if we’re having any effect on the housing market, it is subsidizing home mortgage finance, and that sense I have is bolstered, I had mentioned, by the Desk’s analysis, some of which documents the limitations to the ability of market participants to short MBS.  I think that our task in this recovery, unlike previous recoveries, is twofold.  And this is another way to think of what we have before us.  We have to withdraw monetary policy stimulus, but we have to withdraw a perhaps sizable subsidy to the housing finance market.  To my mind, the recovery is going to be healthier faster the more rapidly we withdraw that artificial subsidy and get capital markets back to neutral.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 256.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker, housing has two other effects, though.  One is on wealth effects, as an important component of consumer spending and therefore affects it.  The other is on the quality of mortgage assets and the implications for the banking system and so on.  So there are other channels of effect—do you think those others are not serious as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply acknowledging that housing has other effects beyond what was previously discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 257.
 MR. LACKER.  Let me go in reverse order.  A fair amount of capital seems to be flowing into the banking system.  There is a lot of private equity on the sidelines or being mobilized to go into the community bank sector, for example.  Large banks have been able to raise capital, even in recent months, quite notably at the large end of the scale.  So I don’t see the economy as terribly constrained by the amount of bank capital.  And even if it were, I don’t think buying MBS is the right way to recapitalize banks.  It’s kind of an indirect channel.  As for housing wealth, if what we are doing is subsidizing mortgage-backed securities and keeping housing prices artificially high as a result, I’m not sure that’s a healthy way to build a recovery either.  I think we ought to be aiming to get housing wealth and housing prices to where they ought to be relative to the economy, if they are being held up by our mortgage-backed securities holdings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, argues against buying mortgage-backed securities as a way to recapitalize banks and suggests that it may not be a healthy way to build a recovery. He also questions whether keeping housing prices artificially high is a beneficial strategy.


Passage number 258.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided passage does not contain any statements or information that could lead to contention or disagreement. It simply states the title of the President as "President Evans".


Passage number 259.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of thanks towards President Yellen.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 260.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My views on the outlook have changed remarkably little during the intermeeting period in spite of incoming data prompting us to revise up substantially our estimate of last quarter’s GDP growth.  As the Greenbook emphasizes, that upward revision mainly reflects a dramatic reduction in the pace of inventory liquidation.  While it’s heartening that inventory overhangs are no longer such a major drag on the economy, I would be more reassured if the surprise had reflected unexpected strength in final sales.  Instead, both my retail contacts and the incoming data suggest that the holiday shopping season was lackluster, even though tight inventory management made it far more profitable than 2008.  Moreover, businesses are still very cautious about capital spending. Going forward, we anticipate moderate growth in the first half of this year, similar to the Greenbook, and see this forecast as consistent with recent data.  I expect real GDP growth to strengthen over time, rising from about 3½ percent this year to about 4½ percent in 2011 and 2012.  This forecast is predicated on strong private demand coming on line as the impetus to growth from fiscal stimulus fades away later this year.  Private demand seems likely to pick up as financial conditions ease further with higher equity prices, narrower risk spreads, and improved bank credit supply. The risks to this forecast appear fairly evenly balanced.  On the upside, it is possible that history will repeat itself.  Every previous deep postwar recession has been followed by faster growth than I expect this time.  Post-recession booms commonly reflect a spurt of pent-up demand, and we could see such a snapback if, for example, households and businesses postponed spending during the period of greatest economic uncertainty and now feel more secure and ready to open their wallets.  So far such a scenario doesn’t square with information from my contacts, but it remains a plausible risk.  On the downside, although my economic growth forecast is similar to the Greenbook, it’s strikingly optimistic relative to most private-sector forecasters.  About 90 percent of private-sector growth projections, including those in the Blue Chip sample, predict weaker growth than I do.  My optimism may not be justified if, for example, credit constraints are more persistent than expected, perhaps fed by mounting commercial real estate losses at banks.  Also, the fallout on households from foreclosures could be more severe than I anticipate. Turning to the labor market, I expect unemployment to remain painfully high for years, edging down to 9½ percent by the end of this year and 8¼ percent by the end of 2011.  However, if last year is any guide, then this forecast is especially uncertain because the big surprise in 2009 was the steep rise in the unemployment rate.  For example, the median FOMC projection for last January was a very accurate guide to real GDP growth and core and overall inflation in 2009.  For these three variables, our median forecast error was inside the one standard-error bands that we published based on past projection errors.  The fly in the ointment was the median FOMC forecast for the 2009 unemployment rate, which was off by 1½ percentage points, an error of three standard deviations.  A three-sigma annual forecast error should come along about once every 400 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen's views on the outlook for the economy are different from the views of most private-sector forecasters. She is more optimistic about GDP growth, while most private-sector forecasters predict weaker growth. Additionally, she acknowledges that her forecast for the unemployment rate is uncertain and could be different from what actually occurs.


Passage number 261.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  So it won’t happen again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that the speaker wants to avoid a repetition of a certain event or situation in the future.


Passage number 262.
  [Laughter] MS. YELLEN.  Clearly, something went seriously off track.  What went off track last year was Okun’s law, the usually reliable empirical relationship between output and the unemployment rate that underlies most macroeconomic forecasts.  Based on actual real GDP growth in 2009, Okun’s law would have predicted an unemployment rate of just over 8 percent by the end of last year, much lower than the 10 percent we got. So how can Okun’s law be reconciled with the output and unemployment data for 2009.  First, the NAIRU may have risen, as President Plosser suggested, so that the currently reported unemployment rate is essentially too high.  This is also the Greenbook’s solution to the puzzle.  The Greenbook assumes that extended unemployment benefits are temporarily boosting the effective NAIRU to 6¼ percent, and certainly a higher NAIRU could be part of the story.  But my staff continues to find little underlying evidence that the NAIRU has jumped up enough to close the gap.  For example, exit rates from long-duration unemployment have behaved much as they typically do over the business cycle.  The same is true for other labor variables, such as labor force participation and hours per worker.  Indeed, the fact that labor force participation was not elevated last year is hard to square with the notion that large numbers of people are staying in the labor force just to get extended unemployment benefits. Instead, the lion’s share of the deviation from Okun’s law in 2009 reflects a surge in labor productivity.  Higher productivity allowed output to stay flat last year while employment dropped and the unemployment rate shot well up past our forecasts.  It is always difficult to discern to what extent movements in productivity over a single year are temporary or permanent.  However, some evidence supports the view that a significant portion of this jump in productivity growth may be permanent.  If so, then potential output last year grew much faster than typically estimated as, for example, in the Greenbook and the chart that Dan distributed to us. Faster growth in potential last year and the resulting wider output gap would help reconcile Okun’s law with the data.  This resolution of the puzzle is hard to square with historical evidence suggesting that financial crises commonly lower the equilibrium level of output because adverse shocks to financial intermediation require significant real adjustments in the economy that can lower the equilibrium level of output.  However, the hypothesis that the breakdown of Okun’s law reflects a higher level of potential and a wider output gap is consistent with labor and productivity data.  I also consider it consistent with the anecdotal reports from my contacts.  They uniformly think that the productivity gains they have put in place are permanent and not the result of an unsustainable spurt of effort.  Furthermore, although the low-hanging fruit of productivity improvements seems to have been picked, there is widespread optimism for further gains, albeit at a slower pace.  Indeed, with opportunities for increasing output through productivity gains going forward, many businesses remain very cautious about hiring. Finally, let me note that my resolution of the Okun’s law puzzle has implications for my inflation forecast.  The breakdown in Okun’s law reflects the difference between the labor-side and the product-side measures of economic slack, with the labor measures suggesting more slack than the output measures.  Essentially, I see a rise in the effective level of potential output as at least as important a factor in reconciling Okun’s law as a rise in the effective NAIRU.  This puts the effective amount of slack in the economy higher than in the Greenbook and may argue for lower inflation going forward.  Indeed, my forecast for core inflation runs a bit below the Greenbook over the next few years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various factors that could explain the deviation from Okun's law and is presenting evidence and reasoning to support their viewpoint.


Passage number 263.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement only expresses gratitude towards President Hoenig.


Passage number 264.
   MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our region of the country continues to show modest, steady improvement across the areas.  To begin with, in terms of the investment outlooks, in energy, where we’ve seen some pretty nice recoveries, there is a return to some pretty vigorous investments in that area, in oil rig counts and so forth.  Agriculture also has shown improvement, and we’re seeing investments regain there.  Our manufacturing side, our manufacturing survey shows continued improvement in the most recent survey for this month.  There is an issue around other industries in terms of the ability to invest, but because of excess capacity, there is a tendency to wait and see, but I think they are in a position to begin to invest if their confidence continues to improve.  We have had a couple of instances, anecdotally, where one of our directors has had a desire to expand and has found the financing to be readily available.  Another has had one of their companies acquired, and the acquiring company’s financing to make that acquisition was fairly readily available.  So there is that note of improvement.  On the labor market, our layoffs are subsiding clearly, but the hiring is very modest, so one interpretation of that is we may be at that inflection point, I hope. Looking to the national economy, I am seeing, along the lines of the broad consensus here, 3¼ percent growth in 2010 and, beyond that, further improvements toward 4 percent, spurred in part by the stimulus and in part by monetary policy.  The inflation outlook under these conditions still is modest, and I see that in 2010 as well.  On balance, though, I see the story on the national economy as continuing to improve and continuing to show a strengthening outlook, and I think that is the critical element for us.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing a summary of various economic indicators in their region and expressing their optimism about the national economy. The information provided is consistent and there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 265.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you" and "President Pianalto" do not indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 266.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook has not changed significantly since our December meeting or since the last forecast submission in November.  My outlook for real GDP growth for the first half of 2010 has been consistently on the softer side of the forecast distribution, and currently my outlook for the entire year falls on the low side as well.  My outlook for growth is restrained relative to a typical business cycle recovery path for some of the reasons that many of us have discussed before—wealth losses, credit constraints, weak labor markets, and increased preferences for liquidity, just to name a few. However, I also have a notably more pessimistic assessment of capital spending this year than is shown in the Greenbook baseline, and so I would like to focus my comments on that sector.  Business executives appear to be unusually aggressive about restraining their capital spending this year.  According to the survey that the Board staff asked us to conduct, capital investment plans of the respondents in my District remain remarkably modest following last year’s steep contraction in capital spending.  In my conversations with CEOs of some very large companies, several important factors emerged.  These firms have plenty of cash, and they have little need to borrow, so credit constraints are not the issues for many of these large companies.  But with no top-line growth, holding down investment spending increases profits and adds flexibility.  Firms have been challenging themselves to see how much paring back they can do to generate cash.  One executive told me that he never thought that he would reduce capital spending below his depreciation charges, but last year his cap-ex was equal to one-half of his depreciation. Business executives also tell me that uncertainties over health care reform, cap and trade, and corporate tax policies are significant impediments in their capital spending decisions.  On the margins, these factors are pushing their plans for capital spending offshore, where the underlying longer-term growth dynamics favor investments relative to the United States.  Another element in the capital spending decision process is the underlying amount of excess labor capacity.  Many companies have reduced work hours and furloughed employees, and the CEO of one manufacturing company that has 70,000 employees worldwide told me that his entire workforce was required to take one week off per quarter.  Just eliminating that program adds 8 percent capacity to his workforce, and just yesterday this CEO announced that they have eliminated that program, so that is a positive sign.  Nonetheless, this CEO and the other CEOs that I talked to said that they are going to use overtime well before they take on any new positions.  Comments like these persuade me that labor markets and, hence, household spending will be quite moderate for a while.  It also seems to me that it is going to take longer than usual to get a sense of when the recovery is truly taking hold. Putting all of these pieces together, I continue to see weak growth in the current year, just 2½ percent over the entire 2010.  In my outlook, the recovery doesn’t really start to gain momentum until 2011, when I see GDP growth hitting roughly 4¼ percent.  As job losses moderate and many people remain out of the labor markets, I expect the unemployment rate to edge down to 9½ percent at the end of this year and to fall to just below 8 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011. Turning to inflation, the incoming data continue to confirm my outlook of slowing core inflation in the near term.  The Cleveland Fed’s median and trimmed mean analysis of the consumer price data consistently points to a further moderation of PCE core inflation to about  percent this year.  Despite the continued and substantial resource slack, renewed economic growth and anchored expectations pull up PCE core inflation in my outlook to 1.5 percent in 2011 and 1.7 percent in 2012.  That said, I am hearing some increasing reports about concerns about commodity-price increases.  Although the contacts who talk about these concerns say that the fundamentals don’t support sustained commodity-price increases, there is some concern emerging that in the current environment of rising federal deficits and accommodative monetary policy, inflation expectations could destabilize as a result of these commodity-price movements. So, overall, the risks to my outlook for economic growth and inflation remain balanced, and the uncertainty attached to my projections remains high.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their outlook and assessment on economic growth and inflation, giving reasons for their views but not engaging in a debate or disagreement with others.


Passage number 267.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude from the speaker towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 268.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply contains a statement of gratitude from the speaker.


Passage number 269.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage consists of a polite expression of gratitude from someone named Governor Kohn.


Passage number 270.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My forecast was similar to the Greenbook’s—a little weaker, but not much:  private demand and GDP gradually strengthens as financial conditions continue to improve, especially as banks rebuild capital and begin to compete more effectively for new business; as wealth turns around and confidence rebuilds; and as households and businesses, responding to the low cost of capital and rising confidence, increase spending on durables, houses, and capital equipment to keep stocks in better alignment with output, income, and wealth.  Economic growth exceeds potential, but not by much, and unemployment recedes slowly in my forecast.  Continued large slack keeps inflation subdued, well below my 2 percent objective for the next three years, on the assumptions that commodity prices rise in line with futures markets and that longer-term inflation expectations remain anchored. Like others, I noted that my forecast was pretty much unchanged from the one I made at the end of October, almost down to the decimal point, and I’m pretty sure that this is the first time in several years that has happened over a three-month period.  I think the encouraging aspect of this is that incoming data over the past three months have tended to confirm that an upswing in the economy is in train.  The rebound in consumption and in some business capital spending is persistent enough to suggest that the recovery can survive the end of the boost from the inventory cycle and the ebbing of fiscal stimulus, and confidence in the strength of private demand is reinforced by the net improvement in financial conditions over the past three months, which will support that spending. The less encouraging aspect of an unchanged forecast since late October is that the incoming information has also confirmed that the recovery is likely to be gradual rather than sharp, and consumption and investment are strengthening slowly compared with past recoveries from severe recessions.  Most recent data on the labor market for December and initial claims reports since then, have underlined continuing weakness and the prospects for very slow improvement, which we’ve discussed around the table.  By any measure, the economy is now operating with a substantial output gap, and that gap is likely to close very gradually. I think inflation data have also been largely in line with expectations.  I agree with President Plosser.  It’s very hard to sort out the underlying rate of inflation from all of these numbers, but I have been looking at core inflation as a better predictor of future inflation than headline inflation, and core does seem to be decelerating.  Both core CPI inflation and core PCE inflation increased more slowly in the second half of the year than in the first, despite the rise in energy prices that boosted headline inflation.  Both core measures are well below the 2 percent level for overall inflation and are likely to decelerate further under the highly competitive conditions in labor, beer, and other product markets.  [Laughter]  Moreover, with energy prices well off their highs of a few months ago—I think down what, $10 over the last three or four weeks.—headline inflation should fall back toward core.  It will be interesting to see what that does to inflation expectations.  Survey measures of longer-term expectations are stable to slightly lower, but market-based measures show some concerns about the possibility of higher inflation.  I agree with everyone else around the table:  We need to watch that very, very carefully. Like many others, I had uncertainty greater than usual.  Sorry, President Bullard, but I actually think there are reasons for that in the unusual situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of the author's own forecast and opinions.


Passage number 271.
 MR. BULLARD.  This time I mean it, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Bullard is expressing his sincerity or commitment to something, but there is no conflicting opinion or disagreement evident.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 272.
  [Laughter] MR. KOHN.  This time I mean it.  The severest recession since World War II and an unprecedented financial disruption, and I had the risks balanced around my central tendencies.  I must admit, as I was staring at the computer screen trying to decide whether growth would be 3.2 or 3.5 or inflation 1.3 or 1.4, it occurred to me that the risks and uncertainties were different and more profound than the stuff I usually concentrate on when making a forecast.  Now, maybe this is because I was doing this last Friday, and a lot of things were happening. I would include in that list of risks, first, the distinct possibility that the regulatory and legislative response to the crisis and the public anger and fear it engendered could undermine the rebound in the availability of credit from banks and, more generally, whether uncertainty about a broad range of policies and even a sense of hostility to businesses might not inhibit business investment.  For banks we are raising base levels of capital and liquidity, possibly adding surcharges for systemically important institutions, taxing borrowing, and restricting business models.  Now, each of these may be desirable to some extent when taken alone, but how they will add up does worry me.  We are raising the cost of bank lending to households and businesses.  It was too low before.  Risk premiums were too low, but I think we run a risk of going too far in the other direction. Second, I see a number of question marks overseas with potentially significant effects.  This overlaps to some extent with the Vice Chairman’s comments.  Greece’s situation is a test of whether the institutions of the European Community and the monetary union are strong enough and coherent enough to craft a solution that preserves discipline but can be accepted by the Greek population.  And Greece’s problems will put additional pressure for fiscal consolidation on other European countries with fiscal problems.  China’s economic growth has been an important factor supporting the global recovery, but that growth was built on a 30 percent increase in bank lending last year, much of it for questionable local government and state-owned enterprise investments, a lot of those investments in property markets driving up the prices of property.  I think we have seen this movie before—lending supporting property prices, and it had kind of a bad ending.  Whether the government can walk the tightrope of sounder lending and less upward pressure on asset and consumer prices while sustaining robust growth is in my mind still an open question.  It could slip off either side of that tightrope, even in what is still a semi-command-and-control economy, and the Chinese government must deal with the issues that Bill was talking about in the current conjuncture, while needing to address the longer-run structural problems of inadequate domestic demand. Third, commodity prices and their implications were on my list of concerns.  China’s move toward restraint has the important side effect of taking some pressure off commodity prices.  Oil prices have fallen $10 since early January, and thus have made me more confident in adopting the futures market path of slow increases in commodity prices.  Still, as I think the conversation with Nathan earlier suggested, we don’t really understand what’s driving these commodity prices.  A further spike is a risk with a number of adverse consequences.  Obviously it could raise inflation expectations, which would pressure central banks to withdraw stimulus before output was on a path that promised the eventual closure of gaps.  Just the mere rise in the commodity and petroleum prices reduces real income and spending power. So though the incoming data have tended to confirm that a recovery is under way and inflation is likely to be subdued, Mr. Chairman, I found plenty to worry about when I was putting my forecast together.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, expresses concerns about the risks and uncertainties in the economy, particularly regarding the regulatory and legislative response to the financial crisis, potential effects of the Greek situation and other European countries' fiscal problems, and the sustainability of China's economic growth. These concerns suggest a disagreement with the notion that the economy is recovering and inflation is likely to be subdued.


Passage number 273.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In evaluating your level of uncertainty, you have a long experience to draw on.  [Laughter]  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 274.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to try to answer two questions in my discussion today.  One is a familiar one:  What is the most significant development since we last met.  And the second is, Who knew free money would be so popular.  [Laughter] So I stared at my screen and tried to answer that first question on the most significant development since we last met, and Don, as usual, stole my homework assignment.  The most significant development is Washington.  The most significant development is the path and variance around policy in the intermeeting period with, I think, very real consequences for the real economy.  The negative feedback loop afflicts the political economy much as it afflicts the real economy.  It is said in Washington that even-numbered years, of which we are now early in one, bring strange things, and 2010 is proving to be persuasive evidence for that old maxim.  I’m not making a statement principally about policy direction.  I’m making a statement here principally about policy variance.  I’m also not making a statement about gridlock, which tends not to be terribly bad news generally for real economies or financial markets.  But I am talking about a variance in policies that can be extremely harmful. I would underscore the reason for concern here with two emphases.  One, particularly now when the economy is at this transitional point, if the Greenbook forecast is right and the baton is passed ably from the public sector to the private sector, we shouldn’t be surprised that this is a time of Washington policy variance.  But I think it’s maybe more important than ever.  The second reason for heightened concern is that Washington has positioned itself so centrally in this narrative that the heightened policy variance is bound to retard the natural recovery in growth and employment even more than usual.  We say around this table often that policy needs to be anchored, and the reaction function of policymakers needs to be clearly understood for policy to be effective.  Well, that’s not unique to monetary policy, and there are real implications of this kind of variance for regulatory policy, fiscal policy, and trade policy.  And in that I would reference what Governor Kohn said about the state of policies everywhere else around the world.  All of this, I think, makes the job ahead for us in predicting the turn in the real economy and the inflation prospects very significant.  So let me give a couple of examples.   First, regulatory policy, which again Don referenced.  Without assigning particular merit to policy proposals, the changing goalposts of what is being billed as comprehensive, fundamental regulatory reform strike me as not helpful to the financial architecture.  Financial firms, perhaps more than other sectors, need policy to be anchored.  This may be even more important than that it’s optimally decided.  And if the credit channel to small businesses, which is going to be so important for job creation, is having a harder time taking advantage of highly accommodative policies and putting them into action, we run grave risks of delaying the onset of meaningful job growth in the recovery.  Over the medium term this could lead to a higher NAIRU if uncertainty drives more-persistent structural unemployment, but I think in the short term it could really have grave risks for the transition happening in the real economy. Second, let me turn to fiscal policy and the questions of variance.  Market participants appear to be every bit reevaluating sovereign risks across a number of countries.  The recognition of large off-balance-sheet, contingent liabilities could make ratios of official debt to GDP move higher virtually overnight.  Now, recognizing that this is arithmetic, these off-balance-sheet liabilities—whether you’re thinking in the United States of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac or you’re thinking of the European Union of what would happen if Greece weren’t to do the right things—markets could come to view sovereign risks differently.  I suspect that sovereign debt markets are likely to be subjected to higher volatility until policy questions are answered, and the potential for nonlinear outcomes is real.  As I have said before, if Dubai is about Dubai, and Greece is about Greece, and Fannie and Freddie are about Fannie and Freddie, then we have nothing to worry about. Okay.  The second question—Who knew that free money would be so popular.  I’ll talk about two things:  financial markets and inflation.  If you think broadly about the intermeeting period—and maybe I would have to except the last week or two, when financial market prices seem to have leveled out and fallen and seem to have become a little more discriminating, which is generally a good thing—it still looks as though high-yield and leveraged-loan spreads and credit spreads generally continue to trend lower.  Volatility measures are up since we last met, so that if you look at the VIX and at some measures of volatility in the credit markets, I think there is further upside risk in the volatility of asset prices separate and apart from what their actual levels ought to be, which has caused me to further mark down my estimates of GDP and employment growth in the forecast period. What about inflation prospects.  I think I share what I have heard to be a bit of an emerging and concerning consensus.  That is, while I would note personally that the dollar sank relative to the euro, dollar stability broadly against foreign currencies is an encouraging sign and should help mitigate some of the trends on import prices, but it’s hard for me to ignore the move in nonfuel commodity prices, and it bears watching much as others have said.  The trend of some of these inflation measures, particularly in a constellation of policy uncertainty around fiscal policy here and everywhere around the world and the misperception that somehow this policy uncertainty will affect the Federal Reserve, which is something that I think all of us will fight vigorously against, does raise the question about inflation expectations and puts a special burden on all of us.  If policy rates were to stay as accommodative as the Greenbook suggests, given these policy uncertainties, I would be surprised if inflation and inflation expectations stayed at levels consistent with price stability in the forecast period.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

There is contention and disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Warsh, expresses concern about policy variance and its negative effects on the economy. He disagrees with the changing goalposts of regulatory policy and the potential for higher volatility in sovereign debt markets. He also expresses concern about inflation prospects and the need to mitigate inflation expectations.


Passage number 275.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 276.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 277.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I realized as all of you were speaking this morning that, after a year here, I’ve come to regard the FOMC as a bit like a big extended family in which each member finds a niche at its periodic gatherings.  So, for example, as you just heard, Governor Duke frequently provides extensive insight into the state of the banking sector.  President Yellen has found a role in giving us careful and illuminating expositions of important analytic issues.  My role, on the other hand, it appears, is to create metaphors.  [Laughter]  So here we go. The data we have seen since our last meeting suggest that the basic story line in the economy hasn’t changed.  Expectations of recovery have taken firmer hold, and forecasts for 2010 of modestly above-trend growth with little prospect of unwanted inflation seem on track.  But if the basic story line hasn’t changed, neither have the subplots.  First, December’s unexpected drop in nonfarm payrolls may, as some have suggested, reflect some weather-related and administrative anomalies, but it may also support the kind of anecdotal reports to which President Evans was alluding of extraordinary cautiousness in hiring by many employers that will likely persist for some undetermined length of time.  And I think this is also supported by concerns about financial encumbrances to new business creation.  Second, continuing declines in bank lending remind us that CRE problems and impaired credit availability for consumers, nonconforming residential mortgages, and smaller businesses will continue to hinder recovery.  Third, significant imponderables remain on the economic horizon, including the impact of cessation of RMBS purchases and later this year of waning stimulus effects.  Finally, the atypical etiology of the recently ended recession and of monetary and fiscal policy responses to it counsel particular alertness on our part for unanticipated and potentially rapidly developing trends, particularly in financial markets. Not only has there been little or no change since our last meeting, I also would expect the narrative to be pretty consistent through at least the next couple of meetings.  After that, I anticipate that the effect of some of the just-noted imponderables will begin to exert considerable influence on economic performance, for better or for worse and in a way that I now find difficult to predict.  I also harbor an uneasy suspicion that both the run-up to the midterm elections, as Kevin was describing, and some potentially unpleasant geopolitical developments may introduce additional uncertainty into economic and financial markets, further clouding prospects for the latter part of the year. In sum, despite reasonably clear prospects for moderately above-trend growth for the first half of calendar 2010, my uncertainty about the third and fourth quarters and beyond has not declined nearly as much from the middle of last year as I might have anticipated.  The economic narrative is, thus, less like a Hemingway tale, moving crisply toward its conclusion, and more like a serialized Dickens novel, sprawling and complex and in which you know there are going to be surprising developments in later installments, but you’ll still be surprised when they occur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 278.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you all.  Let’s take a coffee break for about 20 minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement made by the speaker to suggest that the audience should take a break for a specific period of time. It does not express any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 279.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence.  Dave Stockton, I think you have some data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that they are about to resume and that Dave Stockton has some data. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 280.
  MR. STOCKTON.5  We do.  We handed it out.  You should have at your place a table and charts of the single-family home sales for December that were released this morning.  As you can see, total sales were 342,000.  That was weaker than we had expected.  We had been thinking around 360,000.  But with the upward revisions to October and November, actually the quarterly average was just about exactly what we had been anticipating.  That said, stepping back from this one release and thinking about the configuration of the home sales and production data that we have seen, I think that both in trajectory and in overall tenor we are looking at a weaker housing market than we had thought and that the most recent data probably give some reflection of Governor Duke’s fears and President Lacker’s hopes that there may be more downside risk than upside risk to our housing forecast.  [Laughter]  That’s all I have to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting data and expressing their own analysis and interpretation of the data. The presence of laughter at the end indicates a light-hearted tone, rather than disagreement.


Passage number 281.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there any questions for Bill.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement followed by a question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 282.
 MR. WARSH.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, one question on paragraph 2, the inflation paragraph.  What do you think is the difference in the language that is proposed in alternative B, “inflation is likely to be subdued,” versus the language I think we used for a while “expects,” “inflation is expected to be subdued”.  Is that supposed to be revealing a little less certainty, or is that thought to be consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the following passage. The question posed by Mr. Warsh suggests that there is a difference in opinion or perspective regarding the language proposed for alternative B and its implications for certainty.


Passage number 283.
 MR. ENGLISH.  I think it was intended to pick up the thought that the headline inflation numbers had been a little higher because of higher energy prices.  In December we said “expects that inflation will remain subdued.”  So we are taking out the “remain” thought and saying that inflation is likely to be subdued, in some sense making it a little more forward looking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. English is explaining a change in language and clarifying the intention behind it. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 284.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about any contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 285.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a title or position ("President Plosser") and does not provide any information or statements that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 286.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess I get to go first and throw myself to the bears here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 287.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Hold on.  Do you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple query asking if the person has a question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 288.
 MR. PLOSSER.  No, no, no.  I thought we were starting the go-round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The word "No" indicates disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 289.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not quite yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "Not quite yet" does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It suggests a delay or the need for more time before something is ready or accomplished.


Passage number 290.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Oh, I am sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that indicates contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of apology.


Passage number 291.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody else have a question.  Okay.  If not, now you get to start.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply involves asking if anyone has a question and then stating that if there are no questions, they can begin.


Passage number 292.
  [Laughter] MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic recovery, I believe, is gaining some momentum.  I think the Committee has to prepare itself and the public for the possibility that we will need to begin to reduce the size of our balance sheet and may need to commence this activity sooner than suggested by the Greenbook.  I would like to see us begin to modify our language in a way that will help rather than hinder our ability to take the proper actions at the proper time. In terms of this policy meeting, I can support alternative B.  In particular, I don’t see how at this juncture we can do anything but follow through on our announced purchases.  However, I do think we could consider speeding them up so that we complete them prior to March 31 and not necessarily wait until the end of the quarter.  Paragraph 1 of alternative B is fine with me.  I have no objections to that. In paragraph 3, I favor the alternative variant that substitutes the word “holdings” for “purchases” because I think, again, this is one of those small steps toward signaling our intention to exit.  I would also favor changing our forward guidance from “extended period” to “some time” for the same reason.  I believe it’s important that we extract ourselves from housing finance and adopt an operating mechanism to protect our independence and raise our ability to say “no” to efforts in the political process to use our balance sheet for fiscal policy.  I like the language generally in paragraph 4, which reiterates that many of the special facilities will be closed on February 1.  This is a significant step toward normalization of policy, and I favor that. Now, as I have suggested in several earlier meetings, I have tended to favor alternative C’s inflation paragraph because it emphasizes the dependence of inflation on the stability of long-term expectations and on the policy adjustments that will be taken to keep inflation consistent with price stability.  I very much like the idea that it is monetary policy actions and not structural features of the economy that will influence inflation over the longer run.  Given the concern that a number of people have expressed around this table today about the potential risk for increased medium- to longer-term inflation, keeping those expectations anchored is very important, and this change in language would help signal to the markets and to the public our commitment to deliver on price stability and may put at rest, or at least help put to rest, some of those fears about outbreaks of inflation. On Bill’s reference to energy prices with regard to paragraph 2, I am comfortable with deleting the reference to energy prices in part because I see singling out one set of relative prices for mention and not others can be problematic over time.  So I would be comfortable just eliminating that. Finally, I just want to thank the staff again yesterday for their outstanding work on exit strategies.  I thought yesterday’s discussion was extraordinarily fruitful and interesting.  I learned a lot, and I hope we can continue those kinds of discussion going forward.  I think we must continue to address the issue and evaluate how our various tools fit together, and I hope we will soon come to a decision about the type of implementation framework, floor versus corridor, and the policy rate, funds rate, another market rate, or administered rate like the IOER rate, or where we are ultimately headed in that regard.  I think doing so will help us think more carefully about the nature of and the way we do our exit strategy, and it will help us address the size and shape of adjusting our balance sheet as we go forward if we know where we want to end up. As I said yesterday, my own preference is that we aim for implementing policy with a corridor system, where the market rate such as the funds rate is our operating target, and that we have a much smaller balance sheet that contains Treasuries only and is weighted toward short-term Treasuries at that.  I think this will give us the ability to exercise our independent control of our balance sheet and enhance our independence with respect to operating and setting monetary policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is expressing his support for alternative B and the changes in language proposed in the various paragraphs. He also expresses his preference for a corridor system and a smaller balance sheet containing only Treasuries.


Passage number 293.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude and acknowledges President Rosengren.


Passage number 294.
   MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also support alternative B.  With unemployment likely to remain stubbornly high in the United States and with many of our trading partners also experiencing weak labor markets, the risk of political or economic misjudgments that could sap the strength from the current recovery remains high.  This makes it particularly important that our exit strategy does not inadvertently cause markets to tighten too soon in anticipation of our actions, particularly as we are likely to miss both elements of our dual mandate by a sizable margin throughout this year. In terms of language, I strongly prefer the language in paragraph 3 that the Committee will continue to evaluate its purchases rather than its holdings of securities, for two reasons.  First, we have not completed our purchases, and I think talking about holdings while we are still continuing purchases through the end of March would be confusing.  So I think we should complete the purchase program before we start talking about holdings.  Second, I think sales should be the last thing that we do, as I said yesterday, so I would be doing many things before I would be thinking about sales.  That would include removing the “extended period” language, draining reserves, increasing the interest rate on excess reserves before we start asset sales.  I think we are a long way away from signaling to the market that we might be doing asset sales.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a statement of the speaker's support for alternative B and their preference for certain language and actions related to the Federal Reserve's exit strategy.


Passage number 295.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. It is a simple expression of gratitude towards President Yellen.


Passage number 296.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  As I’ve said in the past, I’d be very surprised if we need to start tightening policy this year.  So “extended period” still seems appropriate to me.  The economy is clearly operating far below maximum sustainable employment, and inflation is undesirably low.  The Bluebook policy simulation shows that it will be well into 2011 before policy would optimally be tightened. On the issue in alternative B of whether to refer to securities holdings or purchases, my strong preference, too, is for purchases.  A switch to holdings now, while we are still purchasing securities, would certainly suggest that we are contemplating sales, and I consider that quite premature.  As I indicated yesterday, I could eventually envision a program of gradual sales, but that would occur once the recovery is well established and we are finally ready to start tightening policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Yellen expresses her preference for alternative B and explains her reasoning behind it, but there is no opposition or contradiction presented.


Passage number 297.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota without any conflicting statements.


Passage number 298.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of President Fisher do not indicate any conflicting or differing opinions.


Passage number 299.
 MR. FISHER.  Just a general comment, Mr. Chairman, and then a comment on the alternatives.  I noted that in your summary you did point out that the dynamics can work in the upside direction as well, and I just want to make a simple comment.  I want to be very careful.  I do think we need to be appropriately patient but not lulled into inertia in terms of our concerns about the downside.  I sense that we are not at risk of doing so, but I do sense that there is some inertia at the table, and it concerns me. That said, while I can see an argument for alternative C, especially against the extensive disposition given by Narayana on price impact in a more robust market than in a market that was bust when we bought these things, I am in favor of alternative B.  I would make some suggested changes.  First of all, and following up on both Governor Duke and Bill English’s excellent summary at the beginning, I don’t think in paragraph 1 it is correct to say, well, “bank lending continues to contract.”  I think it is better to say “remains tight.”  My alternative B says “while bank lending continues to contract.”  Don, is that what you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concerns but also stating their support for a particular alternative.


Passage number 300.
 MR. KOHN.  I didn’t hear what you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement indicating that the speaker did not hear what was said.


Passage number 301.
 MR. FISHER.  I would suggest instead of “continues to contract” we say “remains tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is offering a suggestion for alternative wording.


Passage number 302.
”  It is not contracting from what I understand, and that was a suggestion made by — CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it is contracting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding of a situation without offering any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 303.
 MR. FISHER.  Am I reading the wrong copy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple question asking if the speaker is reading the wrong copy.


Passage number 304.
 MR. TARULLO.  You have the right words, but the wrong data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement of correction or clarification.


Passage number 305.
  [Laughter] MR. FISHER.  The recent loan survey indicates to me that it is not necessarily continuing to contract, but it does remain tight.  But if I am wrong, I will withdraw the brilliant suggestion I just made. With regard to energy prices, I agree with President Plosser and the suggestion made by Bill [English] that I do not think it is necessary to have that in there.  First of all, they may be temporary, and second, it excludes other prices.  I agree with both President Plosser and Narayana on the use of the word “holdings.”  I take to the suggestion in paragraph 4 that we consider mentioning that we expect to offer $25 billion in twenty-eight-day credit at the final auction on March 8. I want to come back to one point that I’ve raised before.  We had some discussion about it last time, and actually in the last meeting President Rosengren made the excellent point that we consider the treatment of the spread on primary credit and the use of word “extended period.”  We have since had much more discussion about that.  We have agreed or at least some of us suggested yesterday that you might use your testimony on February 10, your subsequent testimony, and our investigation of our own boards to move toward normalizing the primary credit spread.  But still, like a broken record, I am uncomfortable with the words “extended period,” and I would like to make a suggestion, which is that we change that sentence after the phrase “stable inflation expectations” to read as follows: “are likely to continue to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate.”  Period.  It may be just editorializing, but as I said in the last meeting, I am a broken record on that subject, and I want to continue my record of being a broken record on that subject.  [Laughter]  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with President Plosser and Narayana on certain points and also makes a suggestion for a change in wording, but does not argue or express disagreement with anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 306.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, I did not quite understand what you said about the TAF auction.  Did you like the language here, or did you want the change that Bill made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply expresses confusion and seeks clarification. There is no clear disagreement or contention evident in the given statement.


Passage number 307.
 MR. FISHER.  I thought Bill’s comment was a possible suggestion, that we would say $25 billion in twenty-eight-day credit on the final auction on March 8.  Is that correct, Bill, as one alternative.  I would be in favor of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fisher is simply clarifying Bill's comment and expressing his agreement with the suggested alternative.


Passage number 308.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states "Okay. Governor Kohn," without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 309.
  MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  I think, not surprisingly, it meets your criterion of a smooth and predictable move toward normalization here.  I think our watchwords at this meeting ought to be “no surprises” unless, given all the other things that are going on—fiscal policy, regulatory, et cetera—there is a really good reason to surprise and unless the current language does not describe what we are planning on doing.  Then we need to change it.  But I think there ought to be a pretty high hurdle at this point.  I am satisfied with the path we’re on, and therefore, I would pretty much retain the language—certainly the “extended period” language, especially when we are going to adjust the discount rate spread.  I think that, if we changed the “extended period” language and then did that, I don’t care how many paragraphs you had in your testimony, [laughter] we would create an expectation that the discount rate was the first step.  So I think it is absolutely essential that we retain “extended period” if we are going to change the discount rate.  And like some others around the table, I see both output and inflation as likely to remain below our objectives for quite some time, an extended period and then some, perhaps for a number of years. I think what we have heard at the meeting is that there is more confidence that the economy is growing and that growth could well be at least somewhat above potential.  But we are starting from a very low level of production by almost any measure, and we can adjust the NAIRU a lot and still have a very substantial output gap.  We need a lot of growth in order to do that.  We are not on an optimal path for monetary policy.  I think that adjusting up from what is already a sub-optimal path at this point would be problematic. I agree with the concern about the movement of inflation expectations.  I share that concern.  I am hopeful that as headline CPI inflation moves down toward core inflation (I think it will with petroleum prices having dropped); as you, Mr. Chairman, become more explicit in your testimony about our exit strategy; and as we do more testing of tools and people become more confident that we are thinking and working on our exit strategies, it will help on the inflation expectations side.  So I very strongly want to retain “extended period” this time. On the purchases–holdings question, I am strongly in favor of purchases.  At some point we might want to move to holdings and hold out the possibility that the amount will decline.  I mean we’re talking about redemptions.  So at that point, “holdings,” if it is properly explained and foreshadowed by the Chairman, might work.  But I think it’s way premature to move at this time.  We are still purchasing.  The way hasn’t been cleared to change the language.  I think changing from purchases to holdings would allow the possibility of sales, and doing it at this point would be disruptive and confusing. We do need to move back to an all-Treasury portfolio, but I would prefer to do it in a way that didn’t disrupt the economy and impede our ability to hit our objectives—price stability and maximum employment.  On “energy prices,” I would delete those words.  I think that’s right.  On the TAF, I have a slight preference for retaining the current language because it retains a little optionality.  We’re winding down a lot of things.  A lot is changing in our liquidity facilities.  I prefer to see what happens in March, but I don’t feel strongly about that point.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinions and preferences, but does not disagree with anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 310.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 311.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will make just a few brief comments.  I support alternative B with certain changes.  One caveat would be this holdings issue.  I would support substituting “holdings” for “purchases.”  I think it is a more accurate description of where we are in the cycle here.  We are almost done with our purchases, and to have the statement say that we are continuing to evaluate our purchases makes it sound as though maybe we would extend our purchases further, or something like that, which I don’t think reflects the intention of the Committee here.  We do intend to end this program, and we do intend to then evaluate our holdings.  So I think that that would be a better way to go. As I have in previous meetings, I support paragraph 2 from alternative C, as President Plosser did, which gives more-direct control over medium-term inflation as a result of what the Committee does as opposed to external factors, and that is why I like that type of statement better. In the fourth paragraph, on the question of the TAF, I would support including the language “twenty-eight-day credit at the final auction on March 8,” and delete the rest of the sentence, because that also seems to reflect the sentiment of the Committee.  And that would tie up our liquidity programs all more or less at the same time, which I think is helpful to us.  We are saying that financial conditions have improved markedly and therefore we don’t need the special programs that we had before, although of course we stand prepared, if turmoil should return, to implement those programs again in the future. Yesterday’s discussion suggested consensus on returning to an all-Treasuries balance sheet at some point.  I think there are definitely issues around the table about how fast and when to start on that project.  There was a lot of discussion also about asset sales at some point to help with this process, and I garnered a sense from many members—and I think—that redemptions alone are just going to be too slow.  It is going to leave too many MBS on our balance sheet for too long a period.  So I think we should do more in future statements to reflect the outcome of that discussion, and that is something we should work on at the next meeting and going forward, because that needs to be communicated accurately to financial markets. I also think there is more state-contingency in our plans around the table than what is perceived in financial markets, and I think we could do more to communicate that as well.  I do think that we could achieve something closer to optimum monetary policy by adjusting our balance sheet program in response to economic developments.  Some people expressed the concern that we would be adjusting all the time in response to maybe what some would think of as small developments with respect to the economy.  But when it’s interest rate policy, we make a judgment at every meeting about what direction we want to go.  And we do try to give guidance to the markets about our future direction with respect to interest rate policy.  I see no reason that we can’t do something similar with balance sheet policy.  We have a baseline in place.  We project out a baseline.  We communicate that to markets, but we adjust it going forward, which I think is what actually most people have in mind, except that most people seem to want to have a high bar with respect to any adjustments or any changes. For you nerds here, I am not quite sure why our optimal balance sheet policy is analogous to an sS-type inventory control policy.  I mean, why not adjust small amounts.  We do small word changes and so on at each meeting.  I don’t see why policy couldn’t be tweaked, stretched out, moved up, faster purchases or faster sales, depending on the situation.  Sticking to a mechanistic approach to balance sheet adjustment is okay, but I also think that it puts a lot of pressure on the expected date of the return to traditional interest rate targeting, so the main way that we would have impact on policy over the next year or year and a half is that we would start talking about that developments were positive in the intermeeting period and, therefore, probabilistically speaking, we would be moving up the date of the return to traditional interest rate targeting.  Or if the data were bad, then, probabilistically speaking, we would be moving back the date of the first move. I am not quite sure what impact that really has, and I think that it is not that clear a way to run policy during the period over the next eighteen months or so before whenever we do get to the date when we want to raise rates.  That, in my view, is not the best way to conduct policy.  I don’t think it’s particularly clear.  And I think going the mechanistic route undermines our claim that quantitative easing has been effective.  If it has been effective, then it should also be effective as a tool going forward, and it’s not clear to me why the Committee wants to forgo the use of that tool in this particular circumstance.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement and proposes changes to the statement. They argue that the word "purchases" should be replaced with "holdings" to accurately reflect the intention of the Committee to end the program. They also suggest including language about the TAF and discussing more about the Committee's plans for adjusting the balance sheet program in response to economic developments.


Passage number 312.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite acknowledgement and the name of a person.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Part of the consensus that I have heard here today is that economic and financial conditions have improved steadily in recent months and that this is obviously due in part to some very stimulative monetary policy.  Although the convictions vary around this table, we are all projecting improved economic growth.  And, yes, unemployment is too high.  Part of that is structural.  And if we wait until it is low enough to satisfy everyone, we will delay actions that I think are necessary.  In my view, President Bullard, uncertainty is always above average in a bust and always below average in a boom.  [Laughter]  That is the problem.  So I think we need to think about that, because in this period, uncertainty impedes actions that I think are necessary.  We have had language of reassurance regarding low rates for nearly a year, even though circumstances are considerably different than they were a year ago.  My point is that we need to turn more deliberately to more-aggressive thinking about our long-run issues. There are three risks that I am concerned about.  The first, and perhaps most important, is a commitment to near-zero rates for an extended period.  It lays the new foundations as the economy recovers for future financial imbalances, and I think this is where we are in danger.  In my experience, artificially low rates for an extended period invite resource misallocations.  No matter the upside data, we will not reverse policy significantly or quickly.  It’s just our experience.  As this occurs, and we use this “extended period” language, we have handcuffed ourselves for any action for at least six to nine months it would seem.  Maybe not.   Another risk is that we are seeing and will experience significant borrowing needs of the federal government.  This will, as our economy continues to improve, put upward pressure on real rates, and therefore we are in this handcuffed position. Third, as noted in the Bluebook, the combination of near-zero interest rates with the size of our balance sheet will cause long-term inflation expectations to systematically, over time, become less well anchored, I guess I’ll say.  Thus, we need to change the forward guidance and cease our commitment to “extended period” language.  We should allow ourselves the flexibility to begin to raise rates modestly, not just let liquidity facilities rescind as the economy improves, assuming that it does continue to improve, and, if it doesn’t, then we don’t move.  The Bluebook recognizes part of this in terms of growth protection and the fact that we could have and should have higher rates.  And I would point out that an effort to move the fed funds rate to ½ or  percent is, if anything, accommodative.  It’s not tight policy, and we should think about it, because the longer we wait, the more the resource allocation issues come up. Now, on the market, I certainly realize that changing the word “extended” may rattle the market, perhaps importantly, perhaps temporarily.  It depends on how we explain it and how we go forward.  But if we are going to remain handcuffed and we are going to remain committed to the markets’ expectations that they define, then we are going to have future problems—maybe not next year in this economy but in a future period as we have had in the past.  Therefore, I would very much prefer alternative C as we move forward.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a different viewpoint and suggesting alternative actions to the consensus that has been discussed. They disagree with the commitment to near-zero rates for an extended period and argue for changing the forward guidance and raising rates modestly.


Passage number 314.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone called President Lockhart.


Passage number 315.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the language and the policy prescription in alternative B.  I also support maintaining the wording “purchases of securities” in paragraph 3, as opposed to “holdings.”  Governor Kohn made the simple statement, “We are still purchasing,” and it seems to me that we change that language when we are no longer purchasing.  I will point out that I don’t believe the last sentence in that paragraph is a stand-alone sentence; I think it is connected to the previous sentence.  It says, “We are slowing the pace of purchases.”  So I see a consistency between those two.  I also think that shifting it would endanger the rate curve accommodation and the stability that supports the recovery.  And since the existing word “purchases” seems to be well understood by the market and conforms to my preferred policy path, I prefer leaving it in place.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses support for alternative B and maintaining the wording "purchases of securities" in paragraph 3. There is no apparent disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 316.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude from President Lacker.


Passage number 317.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, a word or two about timing.  As I said yesterday, I think it would be a mistake to take the centerpoint, the mean of our expected date of tightening, and plan a program around it.  I think we need to plan for the possibility of different dates at which we would want to raise our policy rate, either the IOER rate or the federal funds rate, whatever it is. As I alluded to yesterday, I think that, if we are honest about it, we will admit that, if we aggregated all our uncertainty about when that most appropriate date would be, there would be a substantial mass this year.  Just take for a minute the Greenbook and imagine that it literally comes true this year—now I know Mr. Stockton will tell me that has virtually no chance of happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement from Mr. Lacker giving his opinion on the timing of raising the policy rate.


Passage number 318.
 MR. STOCKTON.  Probability zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating the probability as zero, without any potential for disagreement or contention.


Passage number 319.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  Probability zero.  I was going to say virtually zero, but there is as much mass on either side of that, obviously. You know, at the fourth quarter this year, job growth would have picked up quite smartly in the second half of the year.  It would have been notably more rapid than at the beginning of the previous recovery.  Real consumer spending would have been solid, growing around 3 percent at the end of the year.  Granted, the level of unemployment would be relatively high then.  But by the same token, the current level of real interest rates would be relatively low then as well.  If you look at the Bluebook simulations, they seem to imply a substantial probability of raising rates by year-end. This is the staff’s model.  The staff, as we learned before, is a little more on the side of a later tightening than the Committee is.  If you look at the confidence intervals, they seem to imply a 15 percent chance that we will raise rates by June of this year, and my own personal ocular interpolation indicates about a 30 percent chance, perhaps more, that we will raise rates by the end of the year.  This is in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting different scenarios and probabilities without expressing any disagreement with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 320.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It must be true then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that a certain statement or fact must be true without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 321.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  It must be true then.  Probability zero.  And obviously markets put an even higher probability on it.  So I think we need to make a plan that would accommodate something that has a 30 percent chance of being something we want to do.  And that is why, as I said, I favor—and this is a point that President Bullard made—a fairly aggressive approach of reducing reserves this year. As I said yesterday also, I favor Treasuries-only because of the political entanglement issues but also because it’s likely to yield healthier growth to take out the tilt toward housing.  Then, if you think about any given path of reserve drain, using term deposit facilities or reverse RPs, as opposed to just asset sales, means continuing with more tilt toward housing than we otherwise would.  So for those reasons I am in the Treasury-only camp and the sales-only camp.  I agree with President Kocherlakota that the U.S. financial market should be able to absorb substantial sales.  In fact, I think they could absorb substantially more than he suggests. About divisibility, I think you’re right, Mr. Chairman, to suggest that we move slowly toward an exit, but there is a certain limit on the divisibility of our actions and statements.  A couple of meetings ago we debated two words about our purchase program.  We have now advanced to debating one word about our purchase program, but that’s the limit.  We can’t debate less than a word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 322.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Be careful what you wish for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Be careful what you wish for" simply serves as a warning or cautionary statement.


Passage number 323.
  [Laughter]   MR. LACKER.  But there is a tension with Governor Kohn’s suggestion that we should aspire to no surprises because you have to look at this a few meetings at a time.  I mean, no surprises now sort of builds up pressure for a big surprise, and maybe a lot of little surprises are better than no surprises for a while and a big surprise. I think we should recognize that, no matter how we decide to play our hand this year, there is a substantial chance of significant moves in financial-asset prices around the times of our announcements or communications, even if those occur via leaking something or other to Larry Meyer, which is not the right way to do this.  There is going to be a point at which we are viewed as saying “boo,” and when that happens, there is likely to be a market break.  I don’t think that’s avoidable.  We can minimize that, and we can try for clarity and try to avoid spurious movements in markets’ views, but I think we are just going to have to see that as something that is going to come with the territory.  I don’t think it needs to be something that dissuades us.  I don’t think we should be afraid of every possible discontinuity in market prices.   So as we go forward—let me just add one final word.  This term “market disruption,” I am just going to repeat, as dispassionately as I can, an observation I made before that the mere observation that prices have changed a lot and quantities have changed a lot, perhaps to zero, has by itself absolutely nothing to say about the advisability of policy intervention or any particular policy consideration.  It is something that I know everyone understands around here, but it is worth emphasizing because I don’t want to say that there could be market disruption if we do X.  To me, it says very little.  I will say as well is that I am quite open to a careful, reasoned account of how regulatory constraints and market imperfections interact to yield some policy implications that aren’t trivial.  So this isn’t an ideological point of view.  It is just that I would like to see, rather than waving the red flag of the phrase “market disruptions,” some concrete account of what’s going on in the market that makes some policy consideration of the potential for market disruption warranted.  And I know the staff is capable of such accounts.  So I favor B.  I like “holdings” because it seems like the smallest subdivision of movement of our message.  I like the final auction idea.  I, too, have a leaning toward alternative C, paragraph 2, but the phrase “monetary policy adjustments” in there in the current context is perhaps too strong a signal of raising rates imminently.  So I would back away from that and accept what is in alternative B, paragraph 2, right now.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is some discussion and differing viewpoints expressed in the passage, there is no clear contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges opposing viewpoints but does not engage in a direct argument or dispute.


Passage number 324.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply includes a polite expression of gratitude and a sign-off from President Evans.


Passage number 325.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, but I would like to mention that, in his commentary, Bill English used the phrase “Committee members might be dissatisfied with the outlook” to say that we might prefer alternative A.  I think that almost everybody is dissatisfied with the outlook, and this was voiced by Governor Kohn and President Bullard in commentary about how this obviously isn’t the optimal monetary policy path.  But I’ll pause on that and just say that I am not quite sure what optimal is.  It’s becoming increasingly apparent to me that we never had a chance to keep the unemployment rate below 10 percent.  The options that we considered in March—it would be nice to have a “lessons learned” session at the appropriate time—there wasn’t capacity in the MBS purchases apparently.  We are finding that out now, and so I am not quite sure how we would have tried to accomplish a better outcome.  But that said, this is what we have.   Today, I think the “extended period” language still seems correct.  When I think about this—and I will even say this when people push me—I think it means six months.  That is three to four meetings.  From the March meeting plus six months takes us to September 2010 at the earliest that there would be a tightening.  All else being equal, I just don’t see that.  So I am comfortable with “extended period.”  The TIPS five-year, five-year-forward uptick is noteworthy, but the fundamentals to me still strongly suggest that inflation is going to be below our own guidelines for the next three years.  So, bottom line, I think any tightening prior to September 2010 is unlikely, and it is probably much longer. Now, I do think that we need to map out our strategy for any reserve draining, the lead times, and that might be helpful for building a consensus, as I was talking about before, but it’s not necessary today.  On the holdings–purchases language, I have a preference for “purchases,” not to change things too much.  I don’t think we get that much out of it.  And on the TAF issue, it’s probably a coin flip.  I think the optionality argument wins.  I don’t think we have anything to prove with pre-commitment today, but it could go either way.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 326.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 327.
   MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  My outlook hasn’t changed very much since our last meeting, and the uncertainty around my outlook remains high.  So I support keeping policy unchanged at this time.  In paragraph 2, I agree that we should eliminate the reference to energy prices.  In paragraph 3, I don’t think we should change the language from “purchases” to “holdings” until we have completed our purchases.  I concur with the staff’s assessment that this change in language could lead market participants to anticipate sales even before we are ready to communicate our plans for unwinding our balance sheet.  And in paragraph 4, I have a slight preference for leaving the language on TAF as it is currently written.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. PIANALTO is expressing her support for alternative B and her agreement with certain language changes in the document.


Passage number 328.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Thank you. Governor Warsh" as it is a polite expression of gratitude towards someone.


Passage number 329.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Though to much derision, I recall someone in Washington saying that you go to war with the army you’ve got, not the army you want.  Maybe the same is true of statements.  [Laughter]  So that should maybe govern a bit of our thinking. After lecturing in a prior round about policy certainty, I think it would be ill-timed for us to drop in ideas on which we may well have begun a rigorous debate but not a debate that we have sufficiently socialized.  And that theory of the case I think will underscore some of my comments.  I think the point that Don was making earlier wasn’t that we are stuck with policy inertia but that we are stuck with policies that we have been teaching markets about and we should change our statement as facts change and our judgments change, but we shouldn’t be perceived to be wandering too far from what they have been led to believe.   On the inflation paragraph, I know people are pretty keen now to drop that first sentence, and I think with understandable reasons.  It might not be popular.  I would actually tend to broaden it and say, “Some commodity prices have risen in recent months,” and then end the paragraph just as we have it.  That is, an acknowledgement of facts that I believe have been the case—Nathan can correct me on that—but show that we’re not overly troubled by it.  It is just along the lines of what we were trying to say on energy prices, but the facts changed on us on recent trading days.  So that would be one suggestion, Mr. Chairman. On the purchases holdings question, I am as uncomfortable with our mortgage-backed securities holdings, purchases, whatever they’re called, as anybody in the room.  I think the minutes are likely to do a pretty good job of starting to socialize the debate that we had yesterday.  I think changing that word at a time like this is likely to be saying both too little and too much, and I would rather it come to the fore through minutes and through discussions that are held more publicly.  So I think “purchases,” because I think it’s factually accurate now, might be relevant, and at our next meeting we can get into whether “holdings” or “portfolio” might better reference what we are intending to do. With respect to the TAF, I think, again, that facts have continued to evolve in a way that we want, and so I like Bill English’s proposed suggestion, “The amounts provided under the TAF are in the process of winding down,” and then we go through a recitation of the dates.  I think that is accurate, true.  I would be fine saying, “And it is over” as a final statement, and that should be the last auction.  I don’t think that is so significant, but I would modify it, as Bill did, “It is in the process of winding down,” which I think is one notch higher than what we had said in the earlier statement. On the “extended period” language, sort of using the Rumsfeld reference, I would say changing that now would be nuclear.  It would be perceived to be not conventional arms, but a clear signal.  I suspect that conventional arms might be more useful, and the conventional arms are through the unwinding of these facilities and through a broader discussion outside the statement about various views on timing that we have.  I would be more troubled by “extended period” if markets’ expectations of policy looked more like the Japan curve than the curve for the United States, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of England.  So I don’t think markets have misinterpreted that to be a permanent period at all.  I think Charlie’s reference to six months seems backed up by Eurodollar futures and other market prices.  So I don’t think it seems overly constraining, and I would rather work toward that objective than remove those words at present. One final word, Mr. Chairman, on what has gotten some attention the last two days on the survey question from New York to economists and others about what they think we’re going to do.  I don’t think this is a problem with the authors of the survey, but I think what we really did was to give a bunch of people a take-home test, and it looks as though some of them passed and some of them failed.  What we are really interested in is, What do you think we should do.  What we are not as interested in, it strikes me, is, Based on the musings you have heard from people around the table, how well did you follow that.  [Laughter]  So I don’t think that the survey should be overly read, and I wouldn’t take that to mean that markets would be deeply disturbed if we went with the reverse tapering.  I think that survey might be proving a lot of things, but it is not antithetical to the strategy that we might be converging on slowly after this meeting.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of the speaker providing their own thoughts and suggestions, without indicating disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 330.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  On the facts, Nathan, the commodity prices, there has been a lot of movement, right.  There was a big run-up from October until December.  But I think recently a lot of that has been reversed.  It’s not very clear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage contains information about commodity prices and their movement, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 331.
 MR. SHEETS.  There has been some reversal.  Nevertheless, our broad nonfuel commodity-price index is up roughly 15 percent since early October, with most of those gains concentrated in metals and agricultural raw materials.  Food has been very bouncy.  We have had a huge harvest, and there is a lot of downward pressure on prices there; also, some idiosyncratic stuff with beverage prices.  But “some commodity prices” would be consistent with the facts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is providing information about commodity prices and acknowledging that there has been some reversal but overall, the broad nonfuel commodity-price index has increased.


Passage number 332.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not to push this too far, but those are not value weighted, or those are just sort of equally weighted indexes, right.  And energy in particular I think is sort of back where it was in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement and observation about the weights of indexes and the current state of energy.


Passage number 333.
 MR. SHEETS.  Right.  The index that I was making reference to—we take an IMF index, and we reweight it based on U.S. consumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and providing an explanation of the process they follow.


Passage number 334.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Thanks.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply consists of someone expressing gratitude towards Governor Duke without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 335.
  MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also am in favor of alternative B with the “purchases” rather than the “holdings” language.  Once we have completed our purchases, I do think it’s going to be important to communicate our intention regarding our holdings, but I think changing the language now would be confusing.  And I prefer the final auction alternative in paragraph 4.  I think that will make our explanation of changes to primary credit easier to explain.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses agreement and preference for certain options, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 336.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 337.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I intimated yesterday, I see our exit strategy as composed of three phases, at least two of which overlap.  One is ending the special liquidity programs that we have.  Two is preparing, and including good communication of, a strategy for tightening.  And the third is the tightening itself.  And I do think there’s an important distinction between two and three. I am bemused, I must say, at the certainty of some of the people around the table as to the robustness and pace of a recovery, particularly given a lot of the uncertainties that the Chairman noted in his summation.  My view, again, as expressed yesterday, is a concern that a signaling of tightening and a response in markets could unnecessarily choke off what is still an uneven and somewhat fragile recovery.  At the same time, my inclination, which has only been strengthened during this FOMC meeting, is that when the time for tightening comes, it is probably going to have to be multi-tool and it may well have to be pretty muscular in order to achieve the efficacy that we are going to be looking for. The public and markets are looking much more at changes in the language that we have than in how new language might be read on its own in isolation.  So that makes me, like a number of others of you, disinclined toward any changes that might appear to be signaling a moving from phase 2 to phase 3.  So I guess I’m not looking to indicate that we are gradually moving toward the exit if that means tightening.  And it’s for that reason that I endorsed Charlie Plosser’s idea yesterday of just ending the liquidity programs as quickly as we can.  Let’s say we have done it, and we have completed that phase. For all of these reasons, I favor alternative B, both the action and most of the language.  I favor inclusion of the language that Bill English suggested on the TAF because I think that it pursues Charlie’s goal of wrapping all of this up.  But I oppose the substitution of “holdings” for “purchases,” not because it’s not potentially a useful way to begin changing the language.  I think Narayana proposes it with the intention of ongoing neutrality.  I don’t think that’s the way it’s going to be read by markets right now.  They are just going to invest it with way more significance than most of us at least would intend.  And on the inflation language, I defer to you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, expresses disagreement with the certainty of some individuals about the pace and robustness of the recovery. He is also opposed to any changes that might signal a move from phase 2 to phase 3 of the exit strategy. Additionally, he disagrees with the substitution of "holdings" for "purchases" in the language, as he believes it will be read by markets with more significance than intended.


Passage number 338.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the term "Vice Chairman" do not indicate any form of disagreement.


Passage number 339.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  I think it is very premature to foreshadow tightening.  As Governor Kohn noted, growth is projected to be much weaker than what we would actually like, and the unemployment rate is much higher than we would like.  Slack is abundant.  Core inflation is low.  So I think that alternative B still seems very, very right.   In terms of market expectations, I have no problem contradicting market expectations, if that’s appropriate.  But in an environment where the economy is evolving close to our expectations, it would be sort of odd for us then to turn around and contradict market expectations.  That implies either that we are capricious or that our communications strategy up to now has been very, very poor, putting the markets in the wrong place.  I don’t think the markets are in the wrong place, so I’m not really sure why, given that things are evolving very close to what we expect, we would want to contradict those expectations at this time. In terms of language, I would not insert the word “holdings” for “purchases.”  I think it would be confusing at a time that we are still purchasing assets, and it could be taken as signaling that asset sales might be undertaken soon as part of the exit strategy—in other words, first.  And I don’t think the Committee has clearly come to a conclusion on that point. In terms of paragraph 2, I don’t feel strongly about it, but I find that “energy prices have risen in recent months” does not really work, for me at least, because (1) I think it overstates the importance of energy prices in shaping our views and (2) energy prices have come back down quite a bit recently.  So I think I would probably take that out. On the TAF, I think we should just say that we don’t expect to conduct any further auctions beyond that date because that’s what we do expect, and why not just get it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and preferences, but there is no disagreement with any other party.


Passage number 340.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the name "President Plosser."


Passage number 341.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Yes.  I want to ask a question about this “purchases” versus “holdings” issue.  I want to ask Brian—we are purchasing, but there are also redemptions going on right now.  So can you give me an idea of the magnitude of the redemptions that we are going to be seeing over the next two months or three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a request for information.


Passage number 342.
   MR. SACK.  They are small.  So if you are asking about the net, clearly we are adding on net.  Obviously, when we get to the next meeting, it will be a week or two from the end of the purchases.  We will be at a point where we have tapered a lot more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and explaining their perspective on the topic.


Passage number 343.
 MR. FISHER.  Could you speak up a little, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no evident contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher simply requests the speaker to speak up.


Passage number 344.
 MR. SACK.  I was just saying that, over this intermeeting period, the purchases are going to outpace the redemptions by far.  We have about $85 billion more of MBS to purchase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 345.
  The redemptions are— MR. PLOSSER.  $5 billion.  $15 billion.  $2 billion.  What.  $100 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents a list of numbers without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 346.
   MR. SACK.  I’m sorry.  I can take a look.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sack apologizes and offers to help.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 347.
 MR. PLOSSER.  My point is that our holdings are being affected by both purchases and redemptions.  And so getting back to the debate about “holdings” versus “purchases,” we are not just purchasing, we are also redeeming.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Plosser is highlighting that both purchases and redemptions are affecting their holdings. This suggests that there is disagreement or debate regarding the importance or impact of purchases versus redemptions in relation to the overall holdings.


Passage number 348.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We were doing that last meeting also.  His question is, What are we conveying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "we" were doing something in the last meeting and now "his" question is about what is being conveyed.


Passage number 349.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, I think that’s the point.  I think you are factually correct, but the question is, What impulse do we want to actually send to the market in terms of market expectations relative to what we are actually likely to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are expressing their thoughts and agreeing with each other.


Passage number 350.
 MR. SACK.  So it looks as though we have—I don’t have the exact profile over the whole year—maybe about $10 billion a month coming off and, as I said, $85 billion of MBS purchases and about $10 billion more of agency purchases to do over the next two months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some numbers regarding the amount of money coming off and the purchases to be made over the next two months.


Passage number 351.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply indicates gratitude towards someone named Mr. Plosser.


Passage number 352.
 MR. LACKER.  The sentence refers to the next meeting.  Are we going to be evaluating purchases or holdings at the next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the upcoming meeting.


Passage number 353.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  May I comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given phrase "May I comment". It is simply a question asking for permission to give a comment.


Passage number 354.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The example given does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 355.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me talk about the whole statement, and then I will address your question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the statement. The speaker is simply stating their intention to discuss the entire statement before addressing a specific question.


Passage number 356.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  I just added something that I thought was relevant to this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage mentions the addition of something relevant, but it does not imply any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 357.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Let me just make a few comments.  Just on the substance, I think it was pretty striking that in fact there was not a big change in the outlook and not really that big a change in our degree of certainty since our last meeting.  We do see a recovery, but it appears likely to be moderate.  In any case, it’s still somewhat more projection than actuality.  I talked about the level of uncertainty.  Labor markets are still deteriorating.  I think the UI claims are moving in the wrong direction, and I am not quite sure what is happening there.  I am not sure it’s entirely spurious.  On the inflation side, we had a lot of discussion about the five-year, five-year forward breakeven inflation rates, and I think that is an important thing, but there are technical and other reasons for that.  And I think it is striking how much, for example, the dollar has moved in an anti-inflationary direction recently.  And my general sense is that I didn’t hear from around the table quite as much today as I heard earlier, last fall for example, about chatter, about the Fed’s balance sheet, inflation expectations, those sorts of things.  So I am not sure which way that’s going. In any case, given that we haven’t changed our outlook much, given that uncertainty remains very high, and given that between now and the next meeting we’ll have two employment reports and we’ll have a lot more information, my preference is to maintain a status quo position in this meeting while continuing on our path toward normalization as best we can. Let me talk about some of the specifics in the statement, and then I will address President Lacker’s question and others.  First of all, just on alternative C, paragraph 2, on inflation, given the decline in energy prices in recent weeks, I guess that it does seem a little odd to introduce that sentence in this meeting.  I thought I heard a majority in favor of dropping the first sentence and just starting with “with substantial resource slack.”  I have heard from President Plosser now a couple meetings about C2.  There are really two elements to that.  One is dropping the resource slack reference.  I am not sure that the Committee as a whole is there.  I think most of us think there is some effect of resource slack.  We have considerable disagreement about how important it is and how to measure it, and so on.  The other thing that is in C2 is reference to appropriate monetary policy.  We actually had something like that in the first paragraph, which I guess we dropped this time.  But I take that point, and I think we should consider possibly including something like that as we go forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is primarily expressing the speaker's own thoughts and opinions, without any clear contention or disagreement with others.


Passage number 358.
 MR. PLOSSER.  May I just make one comment.  Previously I actually proposed that we could keep the resource slack sentence and then just add the second sentence of C2 as a way to combine the two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Plosser, is simply making a comment or suggestion about combining two sentences.


Passage number 359.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that is a reasonable suggestion, and let’s foreshadow that for the next meeting.  Perhaps you would remind us about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker indicates agreement with the suggestion by stating it is a reasonable one, and then suggests foreshadowing it for the next meeting. Additionally, the speaker requests a reminder, implying cooperation and agreement.


Passage number 360.
 MR. PLOSSER.  I’m sure I will.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is expressing his confidence about a future event.


Passage number 361.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think you might.  Just one other piece of housekeeping before getting to the tougher questions:  On the TAF, I thought I heard a majority, but maybe not, for going to zero after March.  Bill, what was the language there that you were suggesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a conversation among individuals discussing various topics, including housekeeping and a suggestion made by Bill.


Passage number 362.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Why don’t I just read the sentence.  “The Federal Reserve is in the process of winding down its term auction facility.  Fifty billion dollars in twenty-eight-day credit will be offered on February 8, and $25 billion in twenty-eight-day credit will be offered at the final auction on March 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a statement of fact and does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 363.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Is that all right with everybody.  Are there any who feel strongly that we should not.  Okay.  So let’s make that change. On the other issues, it’s not a question of surprising markets or not surprising markets.  It is a question of communicating accurately, and the question is, Do the markets understand what we think we are doing and what we are trying to achieve.  So, first of all, with respect to holdings, I think that the use of “holdings” at this meeting might not change much of anything, but I think there is a significant risk that it would signal an imminent sales program, which I didn’t hear us agreeing on yesterday.  President Kocherlakota, I think we accepted your basic premise that we should do a gradual selling process that would get us down to zero MBS much more quickly than redemptions would do.  So it’s a question of what’s the appropriate timing of communicating that.  We have several ways to communicate that.  I can talk about this again in testimony coming up on two occasions. It is important, I think, for us to see the effects of the end of the MBS purchases at the end of the quarter.  You were talking about empirical studies.  In a moment, we are going to have a very important empirical study.  So I don’t disagree with the fact that we should modify this, but I guess I think it’s better to do it through other mechanisms and just hold off on this just for another meeting or two.  I didn’t hear anyone yesterday say that we should be selling immediately.  I think there was a view that we should be selling gradually over a period of time but that the beginning of those sales might still be after the tightening process begins, for example.  So I think it would be miscommunication at this point to put that in.  I think it would give the wrong impression. Likewise, with the “extended period” language, I understand the concerns that some folks have about that, and I don’t always feel entirely comfortable with it myself, to tell you the truth.  But there are a couple of aspects about it that I think we should point out.  The first is one that the Vice Chairman mentioned, which is that the signal it’s sending doesn’t seem to be grossly wrong.  The markets are expecting us to move in the second half of this year, and I don’t think many of us around the table are much more aggressive than that.  So it’s not precluding us from moving at an appropriate time at this point.  The other aspect of this statement that is very important is that it is explicitly conditional.  We made a point a couple of meetings ago of putting in this language about subdued inflation trends and contained inflation expectations.  Clearly, if those things start moving adversely, that will invalidate the premise of the “extended period” language.  And, third, although I know people have talked about six months, the similar language in 2004 was dropped and interest rates were raised only in a couple of meetings I think.  So particularly if the conditions underlying the statement begin to change, I don’t think that we are so locked in.  I’m happy working toward the elimination of that statement or a modification of that statement.  But if we were to do it today, we would be signaling with high likelihood that we would be moving in the next two or three meetings, and I don’t think any one of us wants to signal that right now.   So it’s not a question of buying flexibility; it is a question of being accurate in what you are telling the market.  And right now the market’s views seem to me to be more or less appropriately calibrated.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different options and expressing their opinion on the best approach, but there is no disagreement or argument taking place.


Passage number 364.
  MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman, there’s an interpretation of “extended” as referring to six months.  At the next meeting, as someone pointed out, six months out is pretty deep into the end of the year, so we’re going to have to remove it.  What I’m saying is that we would want to remove it at the time when we don’t intend to signal or we don’t believe we are going to move in the next two or three meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a potential interpretation of the word "extended" and explaining their reasoning for wanting to remove it. There is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 365.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I’m saying that we could remove it one or two meetings ahead, if conditions warranted, because it is a conditional statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that the removal of something could happen in the future if certain conditions are met. There is no conflict or opposing perspective presented.


Passage number 366.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  But that suggests that those of us who have suggested interpretations that are closer to six months might want to reguide or reeducate markets about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 367.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it would be important to stress in your elucidations that this statement, if you read the sentence, says that economic conditions—and we lay out what those conditions are—are likely to warrant interest rates that are exceptionally low.  So I think it is analogous what the Swedes do, which is to forecast their own interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's opinion on the importance of emphasizing the statement and draws an analogy to the actions of the Swedes.


Passage number 368.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I am all in favor of our feeling as if we could drop “extended” and move very quickly after that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, expresses agreement and support for a certain idea, indicating that he is "all in favor" of it.


Passage number 369.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In a situation like today, where there has been no palpable change in the outlook, I don’t see the case for that.  But if there were a significant change in the outlook, I think that we certainly could.  I’m also fine with working toward a gradual toning-down of this language, also along the lines that President Hoenig and others have suggested, to “some time,” et cetera.  But I think we are not there yet.  Right now the modal expectation around the table is that we are still some meetings away from it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their perspective on the case for a change in outlook and the potential toning down of language, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention with another person or idea.


Passage number 370.
 MR. LACKER.  I agree.  I take your line of argument to mean that you would not be receptive to an argument that we shouldn’t remove it because we don’t intend to move within the next two or three meetings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly agrees with the previous statement and restates it to confirm their understanding of the argument.


Passage number 371.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That confused me.  [Laughter]  I’m interested in accurate communication.  Right now, the markets have what I think is a fairly reasonable forward curve.  If we were to remove this today, the market expectation would be that we would be moving, say, by April, I would guess.  And I don’t think that is an accurate representation of what the Committee believes at this moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states their confusion, expresses an interest in accurate communication, and shares their opinion about the current forward curve in the markets.


Passage number 372.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  I understand that, and I don’t want to belabor this—this will be my last shot at it.  An argument that we don’t want to move within the next six months doesn’t mean we shouldn’t remove it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges understanding the previous statement and simply states that they don't want to discuss it further.


Passage number 373.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The trouble with removing it, without some basis for it, is that it will miscommunicate our views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing concern about potential miscommunication when removing something without a proper basis.


Passage number 374.
 MR. LACKER.  I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a statement made by Mr. Lacker, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 375.
 MR. PLOSSER.  One question:  What the sentence says is “to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.”  The market seems to interpret that as being that we don’t move at all.  Yet we could move 50 basis points and still have exceptionally low interest rates.  So in your view, what is the interaction between “extended period” and “exceptionally low”.  Should we be interpreting it as no move or that we may be moving up slowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement or contention between the speaker (Mr. Plosser) and the market regarding the interpretation of the phrase "extended period" in relation to "exceptionally low interest rates." Mr. Plosser argues that the market incorrectly assumes that "extended period" means no change in interest rates, while he believes that the phrase allows for the possibility of gradual rate increases while still maintaining low levels.


Passage number 376.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, the Eurodollar futures curve seems to me to be a fairly reasonable guess of what we might want to do.  Now, there have been some—like Larry Meyer, for example—who have suggested that we might want to take a first step up and then plateau at 1 percent or something like that.  That’s possible, but that is a pretty subtle alteration.  I think we would have to communicate what we were trying to do there in advance pretty clearly. So, again, I am hopeful that, besides the language, we do have other tools, including the ramping-up of our reserves-draining capacity and those sorts of things.  But I just want to assure everybody that we are not locking ourselves into an iron-clad six-month period with this language.  In fact, we discussed this at Jackson Hole.  Carl Walsh asked us about this, and we said explicitly that we were not playing a Woodford game where we were trying to commit to keeping rates low longer than we otherwise would.  That’s not what the intent is.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different suggestions and possibilities, but there is no clear disagreement or argument presented.


Passage number 377.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  My concern is that I thought that yesterday we had a very good, very productive discussion, and I agree with you that my sense of the sentiment of the table was that there was some support for a gradual reduction in our balance sheet, faster than would be warranted through redemptions alone.  A lot of heterogeneity in views about timing.  I remain concerned about the message that’s on the table in some vague sense getting out there.  And this term “socializing” that Governor Warsh uses is a great one, and I’m sympathetic to the idea that changing this one word is a rather blunt way to try to accomplish this.  I’m on board with that.  What are the other vehicles that we have at our disposal for doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the sentiments and ideas previously discussed.


Passage number 378.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Testimony, speeches, minutes, and ultimately the statement.  So I think we can communicate that.  Now, I also think, as I said yesterday, that we don’t want to say more than we know.  In particular, I think we ought to get some staff input.  You have suggested a pattern of sales that may or may not be the best one.  We want to look at that—it is very important.  So we may not want to communicate anything very precise about that yet.  But I think it is reasonable for me to begin to introduce the idea that, perhaps not immediately or the near term but at some point, we will want to have a pattern of slow sales in order to normalize our balance sheet.  So that would be, I think, the best way to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions without contradicting or conflicting with others.


Passage number 379.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  So let me ask a pointed question.  Should the New York Fed website still refer to it as a buy-and-hold program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 380.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: passage are you referring to?


Passage number 381.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  The New York Fed website has a bunch of frequently asked questions about the agency MBS program, and one question is, Do we face any risk of loss on this program.  And the answer given is, “There is no default risk,” which I agree with totally.  And there is no capital loss.  But we might face interest rate risk, but we don’t really face interest rate risk because it’s a buy-and-hold program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the answer provided on the New York Fed website.


Passage number 382.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, to answer that question, we would like to have some staff analysis of what would be a good pattern that would achieve these objectives, and I hope without too much capital risk.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they would like to have some analysis done before making a decision and expressing a hope for minimal risk.


Passage number 383.
 MR. BULLARD.  I just have one comment on “holdings” versus “purchases.”  I agree with you that we want to try to keep a status quo type of statement, and we might be communicating too much by changing it.  But the way it’s written it says that we are evaluating purchases, and I don’t think we are evaluating purchases anymore.  It is not as though we are going to change our purchases or anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is offering his comment and agreeing with the idea of maintaining a status quo, but he suggests that the current wording may not accurately reflect the current situation in terms of evaluating purchases.


Passage number 384.
  Maybe markets understand that, but it’s not really— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we need to do something at the next meeting, given that we are at that point.  I think we are very close to the end of the actual purchases.  But it is still possible that we might want—I think you have spoken in favor of contingent policies—to reevaluate the end of our program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions on the current situation and discussing potential actions in the future.


Passage number 385.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  But I think at the end of March we might be evaluating purchases and we might be evaluating sales of various kinds.  “Holdings” might not be the right word.  Maybe “portfolio” is a better word.  But I think at that point we might want to indicate that more weapons are available.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting alternative terms and expressing a possibility for future actions.


Passage number 386.
  MR. BULLARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 387.
  Actually, at that point, we might want a larger reworking of this portion of the statement that more accurately reflects what— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That sounds reasonable.  I am concerned only about accurate communication.  I want the public to understand what it is we have actually decided around the table.  Any other questions.  Matt, do you have notes on the changes that we have made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and concern about accurate communication and is seeking clarification on any changes that have been made.


Passage number 388.
 MR. LUECKE.  Yes.  This vote would encompass the directive that shows up on page 8 of the package.  It would also encompass alternative B, as shown on page 3 of the package with two changes.  The first change would be to eliminate the words in red at the beginning of paragraph 2 and, thus, begin with the words, “with substantial resource slack.”  The second change would be to substitute in paragraph 4 the sentence on the TAF with the sentence that was read by Bill English.  And I would note that we would not be including the word “holdings” within brackets in paragraph 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing changes and amendments to a directive, without any evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 389.
 Chairman Bernanke   Yes Vice Chairman DudleyYes President Bullard  Yes Governor Duke  Yes President Hoenig  No Governor Kohn  Yes President Pianalto  Yes President Rosengren  Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes Governor Warsh  Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  A few items.  First of all, your projections can be updated if submitted by 5:00 p.m. tomorrow.  Second, on redemptions, the Desk needs a bit of guidance.  My sense of our meeting yesterday was that we were happy for the Desk to run off all agency-related securities starting immediately but that, for the time being, they would like to roll over Treasuries.  Is that acceptable to everybody.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 390.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think there is one question:  Roll them into what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question and expressing uncertainty about what the answer to that question could be.


Passage number 391.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, roll them into what.  Into shorter maturities generally.  Is that okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification on what the pronoun "them" refers to, and then suggesting that they should be rolled into shorter maturities. Finally, they inquire if this action is acceptable. The tone of the passage is more inquisitive than argumentative.


Passage number 392.
 MR. SACK.  We were going to propose for now maintaining the current policy of reinvestment and preparing a full analysis that we could discuss either between the meetings or at the next meeting on whether to redeem or to use a more complicated rollover strategy to shorten the maturity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Sack suggests maintaining the current policy of reinvestment and preparing an analysis for further discussion, without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 393.
  MR. DUDLEY.  Right now, when they come due, you rebuy the thing that matures.  If a ten-year matures, you roll that into a new ten-year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a process of rebuying a financial product when it matures.


Passage number 394.
 MR. SACK.  If you want a more immediate change, we need to discuss it in more detail.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sack is simply stating that in order to bring about a more immediate change, further discussion and detail are necessary.


Passage number 395.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So what you want to do for right now is roll it over, but let’s not wait until the next meeting to get clarity on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. Instead, there is an emphasis on taking action and getting clarity on a certain matter.


Passage number 396.
 MR. SACK.  Okay.  There are repercussions, and I want to make sure that everyone understands them.  For example, our securities lending program will be affected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and expressing their intention to ensure that everyone is aware of the repercussions of a certain situation.


Passage number 397.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  We will check with everybody by phone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a direct and neutral agreement to check with everyone by phone.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 398.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  There are also some operational issues.  How do you roll into bills.  There may not be a bill auction on the right day, and so there are some complexities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage states that there are some operational issues and mentions the complexity of not having a bill auction on the right day. This implies that there may be disagreement or contention regarding the process of rolling into bills and finding suitable bill auctions.


Passage number 399.
 MR. SACK.  There are only two dates this year when return coupons coincide with no bill issuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about there being only two dates when return coupons coincide with no bill issuance. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 400.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think there is a preference around the table to go to shorter maturities for Treasuries, if possible.  Let’s see.  The next meeting is Tuesday, March 16.  It is a one-day meeting.  We will start at 5:00 in the morning.  [Laughter]  We may have to start at 8:00 in the morning.  Let me just ask everyone, when you plan your remarks for next time, please keep in mind that it is a one-day meeting, and we will have a very tight agenda.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a preference for shorter maturities for Treasuries and discussing the logistics of the upcoming meeting.


Passage number 401.
 MR. LACKER.  Do you intend to have the same three-part structure, or are you going to go back to two-part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a question asked by Mr. Lacker about the structure of something unspecified. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention between the parties involved.


