Passage number 1.
 Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, Chicago, and Richmond, respectively  Warren Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis   Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on April 27–28, 2010 April 27—Afternoon Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  First Vice President Holcomb will be sitting in for President Fisher today—welcome, Helen. Before I begin the formal part of the meeting, I think we ought to acknowledge an epochal event in the history of the Federal Reserve.  Today is Don Kohn’s last FOMC meeting, assuming, of course, that he retires as he plans.  [Laughter]  That’s always a risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply acknowledging an event and expressing humor.


Passage number 2.
 MR. LACKER.  Don’t worry, Don.  You’re going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is reassuring someone named Don not to worry about something.


Passage number 3.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it should be noted that since 1981 Don has attended 221 FOMC meetings, in a range of capacities, and missed only eight meetings in the past 30 years.  So I wonder about those eight meetings.  [Laughter and applause]  We will have an informal opportunity to say good-bye to Don and to thank him and honor him for all of his enormous contributions.  But I just wanted to take say how much we appreciate what you’ve done and, personally, how much I owe you and the institution owes you for your contributions over many years, and particularly over the last couple of years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing appreciation and gratitude towards Don for his contributions over the years. The laughter and applause indicate a positive and celebratory atmosphere.


Passage number 4.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn is expressing gratitude, which does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 5.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I need a motion to close the Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a need for a motion to close the Board meeting.


Passage number 6.
 MR. KOHN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" indicates agreement or support for a motion, rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 7.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "well done" is a positive statement that usually indicates approval or praise, so there is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 8.
 MR. KOHN.  I got that.  You need to know when to say, “So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement acknowledging understanding and emphasizing the importance of knowing when to say "So moved."


Passage number 9.
”  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Kohn is a little punchy today, I think. All right.  Our first item of business is our briefing on financial developments, open market operations, and system facilities.  Let me turn first to Brian Sack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states the agenda of a meeting and the speaker's observation about Governor Kohn's current state.


Passage number 10.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  I know we said “up to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or clues that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 11.
 MR. MADIGAN. Thank you.  Brian and I would like to update the Committee on the progress the staff has made developing reserve management tools, first covering the term deposit facility and then reverse repurchase agreements.  Last week, the Board approved revisions to Regulation D that will allow Reserve Banks to issue term deposits and that will also allow policymakers flexibility about the details of a TDF and how it may be used.  We anticipate that the Board will issue a press release later this week announcing the changes to Regulation D and indicating that the Federal Reserve will provide additional information at a later date. In the next few days, the staff plans to recommend that the Board formally approve an initial structure for a TDF that will be nearly identical to the one described  in the memo distributed to Reserve Bank presidents and Board members in advance of the March FOMC meeting.  As envisioned, the Federal Reserve will offer term deposits primarily through single-price auctions.  Term deposits would be simple fixed-rate instruments, similar to most other money market instruments. Initially, the maximum bid rate at each auction would be set equal to the primary credit rate, so that institutions that are eligible to hold term deposits have no opportunity to arbitrage the discount window and so that, consistent with a statutory requirement, the auction stop-out rate does not exceed the general level of short-term interest rates.  Early withdrawals would not be allowed, but term deposits could be pledged as collateral at the discount window.  In response to public comments, the TDF would allow correspondents to bid on behalf of respondents.  In addition, the TDF would incorporate a noncompetitive tender feature that will ensure access to term deposits for small institutions.  Moreover, the minimum bid amount in the competitive auction would be set at a very low level so as to enable participation by institutions of all sizes.   The staff plans to propose that the Board authorize small-value offerings of term deposits beginning in June.  These operations would allow the Federal Reserve to test all aspects of TDF operations and would let depository institutions gain familiarity with the TDF.  The staff also plans to recommend that the Board delegate to the Chairman the authority to determine the schedule and amounts for the small-value TDF operations.  Once the Board approves the TDF structure, perhaps next week, it would issue a press release outlining the general structure of the program and announcing plans to conduct small-value offerings.  The press release would include a link to a newly developed TDF website that contains all the information that depository institutions will need to register as TDF participants. If policymakers decide to utilize the TDF in the future to drain significant quantities of reserve balances, an appropriate governance structure will be needed.  The staff, with input from policymakers, expects to propose a governance structure that will provide for appropriate review and policy input by the FOMC regarding TDF operations.  For example, in view of the function of the TDF as a tool facilitating the implementation of monetary policy, the staff could propose that the Manager of the Open Market Desk and the Director of the Division of Monetary Affairs jointly develop a plan for TDF operations over each intermeeting period that is coordinated with all other aspects of short-run monetary policy implementation, including any use of reverse repo agreements.  These plans would be reviewed by the Board and the FOMC at each FOMC meeting and revised as appropriate based on the input of policymakers.  The Board would then formally approve the plans for TDF operations over the intermeeting period.  The Board might wish to provide some latitude to the Chairman to adjust amounts to be auctioned and other auction parameters over the intermeeting period.  We are happy to receive input on these matters, but we are not asking the Board or the FOMC for any decisions at this time.  The second topic for this briefing is reverse repurchase agreements.  Staff at the New York Fed continue to develop the reverse repo program.  The Trading Desk has finalized the process for using agency MBS as collateral in those operations.  Once the legal documents related to custodial arrangements are in place, the Desk will conduct small-scale operations to ensure its ability to use MBS collateral.  We expect those operations to take place in May.  The Desk continues to work on adding counterparties for reverse repurchase agreements.  The Desk received applications representing 28 individual money market mutual funds following the publication of criteria for eligibility in March.  Of these funds, 26 were invited to submit the more detailed second part of the application.  The Desk expects to complete the review of the applications and to announce the accepted counterparties by the end of June. Progress has also been made on the operational requirements for transacting with an expanded counterparty list.  Arrangements have been made with the clearing banks to support the transactions, and an Internet version of FedTrade, the Desk’s proprietary trading platform, has been developed to accommodate a larger set of counterparties.  The Desk expects to conduct small-scale transactions with the wider set of counterparties in June or July. The Desk’s tentative plan for the next step in expanding the set of counterparties for reverse repo operations is to include Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.  Under this plan, we would not focus on a wider set of housing-related agencies for now, partly because none of the other agencies currently participates to a significant extent in the triparty repo market.  As for the subsequent step for adding counterparties, the Desk is considering including a broader set of money market mutual funds. That concludes our prepared remarks.  Brian and I would be happy to address your questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speakers are simply providing updates and progress reports on the development of reserve management tools.


Passage number 12.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Before we go to Q&A, I just want to reiterate what Brian said about governance.  The Board and the FOMC have been working very closely and cooperatively together on these monetary policy issues, as evidenced by the fact that this is a joint Board–FOMC meeting.  So even though the reverse repurchase agreements are technically an FOMC responsibility and the TDF is technically a Board responsibility, we should work together to make sure that they operate together in a seamless fashion, and I give you my assurances that that will be the case.  Starting with questions, I’d like to kick things off quickly.  Brian, if Greece defaults or restructures, have you thought about potential contagion effects on the U.S. financial system or economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply reiterating what Brian said about governance and expressing the need for cooperation between the Board and the FOMC.


Passage number 13.
 MR. SACK.  We have.  I think the most immediate consequences would be to other countries and institutions in Europe, which have greater exposure to Greek debt, and, of course, to the Greek banks themselves, which are relying on posting Greek sovereign debt to the ECB for liquidity needs. In terms of spillover to the U.S., our sense is that the risk of direct spillovers from these securities to U.S. financial institutions is relatively limited.  But that still leaves open a lot of channels of contagion.  Of course, if the contagion spreads throughout Europe, then the potential exposure to the U.S. institutions could be larger.  There’s also the contagion coming from the prices of risk and how risk premiums behave.  Would the markets build in a premium for U.S. institutions.  Would dollar funding markets dry up.  Would investors become concerned about sovereign credit risk, even in the U.S..  I think we are certainly aware of all of those risks.  To date, as I said, we think the evidence of those spillover channels has been limited, and it’s quite reasonable to expect them to continue to be limited, but we’re certainly watching closely, given the risks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of potential consequences and risks related to the Greek debt crisis.


Passage number 14.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Any questions for our colleagues.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and asking if there are any questions for their colleagues. President Lockhart is mentioned, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 15.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Brian, on the reverse repo report, we have made progress with the agency MBS as collateral.  But the primary collateral will continue to be Treasuries, is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is made to clarify the current arrangement and confirm the accuracy of the information.


Passage number 16.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Brian, do you want to take that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple question from Mr. Madigan to Brian, indicating a normal conversation or discussion.


Passage number 17.
  MR. SACK.  At the moment, we are simply trying to get the systems in place to have the ability to use the MBS collateral.  No decisions have been made in terms of which collateral type would be used first and in what size.  We’re starting to weigh the options and to think through the advantages and disadvantages of each, but we’d certainly come back to you with a broader dialogue on that before we moved forward. There are tradeoffs.  The Treasury collateral is simpler, it’s cheaper to use, and for some market participants, such as the dealers, it’s much more valuable for them to take in as opposed to MBS collateral.  On the other hand, for money funds and other lenders outside of the dealer community, there’s really not a strong preference for the type of collateral—they’re much more interested in us as the counterparty as opposed to the collateral we provide them.  So we’re trying to take all of that into account in developing a proposal for how to run the operations and allocate the collateral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a discussion on the pros and cons of using different types of collateral.


Passage number 18.
 MR. LOCKHART.  But it’s conceivable that, as we approach draining, we would have a tradeoff between the use of Treasuries and a fairly substantial initial portfolio of MBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 19.
 MR. SACK.  That’s right.  We will have the ability to use all types of assets as collateral.  I should note that the current constraint on the size of operations would be the counterparty list, not the collateral. As we have discussed before, we think the capacity through the primary dealers is probably somewhere between $100 and $200 billion.  We have much more Treasury holdings than that, and we have much more MBS holdings than that, so we could do those operations with either.  So, really, the constraint on total size right now is the counterparty list, which is why we’re trying to push forward with the money funds and with other firms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and explaining the current constraints and options available for operations.


Passage number 20.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions "President Kocherlakota" without providing any further context or information. Therefore, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in this specific passage without additional context.


Passage number 21.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This probably was in the March memo and I missed it.  What’s the maturity of the term deposit facilities that’s being considered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply asking a question and expressing his lack of knowledge about a specific detail.


Passage number 22.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Generally, probably no more than several months—28 days might be a typical maturity, and as much as 84 days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage is providing a general statement about the typical maturity period of something, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 23.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude.


Passage number 24.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 25.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I just want to follow up on the Greek question.  Do we have a sense of which organizations have written the credit default swaps and whether that is a source of contagion.  Are we connected with the Europeans. Somebody has to have a net exposure—not everybody can be hedged.  I’m just curious, given the magnitude, about whether that could end up being in some respects as important as the total loans—I know in the international section we had a description of the total loans.  But I don’t know how many of those loans are hedged or unhedged, so the other part of that market that we need is the credit default swaps.  Are we monitoring it.  Are the Europeans monitoring it.  When you think of financial stability, some kind of a coordinated effort to monitor would seem like the approach we’d want to take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing curiosity about the potential impact of credit default swaps and whether they could contribute to financial instability. They are asking if these swaps are being monitored by both the speaker's organization and the Europeans, suggesting that a coordinated effort would be ideal. There is no indication of disagreement or opposing views in this passage.


Passage number 26.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We have looked at it.  The notional credit default swap market for the government sector is very small relative to the outstanding supply of debt, unlike the corporate sector, where the credit default swaps can be many magnitudes.  That does not look like a big, independent source of risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It simply provides an observation and analysis of the credit default swap market for the government sector.


Passage number 27.
   MR. SHEETS.  The number that I’ve seen is around $90 billion for the gross CDS outstanding.  The net is only about a tenth of that, from what we hear.  It’s hard to get a comprehensive accounting of that, but it doesn’t seem, on either a gross or a net basis, to be a first-order concern.  It looks like roughly a third of the CDS were written by U.S. institutions,  and I guess that a sizable share was written by Europeans.  We understand that the Greek banks themselves have sold some CDS exposure, but we don’t have a comprehensive accounting of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and stating that there is not enough comprehensive accounting to determine the exact numbers.


Passage number 28.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.  [No response.]  All right, seeing no questions, we need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The lack of response and the need for a vote indicates a procedural matter rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 29.
 MR. KOHN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "So moved" indicates agreement or approval.


Passage number 30.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  The other piece of business is the swaps for Canada and Mexico.  As you remember, we have discussed the possibility of a broader swaps program, including a range of central bank counterparties, but we agreed to put that off for some time, until we get a clearer sense of where financial regulatory reform is, and so on.  But we have been renewing these relatively small North American swaps for some time.  Does anyone want to discuss or raise questions about this proposal.  [No response.]  If not, we need a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. There is no objection or discussion raised about the swaps proposal.


Passage number 31.
 MR. KOHN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "So moved" indicates agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is there anyone who would like to vote against it.  [No response.]  All right, seeing none, we’ll accept that proposal. The next item is a briefing on asset sales and redemptions.  I want to congratulate the staff on a really very, very helpful and thorough set of memoranda.  It was an awful lot of work and extremely informative, so thank you for that.  Let me now turn to Brian Madigan to lead that briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The lack of response suggests agreement or consent to the proposal, and the following statements express praise and gratitude.


Passage number 33.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for the staff.  [No response.]  If no questions, I’d like to take comments from participants on this broad set of  issues—Treasuries, agencies, and the exit strategy overall.  Let me briefly try to frame the discussion and lay out some of the issues I think we need to resolve. First of all, even though the staff simulations, except for the first, all assume Treasury redemptions, I just want to make sure we all agree or understand that this is in fact a quite consequential decision.  There are some obvious advantages to Treasury redemptions.  It would be an easy way, relatively speaking, to shed duration and begin to shrink the balance sheet and reduce excess reserves.  To give you an idea of the magnitude here, if we began doing redemptions on May 3, we would be able to shed about $60 billion from the balance sheet in the rest of 2010, about $70 billion in 2011, and about $140 billion in 2012.  So, by the end of 2012, we would be able to lower our Treasury holdings by about $270 billion, which is obviously consequential. At the same time, while that has its advantages, of course, it would be a tightening of policy, and one that’s not widely anticipated at this point.  I think one of the contributions of the staff analysis was to make us think about the general equilibrium implications of these decisions.  In particular, if we were to tighten policy via Treasury redemptions, then the envelope theorem (or something) would tell you that you have to adjust appropriately on other dimensions.  Another issue to consider with doing Treasury redemptions is that it may or may not complicate the path from where we are now to the ultimate desired composition of our balance sheet, including not just all-Treasuries but also the maturity structure that we hope to have. There are a number of issues involved, and I would like your considered views on Treasury redemptions.  If we decide to do Treasury redemptions—and the same is true with the other issues, for example agency sales—we don’t necessarily have to do it at this meeting.  We  can, obviously, communicate in various ways and make a decision at the next meeting.  But this is, I think, a very important issue. Another issue, most obviously, is when and how to sell some of our agency securities.  My sense from previous discussions is that most people would like to sell at some point, because the implication otherwise is that we would be holding MBS for a very long time.  Nevertheless, there are important questions of timing.  Should it be done after rates rise or at a fixed time.  How far in the future.  How quickly.  How conditional on the economy.  And how should we communicate that.  I think, broadly speaking, that the issues related to agency MBS tie very closely to the general question of what our appropriate sequencing should be.  I also do think it’s important to keep in mind that we could, of course, make provisional decisions at any point, or decide how we’re going to proceed to a certain point, and then leave flexibility at a later point.  Again, in the spirit of what Brian said, there are a lot of different degrees of freedom here. There is one thing I want to achieve today.  I don’t by any means think we need to come to a full and final set of decisions, particularly quantitative decisions, today about the exit strategy or the sales strategy.  But it would be very helpful if we could refine our strategy sufficiently that we collectively, in the minutes and so on, can begin to reduce to some extent the uncertainty in the market about how we’re going to be proceeding.  So if we set that not-too-ambitious objective, meeting it would be a very useful accomplishment for this meeting.  Let me stop there and begin a discussion.  I had first on the list President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and asking for input and opinions on various issues.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 34.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  What’s striking to me about the analysis—which I also think deserves the glowing praise you heaped on it earlier this afternoon, it was very, very helpful—is how small the effects are on the macroeconomy and on interest rates.  As I  recall, in the most aggressive strategy you described, the effect is 35 to 50 basis points on longer-term yields. The memo also mentions a 15 basis point additional effect on the MBS–Treasury spread, which has increased by about that much in the last couple of months anyway.  To me, this makes a very aggressive and fairly rapidly commenced strategy pretty attractive.  So I’m attracted to option 5.  In fact, I like to refer to it as the “centennial strategy,” because it is the only one that gets us out of MBS before the Federal Reserve System centennial.  [Laughter]  I think that has some independent benefit. One drawback someone might articulate regarding an aggressive program is that it withdraws monetary policy stimulus too rapidly.  That’s what the letter that I distributed last Friday was really aimed at addressing.  It’s just to point out that our security holdings fall in two categories—it gives us two variables—which means we can make the sum do something different from the total of our MBS holdings.  As I read the staff’s analysis, their belief is that the sum of our security holdings is what is responsible for the effect on long-term yields, and I am seeing Mr. Reifschneider nodding his head in assent.  So it suggests that what we could do is commit to a brisk pace, pretty soon, of getting the composition of our portfolio back to Treasuries-only pretty rapidly, and then think separately about monetary policy, that is, think separately about stimulus.   We could use our decision about redemptions and our decision about our overall holdings of Treasuries to calibrate how much monetary stimulus we’re withdrawing and at what pace.  We can then craft our language accordingly, so that the unwinding of our special intervention in the MBS market is viewed much like our getting out of these special programs.  This would have the advantage of addressing the tension that was evident the last time we spoke of this between the desire to comfort the MBS market about the expected pace of our sales—to provide some surety, some confidence in how we’re going to proceed—and the desire to retain the contingent nature of monetary policy; we could commit to making monetary policy contingent on incoming data on economic and financial conditions.  This would do that by taking those two apart, saying to the MBS market, which is not as deep as the Treasury market, “We can give you some surety,” while at the same time saying to the deep and liquid Treasury market, “This is where our intervention, the size of our holdings, is going to be contingent on incoming information.”  The broader point I was trying to make is that it doesn’t make sense to oppose rapid MBS sales on the basis that it would withdraw monetary policy stimulus too rapidly.  That’s what I wanted to disentangle. Now, don’t get me wrong, I do think asset sales should commence fairly soon.  A June announcement wouldn’t be too soon in my book, and a summertime commencement wouldn’t be too soon in my book.  If it were up to me, I don’t think I would add in Treasury purchases.  I don’t think we need to do that, but I just offer that up as an option for those who might otherwise be attracted to an aggressive pace of sales but fear too rapid a monetary policy stimulus reduction. I don’t think we should decide on redemptions until we’ve figured out asset sales.  I don’t think it makes sense for us to sign up for redeeming Treasuries and then go down the road to the next meeting and look at a situation where we would say, “Oh, to sell MBS would be withdrawing too much stimulus.”  I think it makes sense to consider these in the context of one decision, one crafted strategy about our portfolio going forward.  Those are my remarks, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker presents his belief that an aggressive strategy of selling MBS and rapidly getting the composition of the portfolio back to Treasuries-only is attractive. He argues that this approach would address concerns about withdrawing monetary policy stimulus too rapidly and could provide surety to the MBS market while retaining the contingent nature of monetary policy for the Treasury market. However, he mentions that some people fear too rapid a monetary policy stimulus reduction and suggests the option of adding Treasury purchases for those who are attracted to an aggressive pace of sales but have this fear.


Passage number 35.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, President Lacker.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Lacker and addresses President Bullard.


Passage number 36.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think Milton Friedman was concerned about the reduction in excess reserves in 1937 and 1938, so I don’t want you to take his name in vain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and beliefs about Milton Friedman's concerns regarding the reduction in excess reserves. They are simply requesting that the listener does not speak negatively or disrespectfully about Friedman.


Passage number 37.
 MR. BULLARD.  He was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: not sure about the best way to approach the problem, but he was open to considering different options.  


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think so.  But I actually have a substantive question for you.  I was listening very carefully, and I didn’t hear anything that clarified for me whether you thought the Treasury redemptions issue was something that should be delayed or part of the broader strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It expresses a personal opinion and poses a question for further clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 39.
 MR. BULLARD.  I’m a little ambivalent on Treasury redemptions.  I’m going to talk tomorrow in favor of it, but I’m not strongly in favor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, states that he is "ambivalent" or having mixed feelings about Treasury redemptions. This indicates that he is not strongly in favor of it, which implies a disagreement or contention within his own opinion.


Passage number 40.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.   Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement by President Rosengren is a simple expression of gratitude and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 41.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The memos on options were extremely useful.  I think the memos highlight several important facts we need to consider.  First, the size and composition of our balance sheet, like short-term interest rates, are not the goals of policy.  They are the instruments used to achieve our goals of full employment and price stability.  Second, asset sales are a tightening of monetary policy; while the magnitude is uncertain, the direction is not.  And, third, under all the options, we will not achieve either element of our mandate over the period we usually forecast, that is, by the end of 2011.  In fact, we will be far away if the Greenbook is right.  So if I were to have a centennial option, it would probably be to reach our mandate by the centennial rather than to get our balance sheet of mortgage-backed securities to zero by the centennial.  That highlights the point that, in my own estimation, we are  very far from attaining either element of our mandate.  That implies that both the onset of conventional policy tightening and the need to sell assets are quite a ways off.  In addition, there is considerable uncertainty about how the economy will evolve in terms of both employment and inflation.  So I would strongly prefer to maintain a high degree of flexibility and conditionality in whatever program we adopt.  With that in mind, I feel that the more extreme options, such as option 5, take an unacceptably long time to achieve either element of our mandate and fail to embody the conditionality that I think is critical at this time. Consistent with these overarching principles, I would prefer an option that facilitates reaching our dual mandate within a reasonable horizon but that shrinks our balance sheet when and as needed so that we can be confident that we can raise rates when that becomes necessary.  The closest option to achieving that goal would be a variant of option 2.  Other things equal, I would prefer not to sell assets until after, possibly well after, we begin tightening.  I would also prefer to make asset sales or purchases conditional on economic and financial conditions.  I hope that such a conditional plan would soften much of the announcement effect that could result in a tightening of financial conditions when a tightening is not at all what the economy requires at present. Given my economic outlook, I would prefer currently to replace maturing Treasury securities with short-term Treasury bills that could run off as we approach our first tightening.  When tightening is appropriate, these Treasury securities would roll off so that we can reduce our excess reserves.  This takes out some insurance against the risk that the large stock of reserves could complicate further tightening or be seen as inflationary, though I view both of these risks as remote.  In terms of communication, I would prefer to use the minutes rather than the statement to convey the sense of the Committee and only say at this time that there are no plans to sell assets until after we begin raising short-term interest rates.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own preferences and opinions, but there is no conflict or argument with anyone else's views in the passage.


Passage number 42.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude addressed to President Yellen.


Passage number 43.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The issues of asset sales and Treasury redemptions present the Committee with difficult policy and communications issues.  I found the Board’s staff memos also very helpful in clarifying the key issues and quantifying the potential effects of the various options. I want to emphasize at the outset that, like President Rosengren, I feel, given the outlook for economic activity and inflation, that there is no case at present to tighten monetary policy, and asset sales and even the announcement of future asset sales will entail some policy tightening.  The Board memo shows this clearly.  For this reason I don’t share the urgency to initiate asset sales any time soon.  I’m not at all convinced that the size of our balance sheet creates unacceptable inflation risks through an impact on inflation expectations, and I don’t see a compelling need to shift the composition of our portfolio back toward Treasuries-only on an extremely rapid time table. Nonetheless, I do recognize the concerns around this table about our balance sheet, and for that reason, I’m open to strategies involving asset sales and Treasury redemptions to shrink our balance sheet more rapidly than the staff’s option 1 and to shift its composition more quickly toward Treasuries if we can do that without having a significant negative impact on macro performance. If we do plan to sell assets, I think the memo makes a compelling case for conditionality as in options 2 and 3, namely, waiting to initiate any asset sales until after the time arrives when  we want to remove monetary policy accommodation.  Between these I strongly favor option 2, although I’ll admit that, on paper, option 3 is the more attractive of the two strategies.  By initiating policy tightening through asset sales rather than an increase in the IOER rate, option 3 brings down our MBS portfolio more rapidly.  Conditioning the pace of future sales on economic and financial developments and allowing future purchases if economic conditions deteriorate creates the possibility of improved macro performance, especially if downside risks materialize. But, in practice, I’m fearful that the implementation of option 3 presents insurmountable communications challenges.  First of all, logically, a decision to sell off assets before we raise the IOER rate implies an even longer period of exceptionally low rates and a more gradual pace of tightening once the IOER rate is raised than markets now anticipate.  I worry that an announcement now of the intent to sell assets prior to raising short-term rates would have exactly the opposite impact on market expectations.  Second, we would have to communicate that we are entirely open to further purchases when many Committee members are actively voicing concerns about our holdings, and even those who are supportive have indicated that the bar for further purchases would be very high.  With respect to interest rates, there’s a long track record upon which the public can base expectations, but for asset sales we have no such track record, and market participants would be constantly guessing about our new asset sales reaction function.  I fear that such an approach would create greater market volatility and uncertainty as markets react—and almost invariably overreact—to every word we say.  So unfortunately, I think these communications problems outweigh the potential benefits of this approach. Although I do not see an economic case to tighten policy now—and the announcement of future asset sales will tighten policy—I could still support a plan to sell assets structured along the lines of option 2.  If we agree to this plan, our communications could be either in the minutes  or in the FOMC statement, and I’m open to both approaches.  If we were to decide to include it in the statement, the illustrative language in the staff memo for option 2 provides a way to do it, but I would be quite concerned about including as much detail about quantities and timing.  I think that’s quite premature, and intervening economic developments could cause us to change our plans about quantities and timing.  So I would be inclined, if we include something in the statement, to say only something like this:  “The Committee anticipates that some time after raising its interest rate target it will initiate gradual sales of agency debt and MBS,” and then go on to say that “the Committee will adjust the timing and sequencing of these steps as necessary to promote economic recovery and price stability.” On the issue of redeeming Treasuries, I see this potentially as another way to address concerns around the table about the size of our balance sheet, and for that reason I could support a decision to redeem Treasuries.  It would, I think, demonstrate to markets that the FOMC is committed to shrinking our balance sheet over time, and it would mitigate some of the interest rate risk we face. But I also have concerns about a decision to redeem Treasuries, and I see no urgency at all to move on this today or tomorrow.  I said at our last meeting that I view Treasury redemptions as a modest tightening of policy in terms of its effects on interest rates.  More important, it would be an unexpected shift in policy, and it could move forward market expectations about the timing of asset sales and an increase in the target funds rate.  Redeeming Treasuries doesn’t help move the composition of the SOMA away from agencies, it’s unlikely to obviate the need to deploy reserve-draining tools, and it probably isn’t the strategy we would adopt if we wanted to rebalance the duration structure of our Treasury holdings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 44.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude and a respectful mention of President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 45.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to add again to the praise of the staff for the excellent job they did on the three memos—they were just outstanding. So these are the questions:  Shall we shrink our balance sheet by selling, as in options 2 to 5, or should we wait until 2025 or later as in option 1, or should we sell MBS and buy Treasuries, as in President Lacker’s memo.  It seems clear to me that the answer lies somewhere in options 2 to 5.  If we want to get back to an all-Treasury portfolio in the long run, we also want that portfolio to be considerably smaller in terms of excess reserves. Why do we want a smaller portfolio.  I think figure 7 in the memo by Jane Ihrig and her co-authors shows why.  In that figure, the large balance sheet unmoors inflationary expectations with deleterious macroeconomic consequences by mid-decade.  There are reasons to be concerned that this may end up being more than just a thought experiment.  As I’ll discuss in my later remarks, the 10-year, 10-year forward break-even inflation rate has risen by 65 basis points in the past seven months, rather steadily, and now stands at nearly 3 percent. It is true that sales will have contractionary effects, and the Ihrig memo provides us with estimates of their magnitude.  The memo rightly describes its baseline estimates as modest, but there are a couple of reasons why I believe that even these modest baseline estimates overstate the true effects by at least a factor of two. First, the memo’s calculations are based on an estimate from a working paper by Gagnon et. al.—apologies to Brian—that the LSAP program lowered bond premiums by 80 basis points.  However, the Gagnon paper finds such a large effect of the LSAPs only if it ignores duration heterogeneity.  The more sophisticated estimates of the paper are more along the lines of 30 to 40 basis points.  These lower estimates are also basically the same as the ones that I reported to you earlier from different New York Fed research by Raskin and Sheets and by Kimbrough and  Madar.  But even those estimates strike me as being too high, because it seems likely the current market prices already reflect expectations that the Fed will use sales paths at least like those in options 2 to 4, probably not 5.  In Minneapolis, we did the simple event study of the one-day effect of FOMC speeches, testimony, and minutes on MBS prices over the past six months.  The biggest move came on March 25, when Chairman Bernanke’s exit strategy testimony made clear that the Fed would need to engage in gradual sales at some point.  His testimony is associated with a change in MBS prices of six basis points.  My own speech on April 6 had an effect on MBS prices of exactly zero basis points.  But I admit that this is a result that is consistent with multiple interpretations.  [Laughter] To me, the benefits of avoiding the possibility of inflation scenarios like the one depicted in figure 7 are worth the costs described earlier in the Ihrig memo.  This is especially so given that the true costs are, as I have argued, likely to be significantly smaller than the memo’s estimates.  So I strongly prefer options 2 to 5 with plans that don’t shrink the balance sheet in the immediate future.  I view the choice among options 2 through 5 to be second or even third order, and I think that’s consistent with the results we have seen in the Ihrig memo.  Nonetheless, I will offer my views on that question.  To oversimplify, we have two tools:  assets sales and the fed funds rate.  I think the first tool is new, and the second is familiar.  To me this argues that we should use gradual, noncontingent sales to get our balance sheet and longer-run inflationary expectations under control.  We can then rely on the fed funds rate to do the final work of shaping the macroeconomy. Along the same lines, my preferred communication plan would be to divorce balance sheet normalization from our traditional fed funds rate choices, and I would also, I think, allow for a fair amount of future flexibility.  I would like to indicate relatively soon in the statement  that  “the Committee’s goal is to normalize the Fed’s balance sheet both in terms of scale and composition within the next five to ten years.  In keeping with this objective, the Committee will initiate gradual sales in early 2011, if economic conditions are appropriate.”  I’m open to other kinds of details in this communication, for example, saying we will initiate gradual sales shortly after raising rates.  The details of this communication would, of course, then depend on our desired sales strategy.  But I think the more important point for me is that we soon provide some form of forward guidance about balance sheet normalization, because I think markets are longing for that. I, too, was planning to speak about Treasury redemptions tomorrow, but, to sum up, I want to shrink the balance sheet.  This seems like a relatively fast way to do it.  It is going to lead to a contractionary increase in interest rates, but the Bluebook argues, and I think it is right, that these effects are likely to be small, especially because I think there are more expectations built into the market than even what’s in the Bluebook.  Having said that, it’s critical, I think, given where we are in terms of current unemployment and inflation, to use language to isolate this move from any decision to increase the fed funds rate.  But I’m pretty happy with the language in alternative B in the Bluebook along these lines.  So I’d be in favor of going ahead with redemptions now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that someone named Governor Kohn exists without providing any further information or opinions.


Passage number 47.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I join the others in congratulating and thanking the staff.  I’m glad I am on this side of the table rather than that side of the table on the exit strategy stuff [laughter].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards the staff and making a lighthearted comment about being glad to be on his current side of the table.


Passage number 48.
 MR. WARSH:  Not for long.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Warsh's statement suggests that there will not be a long delay or issue.


Passage number 49.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Thank you" does not express any disagreement or contention. Additionally, the mention of First Vice President Holcomb does not indicate any conflicting opinions or disagreements.


Passage number 50.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will attempt to speak on behalf of President Fisher without really having had an opportunity to speak with him specifically about his views.  If Richard were here, I believe that he’d argue for an approach that leaves the Committee with greater flexibility to determine the best pace for asset sales as economic conditions warrant.  In addition, as he has stated, he is in favor of moving expeditiously to return the balance sheet to normal.  I am not sure that there is an option on the table that is fully consistent with his views, but option 3 seems to come the closest. We are sensitive not only to the need to allow the Committee flexibility to gauge its approach to changing conditions, but also to the need to understand better the implications of shrinking and changing the composition of the balance sheet.  Given the unprecedented nature of the current situation, until greater experience has been gained, these implications are largely unknown, and it will remain difficult to determine the optimum speed at which to shrink the balance sheet, therefore arguing for greater flexibility. Finally, Richard has been concerned about the institution of rigid rules to determine the Committee’s actions, even if the rules have contingency wording built in.  I believe he would want to avoid making strong commitments at this point.  So, given the desire to preserve conditionality for the Committee, yet move forward forthwith, I believe that option 3 is closest to or perhaps I should say least far from, our views.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining President Fisher's views and stating that option 3 is the closest to those views. There is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone addressed as "President Hoenig."


Passage number 52.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you.  I have to add my thanks to the staff.  This really was a very helpful set of options, and thanks to Brian for such a great presentation.  Let me start by saying that, while I certainly realize that monetary policy is scheduled for discussion tomorrow, it is hard, I think, to avoid touching on some aspects of policy as we discuss these options today.  But I won’t stray very far, I hope. I assume that, for the purposes of this discussion, our overall objective is to normalize monetary policy within five years, the period during which we would expect the economy and the financial markets to have returned to a more normal set of circumstances themselves.  Included in this objective is the goal of restoring the size and composition of the balance sheet to normal and raising the nominal fed funds rate closer to neutral, depending on inflation expectations and inflation itself, of course. In considering the five options, I do judge option 2, asset sales after an increase in the target, to be the closest to my preferred approach.  Under this option, we eliminate agency debt and MBS within five years from when we first increase the fed funds rate, depending on economic and financial conditions.  I believe this approach will be the most favorable to the economy and financial markets as we move through this transition. While option 2 is close to my preferred approach, I do have some important differences that may not surprise you.  Importantly, as I will suggest during tomorrow’s go-around, I believe we should begin to consider raising the fed funds rate towards 1 percent as early as this summer and into September, and we need to do it in more than a quarter-point step, which would only give the market the impression that we have this series of quarter-point steps into, it seems, infinity.  I’d also say that, after we get to 1 percent, we would pause and take stock of the emerging economic and financial conditions.  We would look then to determine whether and at what pace the rate should increase beyond that, thus letting the markets know where we are headed and that we will take conditionality into consideration.  This would then also allow us, I  think, to redeem Treasuries along the way.  As the fed funds rate rises above 1 percent, we can then begin to dispose of the mortgage-backed securities and judge at what pace this might occur in a pretty careful way. Finally, let me turn to the issue of how we communicate our asset sales strategy.  Once a decision is made, I would disclose it in the statement following the meeting with additional details included in the minutes.  If this isn’t acceptable, perhaps we could do it through testimony or other remarks, but I think we can do it following the meeting.  Therefore, I generally support the illustrative language in option 2 described in table 2 of the staff memo, subject to the differences I have mentioned here.  I also appreciate that the statement includes a general description of the overall exit strategy that I think would be important to the market.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their gratitude for the staff's help and presenting their preferred approach and suggestions for monetary policy.


Passage number 53.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Can I take from your remarks that you are okay on redemptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention anything related to redemptions or express any indication of agreement or disagreement. It is simply a polite expression of gratitude.


Passage number 54.
 MR. HOENIG.  Yes, I think this allows us to do Treasury redemptions at this point because we are thinking of raising the rate along the way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about a proposed action.


Passage number 55.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name of a person, President Plosser, without providing any additional information or context. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement involved.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 56.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will join the chorus of praise for the staff.  This is a fascinating set of memos.  I learned a lot, and it has stimulated a lot of thinking about different things. My view is a kind of linear combination of perhaps 2, but probably 3 and 5.  One of the things that struck me about this memo, which has already been said, was the rather modest effects of very rapid sales on the economy—not zero, but moderate—which leads me to have more confidence that we can exit from this unusually large balance sheet perhaps more rapidly than we might have thought.  I say that because, again, my objective, like that of many others, is  to reduce the size of the balance sheet and get its composition back to all-Treasuries.  The question then arises of what the pace should be and how we would go about doing that.  I think one of the debates about this relates particularly to the relationship between when we raise rates and when we start selling assets, whenever that may be.  I guess I would stress that we don’t really know very much about how policy and the economy will respond as we raise the IOER rate when we have a balance sheet with a trillion dollars of excess reserves. Our confidence in how monetary policy is going to work in that environment is highly uncertain.  So I think it behooves us to take seriously the option of trying to get the balance sheet somewhat more in control before we begin to rely only on moving the funds rate target.  That could protect us from finding ourselves in a position somewhere down the road where we may decide that we have to raise rates very rapidly, and shrink the balance sheet very rapidly, and deal with all of the concomitant complications that that may pose for us.  I think a more prudent policy would be to begin earlier, so that we have more confidence in our ability to execute both a funds rate policy and a shrinking of the balance sheet policy. I guess my views are partly a linear combination of President Kocherlakota’s, President Bullard’s, and President Lacker’s.  I am sympathetic to the notion that it’s a good idea to have some conditionality in our ability to shrink the balance sheet.  In particular, committing for five years that this is the pace of our sales and then sticking with it seems to me to be perhaps unwise, particularly when we don’t know the consequences of our funds rate policy in hitting our monetary policy targets.  I also think that if we have to raise interest rates very high, with high excess reserves, we end up paying lots of money to the banking system in the short run, and I’m not sure politically that’s going to look very good, either.  I think there are good arguments for not sequencing these things.  I think you may have to take them jointly as we move forward.  I like the idea of committing to sell assets perhaps for an intermeeting period, or maybe three months or so, and then having the option to reevaluate the pace at which we sell those assets.  But I would prefer, as in option 5, to make that pace more aggressive early.  And if we need to slow it down, we could choose to do that. I would also add that, in talk about the tightening of policy, I think we have to understand that, as the economy continues to grow—whether or not we have met our dual mandate, which I think it’s important to achieve—if we leave the funds rate where it is, we will actually be creating more accommodative policy relative to where we were.  So I think we have to be a little careful in how we interpret our behavior here. Mr. Chairman, the last question was about both communications and redemptions.  On communication, I think it is very important that at this meeting, either in the minutes or maybe preferably in the statement, we make it clear that asset sales are in fact on the table, that they are a tool of policy, that we desire to shrink the balance sheet over time and to return to an all- Treasuries portfolio, and that at subsequent meetings this Committee will be further considering the timing and pace of such sales.  I think it’s very important that we make that as clear as we possibly can. On Treasury redemptions, I’m somewhat ambivalent here.  I would like to see Treasury redemptions simply because it furthers my goal of shrinking the balance sheet.  But I also have some sympathy for the view that if we didn’t want to shrink the balance sheet quite as fast, then I would prefer, as President Lacker suggested, that we roll non-Treasury redemptions over into short-term Treasury bills, which would give us more flexibility going forward.  I would be amenable to such a strategy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. Mr. Plosser expresses his view on how to reduce the size of the balance sheet and get its composition back to all-Treasuries. He also discusses the timing and pace of selling assets and raises concerns about the uncertainty of how monetary policy will work in an environment with a large balance sheet. Additionally, he mentions his sympathy for the views of presidents Kocherlakota, Bullard, and Lacker, indicating there are differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 57.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think I can assure you this will be in the minutes, we’re in good shape on that score.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confidence and assuring the other person that the mentioned item will be included in the minutes.


Passage number 58.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me add to everyone else’s praise of the staff and thanks for the memo that framed a complex subject very well. First, I’d like to weigh in in support of what President Rosengren said.  I’m trying to frame my thinking by, first, starting with the end goal, which, I think, is the achievement of the mandates and nurturing a positive path for the economy, not, strictly speaking, the balance sheet size. Second, preliminary to commenting on the specific issues, I think we have to keep in mind a context here.  The first context is the state of the economy as it is today, which we will discuss later.  But also, as others have commented, we are in new territory regarding monetary policy, and a lot is not known or understood.  We have a lot to learn, such as, the market reaction to monetary policy actions taken prior to changes in interest rates, the behavior of the fed funds rate in the presence of high reserves, the ability to use the interest on reserves as the policy rate, the effectiveness of reverse repos and term deposits, and the optimal balance sheet size.  The point is that there are simply a lot of things that we’re going to learn along the way, and I think the best approach is to recognize what we don’t know and to maximize flexibility through the process, and not to jump to what I would consider less reversible measures before we have clarity, that is, I’d take an approach that takes a step and assesses, and then takes another step and assesses. That said, the approach that I would take has elements of 2 through 4, perhaps even 1 through 4.  I would not initiate sales immediately or early.  I would do that after a conscious decision to tighten, which, in my mind, is not necessarily a rate move but is the commencement  of draining, and conceivably the dropping of language.  I would not redeem Treasuries.  I would reinvest them biased toward bills.  I see a relatively small gain from the redeeming of Treasuries in terms of the reduction of the balance sheet.  I think there is something to be said for preserving ammunition for the reverse repo activities.   And I think I’d like to avoid the later need to purchase Treasuries to fill in after we have sold them or redeemed them early in the process.  I see sales as, in effect, a permanent step in reduction of the balance sheet, and I would sequence things to let the impermanent measures precede the permanent, meaning the use of reverse repos and term deposits.  Then, as we know better the optimal size of the balance sheet, the success of the draining tools, and what’s needed to affect the fed funds rate, we could begin to let the permanent measure, which would be the asset sales, take over for the impermanent measures. Regarding communications, I would communicate that the sales program is conditional, and I would accelerate it if market conditions allow.  I favor an announced program, in effect a kind of reverse of the LSAP program that communicates that it is conditional, as in option 3.  And I am open to the reverse taper idea in option 4 that basically communicates a clear framework that, again, is qualified as being conditional on the course of the economy and market conditions.  Those are my thoughts, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and preferences on how to approach the issue at hand, but there is no direct opposition to any other viewpoint.


Passage number 59.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement or evidence of contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from the speaker (President Evans) to someone else.


Passage number 60.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, it will be in the minutes, obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply indicates that something will be included in the minutes, which does not involve any conflicting views or disagreement.


Passage number 61.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 62.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We can discuss that tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that the topic of discussion can be postponed to another day.


Passage number 63.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  If we say too much, it could be a bombshell, if it’s in the minutes rather than the statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "If we say too much, it could be a bombshell" does not imply any disagreement among the individuals involved. It suggests caution in sharing too much information.


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the minutes will reflect the variety and the depth of the discussion.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that the minutes will accurately represent the wide range and significance of the discussion.


Passage number 65.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also would like to compliment the staff for providing a very useful set of memos that organize the many complex issues associated with potential asset sales into a workable set of options. After examining the staff analysis of the options and the different objectives that they seek to accomplish, I found myself looking for the best way to attain several objectives.  First, I would like to return the SOMA to an all-Treasuries composition in the intermediate term, but I would initiate asset sales only when the economic recovery is well established.  Second, I would like to minimize market disruptions.  Third, I would like to avoid having to purchase any additional MBS down the road.  Fourth, I would like to rely as much as possible on the federal  funds rate or other short-term policy rates as the primary signal of monetary policy.  And finally, I think the realized or unrealized losses on the SOMA portfolio should be a second-order consideration and should not drive our decisions. Comparing the five policy options in the staff memo against these objectives, I find options 1, 3, and 5 to be less appealing than options 2 and 4.  Option 1 doesn’t get us back to an all-Treasury SOMA quickly enough.  Option 3 puts the sales and potential purchase of assets in the policy forefront rather than the interest on excess reserves or the federal funds rate.  Option 5 poses the risk of market disruptions, and if the economy starts to deteriorate, it could be difficult for us to provide the necessary monetary policy stimulus due to the zero lower bound. Option 4 is attractive to me because it returns us to a Treasuries-only SOMA within five years and places the emphasis of monetary control on short-term policy rates.  By starting with relatively small quantities of sales and then scaling up over time, we could likely minimize disruptions to mortgage markets and the broader economy, and, of course, by having to announce asset sales only once, we could reduce uncertainty over at least one aspect of monetary policy. I am concerned, however, about the extent of pre-commitment embodied in option 4, which, I realize, is meant to be its inherent strength.  I am very uncertain about what economic and financial conditions will prevail three years or so out, and if we go down the path of this pre-commitment strategy, it might be that as we’re ramping up these sales, we could face a situation with an economy that is deteriorating, and that would make it very difficult for us to provide accommodation.  It would also cause us to deviate from our preannounced path and then, perhaps, cause us to lose some of our credibility.  That leaves me favoring option 2.  Option 2 doesn’t have all the benefits that come with a pre-commitment in option 4, but in choosing option 2, we could be committing to sell all agency debt and MBS within a specified time period, which I view as a large step forward.  In addition, option 2 contains an embedded option of its own.  We can choose at any time in the future to invoke a stronger commitment to sell along a particular path, as in option 4.  For example, two years from now, we could pre-commit to an explicit sales path, if that strategy has merit at that time.  So I think option 2 brings many of the advantages of option 4, but with more flexibility.  One other consideration that tips me in favor of option 2 is the fact that the economic outcomes associated with options 2 and 4 are very similar, at least as modeled here by the staff.  I realize these scenarios, as others have said, are hard to model and the range of real outcomes might be wider than has been presented.  But based on what I can see, the pre-commitment strategy is not buying me enough of an improvement in the outcomes to overcome my concerns about the inflexibility in option 4. Regarding the redemption of Treasury securities, I was prepared to support the language that was presented in alternative B that states we would stop reinvesting the proceeds from maturing Treasuries.  I do have some of the concerns that others have mentioned that the redemption of Treasuries will be a tightening of monetary policy, but I can support that step because it will help us start unwinding our balance sheet.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts, preferences, and concerns about the different options presented.


Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  We have a few more speakers, but it’s four o’clock, and maybe it’s time for a 15-minute, 20-minute break.  Say 4:15.  There’s coffee outside.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply conveying information about the schedule and suggesting a break for the attendees.


Passage number 67.
 [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we recommence.  Governor Warsh, you’re next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting to continue the conversation and directs it to Governor Warsh.


Passage number 68.
  MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me add my thanks for the memos.  I think the reward you get for the great memos is trying to make sense of what we’ve heard so far when you write the minutes. Let me see if I can’t try to summarize it in some broad view before going to specifics, some of which I think are covered by what was already said this earlier this afternoon.  First, I think it’s more important that the broad outlines of an asset plan strategy be understood than that a specific asset management plan be announced. I think that really puts the emphasis on communications, perhaps for this FOMC cycle.  Second, I think we should be as clear as possible about our redemption and sales strategy as we possibly can.  No less and no more.  That means that the purpose of the communication should be to see where we can agree around the table at least in a broad consensus.  Third, if properly communicated, financial markets seem to me readily able to incorporate clear, credible, properly sized, prospective communications about asset sales.  The improvements in the financial markets should make us more comfortable that, if we do our jobs in communicating the kinds of asset sales that we’ve described, they should be well received in the markets. Fourth, it strikes me that the impact of the last dollar of MBS purchases or, say, the last $100 billion of MBS purchases, was rather small in financial markets in terms of overall effect.  I think the effect of the first dollar, or $100 billion, of sales of these assets is also likely to be quite small, if properly understood.  I think that private market participants appear right now to look quite kindly on this kind of asset.  These government-backed, mortgage-backed securities strike me as being somewhere in the sweet spot of what investors are looking for.  This obviously can change, but that should give us incremental comfort if we choose to start to socialize our strategy at this moment.  Fifth, in my view, more broadly, there are likely net benefits of slowly and  steadily disposing of these assets, or at least signaling as we come out of this meeting an openness to doing so, and that could precede changes in the policy rate.  Sixth, even assuming an active program of asset sales above and beyond what I’d recommend—I’m thinking about option 5—the high end of staff work suggests that the term premiums could be as much as 80 basis points.  I share the view of others that that well overstates the likely impact.  But even if that’s the case, it was striking to me—and I’ll share a view that President Lacker expressed—that it takes a lot of work to move the needle in terms of real economic effect.  So while this is a very consequential decision we’re making on asset sales, I think the consequences of the communication are greater.  If the communications were botched, it would likely have real consequences in financial markets and the real economy.  So I’ll put the emphasis back there. What should we guard against.  I think as a seventh point I would say we should guard against option 5 being perceived as being too anxious to engage in rapid fire sales of assets.  I think we should also guard against option 1, the idea that we’re very comfortable holding these assets for the next couple of decades, making these housing assets part of our permanent portfolio, or allowing normal maturity schedules to dictate our holdings.  Another thing we should guard against is confusing markets.  I think markets, through no fault of anyone around this table, are uncertain about what our relative preferences are between policy rates, balance sheet size, and asset mix.  I think they’re also confused about the timing.  If we could come out of this FOMC meeting or the next with some overall sense of the best way forward, I think we’d be doing ourselves and markets and the real economy some good. As an eighth and final point before turning to specifics, it strikes me, based on what I’ve heard so far today, that it’s best to chart a thoughtful, steady, middle ground that crowds in private investors, who are probably more interested in holding these assets than we are.  What does that mean in terms of strategy.  I favor outlining a broad strategy of asset sales outside the four corners of the statement—most likely in the minutes and in the speeches from many of our colleagues—that accomplishes three things.  First, it envisions circumstances where asset sales might, but only might, precede changes in the policy rate.  Second, asset sales are done in a way that is slow, steady, prospective, predictable, and presumed to continue absent a material change in economic conditions.  And finally, in the broad strategy of asset sales, we avoid at this moment pre-committing to a date for the program to kick off. I think that, perhaps, as we get through the next couple of meetings, if we get more comfortable with the contour of the economy, as we’ll discuss in the economic go-round tomorrow, we could get more comfortable with signaling what the date could be.  But I’m not sure as of this minute that I’d want to nail that down or put that in stone. On the question you asked, Mr. Chairman, about reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasuries, I am comfortable, at least in isolation, putting that in the statement at this meeting.  But I think that goes against what is more likely to be the key takeaway that we want it to be, and I worry that, even though I favor that section in paragraph 4 as a matter of policy, it gets in the way of our broader communications coming out of this meeting.  I would say it’s probably not worth it for now.  We can talk more about that tomorrow.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the broad points discussed earlier in the meeting and expressing their own views and suggestions. There is no opposing viewpoint presented or any indication of disagreement among the participants.


Passage number 69.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. It simply consists of an expression of gratitude towards Governor Duke.


Passage number 70.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor option 2 for reasons that have already been pretty well articulated here.  I also appreciate, more than I can say, the staff memos.  They were not only helpful, but I don’t know what I would have done to entertain myself this weekend without them.  [Laughter]  I did come down to option 2, but I was attracted by option 3.  My problem with option 3 was that there seemed to be so much conditionality that it implied that we were going to use two tools.  So it seemed to me a little difficult for both us and for markets to keep up with when we were using which tool and what we were using it to do.  So I came down to option 2. I do think that we should make a movement in the short-term rate first before we start the asset sales.  And I favor redemption of Treasuries, as they reduce the balance sheet size and would put less pressure on reverse repos and term deposits.  I would probably agree with Governor Kohn that it might make sense to begin or to announce them when we are getting ready to raise rates.  I’m not sure that it is necessary to do it right now versus sometime in the near future. I would also be interested in a strategy that replaced it with Treasury bills.  I thought we had discussed that six months ago or so, and there were operational difficulties with that.  The reason I particularly liked the redemption of the Treasuries is that we got to a point where we needed to buy additional Treasuries sooner, and they could have been bills.  Finally, on communications, I think we should be absolutely clear to markets about what our overall intentions are, and then make our own future decisions within those frameworks in the same way that market participants will make theirs.  When we started buying the assets, we announced that we were going to purchase X assets by Y date.  In terms of sales, I think also announcing that we were going to sell that same body of assets by a date certain would give everybody something to mark off of.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their preference for option 2 and explains their reasoning for it. They also discuss their views on the redemption of Treasuries and communication strategies, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 71.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 72.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start briefly with my premises.  First, I don’t want to tighten monetary policy right now.  Second, I agree with President  Rosengren’s point that the size and composition of the balance sheet is not an end in itself, but a means to achieving the ends specified by the Congress in our dual mandate.  Third, in general I prefer maintaining our ability to adjust policy to the conditions as we find them.  But, fourth, I think there is some guidance needed in markets, specifically with respect to the question of asset sales.  That’s the thing that I find that people have asked about the most, substantially more than interest on excess balances or term deposits or anything else. Which considerations have most affected me of these that I’ve heard from you today and from staff and others in the days leading up to this meeting.  One is that it’s a bit hard for me to see how anything but really quite substantial asset sales before a change in our target could actually do very much to sop up some of that soggy bottom that we may be looking at when we want to increase the target rate.  There is uncertainty, obviously, about what reactions will be, what the perceived signaling effect of our beginning to sell assets will be.  So even though I think people have done a good job of trying to project what those reactions will be, we don’t have any history on the basis of which to extrapolate. Next, as several people have pointed out, we would be in a very uncomfortable position if we wanted to reverse sales, if we thought, “Oops, we made some sales, turns out that that was a little bit premature, and now we want to go back.”  I think that the hurdle for that kind of reversal would be considered quite high by everybody around the table. Next, though, is sort of the converse of that.  Once we are in a mode in which we want to tighten, I think that we should contemplate the possibility that we might sell assets fairly quickly or sell a lot of assets fairly quickly, depending on the circumstances as we find them.  That is to say, if we are in a mode in which we have decided that tightening is warranted, we’ll presumably have made the judgment that markets can sustain the tightening without pushing the economy in  an unfavorable direction, and where, obviously, by definition, we’re not worried about either signaling or actually tightening.  So, if a situation such as President Plosser contemplates were to be realized, I think that we, in turn, should contemplate moving in parallel with both policy tools as quickly as might be needed. Where does this all leave me.  Well, it leaves me wanting a fairly parsimonious decision, because obviously some of my premises are actually or potentially in conflict with one another.  And that leads me to—[laughter]—that’s the nature of policymaking, President Yellen, in addition to saying “so moved.”  I’m not uncomfortable with needing to balance those considerations, but they lead me to a parsimonious option 2, because what I hope that we can do coming out of this meeting is to signal with some clarity that asset sales will not begin until we have specified an increase in the target rate, and, in line with what Kevin was saying earlier, to indicate that we’re prepared to move forward with a plan at that point, which would be reasonably predictable and from which we could deviate if unusual circumstances dictated that we do so.  But I don’t think, at this moment, that we either need to or should decide, for example, whether some variant on option 3 or option 4 is the right way to go, once we do make the decision to begin selling those assets. On redemption of Treasuries, I guess at this juncture I’m opposed for the reason that President Lacker stated.  I think it’s best to bind these decisions up together when the time comes to make them.  And, as I’ve already intimated, my preferred mode of communication would not be in the statement, certainly not this statement, because, again, I think that leads us towards tightening.  Obviously, the minutes will speak for themselves.  But I would hope that we would collectively equip the Chairman to be able to speak with the confidence that the whole FOMC is  behind him on the elements of this consensus that we are able to reach, understanding that there will be some elements of our decision that will need to await a future meeting.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is some contention and disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses preferences for certain actions and considerations, but also acknowledges conflicting premises and uncertainties. For example, the speaker mentions the need for guidance in markets regarding asset sales, but also expresses uncertainty about the impact and risks of selling assets. The speaker also mentions the possibility of quickly selling assets in a tightening mode, but also acknowledges the need for a parsimonious decision that balances conflicting considerations.


Passage number 73.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only contains a polite expression of gratitude and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 74.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And thank you, staff, for great work.  Keep it up.  I know you will.  We’re certainly putting lots of demands on you, that’s for sure. My preference is to provide guidance only broadly in terms of what the sequence of tools is likely to be.  It seems too soon to provide details.  After all, I think that exit, in terms of trying to tighten financial conditions, is not likely to happen soon, nor should it happen soon.  Providing details now would be premature, as it would foreclose future options and might imply to market participants that a nearer-term adjustment to policy was going to take place than what we actually anticipate doing.  I would favor outlining in the FOMC minutes, assuming that the Committee can come to a reasonable consensus, a sequence that goes like this:  The Committee is going to change the “extended period” language at some point, then reserve draining will begin in size, the interest on excess reserves rate will be raised, and only after that will asset sales commence at a slow and deliberate rate. I view early asset sales as inappropriate for several reasons.  It’s a blunt tool that we don’t have much experience with.  While the staff estimate is that modest asset sales would be worth 25 to 35 basis points, I thought the survey results were interesting in that even very modest asset sales of $50 billion per year, according to the market participants, would cause a 20 basis point backup in yield, and $150 billion a year would cause a 40 basis point backup.  I think the reality is that we don’t know how large the effects would be, we just know the direction.  Also, I would note that asset sales are not anticipated by market participants any time soon.  Even for agency  MBS sales, the probability of sales in the next two years is reported at only about 25 percent in the survey.  In addition, we can conduct monetary policy effectively with an enlarged balance sheet, so I think the costs of delay on asset sales are quite low.  We could do asset sales sooner, but I don’t see the benefits outweighing the cost.  I’m not particularly troubled by the fact that we have a large balance sheet.  We have the tools to manage monetary policy despite that.  I’m also not particularly troubled by holding the agency MBS for a while longer.  I don’t want to hold it for 20 years, but a little longer is okay.  They are de facto government-guaranteed.  The only risk we have is with respect to duration and convexity.  Those risks seemed acceptable to me, relative to the risk of tightening financial market conditions prematurely.  I’m troubled mostly by how far away we are from our dual mandate, to echo President Rosengren. In terms of the Treasury redemption issue, I think there’s no pressing reason to do this now.  Depending on what the Treasury did in terms of their debt management, it would increase duration that would likely be held by the market and thereby lead to some increase in long-term rates.  I don’t see why that’s desirable at the current time.  Also, the decision about redeeming Treasuries depends a little, I think, on our decisions about what we want our portfolio to look like over the long term.  So I’d ask the staff to help us think about what that portfolio should look like, and then use that as something to inform our decision about Treasury redemptions going forward.  I’d also note that market participants generally put a low probability on our deciding to redeem Treasuries, so, if we were to do it and announce it, it would lead to some backup in rates right now.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 75.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Rosengren has a question.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 77.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  It would be interesting to know what was coming due and when, so that we could get a sense, if we were to go with the last alternative, what it might look like.  Getting the information as soon as tomorrow may not be possible, I realize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing curiosity and acknowledging the potential limitations of obtaining information by tomorrow.


Passage number 78.
 MR. SACK.   Do you mean over the coming years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification.


Passage number 79.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If we were to redeem only securities with original maturities longer than three, five, or seven years, what would the total redemptions be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a question that simply poses a hypothetical scenario. It does not present any arguments or differing viewpoints.


Passage number 80.
 MR. SACK.   I can give you some numbers now, or I could put together a full set of numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states two options they can provide - giving numbers now or putting together a full set of numbers - without showing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you think you can get numbers for tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple question asking for someone's opinion on obtaining numbers for the following day.


Passage number 82.
 MR. SACK.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without any context or specific information about the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. The word "Yes" on its own does not provide enough information.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Terrific.  Anything else.  [No response.]  All right, we can now turn to the second agenda item, the economic situation, and turn to Dave Stockton and Nathan Sheets to give us the overview.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple exchange of information and the transition to the next agenda item.


Passage number 84.
 MR. MADIGAN.3  Thank you.  I’ll be referring to the package labeled “Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.”  Exhibit 1 depicts the broad contours of your current projections for 2010 through 2012 and over the longer run.  Almost all of you continue to project a gradual economic recovery, with the unemployment rate, the second panel, slowly trending lower and inflation, the third and fourth panels, remaining subdued over the next few years. Exhibit 2 reports the central tendencies and ranges of your projections for calendar years 2010 through 2012 and over the longer run; the corresponding information about your January projections is indicated in italics, and Greenbook projections are included as a memo item.  As shown in the top panel, most of you anticipate that real GDP will increase about 3½ percent in 2010.  The central tendency and the lower limit of the range of your growth projections for this year are both slightly higher than in January.  You see economic growth stepping up in 2011, with a central tendency of 3½ to 4½ percent and then staying at about that rate in 2012.  Both the range and the central tendency of your estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of GDP growth, the right-hand column, are the same as in January.   Your unemployment rate projections are summarized in the second panel.  The central tendency for the average unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of this year is 9 to 9½ percent, a bit lower than in January.  But, underscoring your expectations of a gradual economic recovery, all but one of you expect that the unemployment rate will remain above 8 percent at the end of next year.  Moreover, most of you project that the unemployment rate will be about 6½ to 7½ percent even in late 2012—well above your estimates, shown in the right-hand column, of the 5 to 5¼ percent unemployment rate that most of you anticipate to prevail over the longer run in the absence of further shocks. As shown in the third panel, the central tendencies of your projections for headline PCE inflation over 2010 to 2012 are just a bit lower than the projections you gave in January.  In contrast, the central tendencies of your projections for core PCE inflation over that horizon, the fourth panel, have shifted down more notably, and the dispersion of those projections has narrowed.  The deviations in your projections for overall inflation compared with core inflation generally suggest that a number of you anticipate persistent upward movements in the relative prices of food and energy over the next few years.  Nonetheless, nearly all of you project that through 2012 headline inflation will stay at or below your judgments of 1¾ to 2 percent for the “mandate-consistent” inflation rate, the right-hand column. Your views on the outlook for inflation continue to differ somewhat from the staff’s:  Across the three years, the Greenbook forecasts for total and core inflation are around the lower limits of the central tendency ranges of your projections.  This pattern helps explain why a sizable majority of you anticipate that it will be necessary to begin moving the federal funds rate up earlier than envisioned in the Greenbook. As shown in exhibit 3, about two-thirds of you continue to see greater-than-usual uncertainty regarding your projections for economic growth and inflation, the solid bars in the two left-hand panels.  As shown in the top right panel, most of you judge that the risks to output growth are roughly balanced, but a few of you now see those risks as tilted to the upside.  Most of you continue to view the risks to the inflation outlook, the bottom right panel, as roughly balanced.  Thank you.  That concludes our prepared remarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 85.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for the staff.  Anyone.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage consists of a polite expression of gratitude followed by a request for questions to be addressed to the staff, with the mention that anyone, including President Lacker, can ask questions. The tone is respectful and cooperative.


Passage number 86.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.  This question just occurred to me in looking at this year’s bank earnings reports, and it probably should have occurred to me earlier, and you have probably thought this through, so help me with this.  When loans are written off by a bank, that’s an increase in the net worth of the consumer, but my understanding is that that’s not included in  NIPA personal income, and, as a result, there’s sort of a boost to net worth, like an unmodeled income flow, that we’ve been seeing.  A couple of back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest it’s roughly 1½ percent outstanding balances at an annual rate.  I can’t claim we have nailed this, but it could be material—it looks like it could be maybe 0.4 percent of disposal income at an annual rate.  So do you think that might be responsible for consumer spending coming in stronger than you might have expected.  Do you factor this in.  How do you think about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification or confirmation from the person they are addressing.


Passage number 87.
 MR. STOCKTON.  First of all, I guess I’d need to check on the accounting because, in fact, I haven’t thought of this and I’m not totally sure.  I guess I’d like to get my thoughts organized on that.  If that’s the case, the income flow from that would not be in this forecast, but it would be here through its effects through net worth and overall stock prices.  I will get a note to you on what the facts are there first before I actually embarrass myself by saying something incorrect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about the accounting and wanting to gather more information before making a definitive statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 88.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker, another possible measurement issue is tax refunds, which are not counted as current income but are probably higher this quarter than they have been on average.  That also could explain part of the change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The mention of "probably higher this quarter than they have been on average" implies a different perspective or an alternative explanation from the one previously stated.


Passage number 89.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  Well, let me follow up.  Do you calculate this financial obligations ratio.  Does that factor into your modeling at a formal level.  I mean, it’s sort of a “cash-flowy” kind of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No+ The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It only includes a question and further clarification.


Passage number 90.
 MR. STOCKTON.  Yes.   We look at that financial obligations ratio to get a sense of how much strain there is on household balance sheets.  It’s something we take account of judgmentally.  It’s not incorporated in our consumption models per se, but I think certainly as we look at the decline in the financial obligations ratio, that gives us a sense that part of what this forecast is predicated upon is an improvement in underlying financial conditions and a lessening  of credit constriction, and that affects consumption.  So we’re getting a bigger acceleration in consumption than just the pickup in income growth can account for, because we’re assuming there are going to be better financial conditions and better household balance sheets going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the use of the financial obligations ratio in assessing household balance sheets and its impact on consumption.


Passage number 91.
 MR. LACKER.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage only includes a statement with no conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 92.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry to pursue this, but you’ve got me interested now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It seems to express curiosity and interest in the topic being discussed.


Passage number 93.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  It’s interesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 94.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It would be a wealth effect mostly, and that has got to balance out.  Any write-down on liabilities would have to balance out on the asset side, obviously.  But are you referring to the flow of payments, the interest payments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing a potential financial outcome and the balance between liabilities and assets.


Passage number 95.
 MR. LACKER.  I think there are both.  It decreases their liabilities, which makes them better off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It states a fact about the decrease in liabilities making someone better off without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing claims.


Passage number 96.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 97.
 MR. LACKER.  But then a mortgage restructuring reduces your monthly payment flow, and that has this financial obligation ratio effect.  So I was thinking about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning a potential financial effect of mortgage restructuring.


Passage number 98.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  An interjection by Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Governor Kohn's interjection does not indicate disagreement or contention, but rather an interruption or additional input.


Passage number 99.
 MR. KOHN.  I actually asked one of your staff about this, Dave, and she said, first of all, it’s a transfer of income from the lenders to the borrowers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply relaying information they received from a staff member without expressing any disagreement or taking a stance.


Passage number 100.
 MR. LACKER.  But presumably to more credit constrained borrowers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as an assumption, without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 101.
 MR. KOHN.  Right.  So the mpc rates would probably be a little higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "MR. KOHN" is simply agreeing with the previous statement.


Passage number 102.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentions Mr. Lacker without stating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 103.
 MR. KOHN.  But she also noted that it’s unlikely that this has grown a lot over time to account for the pickup in income growth.  It could account for some of the level.  But I guess the  more foreclosure mitigation efforts there are, the more of this that might be going on.  What I was reading about was the strategic defaults—people who were defaulting and staying in their homes so they weren’t paying rent and they weren’t paying their mortgages, either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of homeowners strategically defaulting on their mortgages.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 104.
 MR. STOCKTON.  But even that effect on consumption would in some sense be a little bit more like a wealth effect, because presumably those people are going to have to pay for housing sooner or later.  So it isn’t an increase in their permanent income by that amount.  It’s a certain period of time in which they might be able to consume housing services free, but ultimately they’re going to have to pay for it.  So that was a small, incremental effect on wealth.  It could have a small positive effect.  We didn’t really think that was likely to be material.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Stockton, is presenting a counterargument or differing opinion. He disagrees with the idea that the temporary consumption of free housing services would have a significant positive effect on wealth. He argues that although individuals may be able to consume housing services for free for a certain period, they will eventually have to pay for it, and therefore, it is not an increase in their permanent income. Mr. Stockton believes that this small, incremental effect on wealth is not likely to be significant or material.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  There’s a timing issue here on these wealth effects, as well, in the sense that banks are taking write-downs on these loans in anticipation of losses.  Looking ahead, the market is pricing that into valuations of firms, so that’s getting into net worth.  But if you think about it from the point of view of households that are in trouble, the bank may be assuming that they’re going to be writing down the debt, but the household doesn’t know it yet.  So there’s uncertainty about the timing but eventually those two things come in sync.  But that goes on in downturns regularly.  It’s more pronounced in this one, but it’s not clear that this effect isn’t picked up by the fact that it’s correlated with other things reflecting the depth of the recession.  There are other variables in our models, like the unemployment rate and so on, which may be more or less proxying for these effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that there is uncertainty and disagreement regarding the timing of write-downs on loans by banks and the impact on households. This suggests that there may be a lack of consensus or agreement among experts about how and when these effects will occur.


Passage number 106.
 MR. LACKER.  But the secular trend in debt would last then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the duration of a secular trend in debt.


Passage number 107.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only contains one statement, which is "Right." This statement does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 108.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke, did you have something on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a polite question or solicitation for input from Governor Duke.


Passage number 109.
  MS. DUKE.  Well, I got worried about it from the other direction.  If all of these homeowners are not making payments on their mortgage, then they’re spending that money, and sooner or later they’re going to have to come to grips with either paying for rent or resuming payments on their mortgages.  Again, someone on your staff calculated that for me, and it was a very small amount in relation to total spending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their worry about homeowners not making mortgage payments and the potential consequences of that situation. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I am really impressed by the perspicacity of the group here.  [Laughter]  President Lockhart, do you have a question.  No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the speaker is impressed by the perspicacity of the group and then asks President Lockhart if they have a question. The response "No" indicates that President Lockhart does not have a question, but it does not introduce any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 111.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Withdrawn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that the statement is withdrawn, indicating that they are retracting or taking back something that was said or proposed previously.


Passage number 112.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there are no other questions and addresses President Bullard.


Passage number 113.
 MR. BULLARD.  I have a question for Nathan Sheets.  You said that the Greece situation is on the verge of metastasizing.  Can you give the Committee a sense of how you think events might unfold between now and the next meeting.  It seems to me that if we did get to the point where the Europeans were willing to say that there has to be a restructuring, it would be a real bombshell, even globally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking for clarification and expressing his thoughts on the potential impact of a restructuring in Greece.


Passage number 114.
 MR. SHEETS.  I think that even today we saw increased evidence of that metastasis with the downgrade in Portugal.  Let me give just a little bit of a time line here.  I think that the Europeans are hoping for a package to be announced in early May, within a week or so, and that would be voted on by the European Union and by the IMF executive board a week after that, which would make it strategically after the May 9 German state elections, which would then put money in the hands of the Greeks so that they would be able to make their €9.5 billion payment on May 19.  My sense of the most likely outcome is that things will go reasonably smoothly over the next several weeks and Greece will get the money without any further blowups.  This is what’s incorporated in our baseline forecast.  Nevertheless, there are lots of risks.  The Germans have not been willing to commit categorically to supporting a package.  Other European countries have said, “Well, if Germany hasn’t quite gotten around yet to voting for the money, we’ll make it up and make sure that the Greeks have the €10 billion.”  So there are all sorts of different ways it can blow up over the next couple of weeks, including the possibility that the Greeks and the IMF don’t have an agreement.  But I would expect it would go reasonably smoothly over these next six weeks, with all sorts of downside risks associated with it; then, over the course of months—probably not years—people would start doing real hard analysis on the debt-sustainability issues. At some point, the Greeks are going to have to make a firm, firm commitment to this fiscal adjustment package and have some social cohesion on it, which they don’t have yet—they’ve been rioting in the streets in Athens and criticizing the finance minister and others for going forward in this direction.  If Greece doesn’t get social cohesion on this issue, then I think, at some point over the next six months or so, the situation would deteriorate and blow up.  Maybe the Chairman heard something different over the weekend, but at least in my conversations and in what I’ve read, the Europeans at this stage are not at all willing to entertain the notion that a debt restructuring is probably in the cards on this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is mainly discussing the potential outcomes and risks associated with Greece's financial situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 115.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  They’ve been very clear that they’re concerned that a restructuring would just create contagion and lead to a run on other countries.  At the same time, they have another serious issue:  There’s a very severe doubt that this coalition could come together to do the same thing for Portugal or another country. Vice Chairman, you had an interjection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The first sentence suggests that the subject mentioned in the passage is against a restructuring as they believe it could lead to negative consequences in other countries. However, the second sentence introduces another perspective, indicating doubt that a coalition could be formed to take similar action for Portugal or another country. This difference in opinion or perspective signifies contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 116.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes, I just wanted to expand a little bit.  The German situation is particularly problematic because they have these state elections.  This whole idea of  aid to Greece is very unpopular, yet the German government clearly wants to come forward with the aid, and they haven’t explained yet to the German voters that this isn’t a one-year package anymore, this is a three-year package, and it’s going to have to be a lot bigger to be viable.  I think what the Germans are hoping is that the IMF and Greece will work out a three-year agreement that’s very tough on Greece and then they’ll say to the voters, “Okay, we’ve got this really tough agreement.  Oh, by the way, now the aid package is for three years.  It’s going to be much bigger than we thought.”  And they hope that they can get it through that way.  That’s why you’re hearing all of this tough talk out of Germany, because they’re trying to prepare the ground for ramming this through at the end.  What’s going on in Germany is pretty complicated, and there’s a lot of politics and a lot of theater involved, so we’ll see if it plays out smoothly or not over the next week or two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage suggests that there is disagreement within the German government and among German voters regarding the aid to Greece. The passage also suggests that the German government is trying to convince the voters by portraying a tough agreement with Greece and by not fully explaining the extent and duration of the aid package. This indicates a lack of consensus and potential disagreement within Germany.


Passage number 117.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement indicating that the speaker is open to hearing any additional questions. The inclusion of "President Hoenig" does not introduce any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 118.
 MR. HOENIG.  I just want to pursue this a little further.  Nathan, what if they can’t come to agreement, and Portugal and Spain need help next.  Because even if they do come to an agreement, there’s that possibility for Portugal and Spain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a hypothetical situation and asking for clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 119.
  I hope that someone is assuming that this aid doesn’t come through and they do go into default because— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We’re looking at it.  European banks are another transmission channel.  One could imagine that if we started seeing contagion to Portugal, Spain, maybe even Italy, people will start to become worried about the European banks.  Then you could actually have a dollar funding problem again as U.S. banks start to back away from European banks.  We don’t have the swap agreements in place.  We don’t have any sort of mechanism to provide dollar liquidity to Europe.  So the LIBOR problem that we saw a year and a half ago could potentially resurface.  So there’s some real risk here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents a potential disagreement or contention by suggesting that if the aid doesn't come through and the country goes into default, there could be a risk to European banks and a potential dollar funding problem. This contrasts with a more optimistic or hopeful assumption that everything will go smoothly.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
  MR. SHEETS.  In terms of the transmission, my sense is that Portugal is very vulnerable.  They have big fiscal deficits, relatively large debt-to-GDP ratios, and I think there’s a perception that they have not yet taken the situation sufficiently seriously and put into place a rigorous adjustment program to address the fiscal problems that they face.  I see Portugal as being quite vulnerable.  In contrast, I think it would take a very strong wind for this thing to spill over into Spain.  Spain is much larger.  It doesn’t have the imbalances.  It has been influenced by the global financial crisis and is experiencing a severe recession, but underneath it, I think that there’s pretty much universal respect for the Spanish policymakers. With that said, if things did move from Portugal and Greece into Spain, then at that point it would get brutal, and let me give you one parameterization of that.  Western European bank exposure, including the CDS, to Greece is about $240 billion.  To Portugal it’s about $290 billion.  To Spain it’s almost a trillion dollars.  So if it hits Spain, I think what we have is not just a Southern European crisis, but we also have a more generalized sovereign risk crisis.  At that point, I’d say that there’s some probability that it could move across the channel to the United Kingdom and perhaps become a broader problem.  I see in this a firewall between the Portuguese and the Spaniards.  If the crisis blows over that firewall, then it could get much more severe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The author is discussing the vulnerability of Portugal and the potential for the crisis to spread to Spain and beyond. There is a disagreement about the severity of the crisis and the likelihood of it spreading to different countries. The author believes that Portugal is vulnerable but it would take a strong wind for the crisis to spill over into Spain, while others may believe that the risks are higher.


Passage number 121.
 MR. HOENIG.  That would be bad.  It has a familiar ring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Hoenig is expressing his opinion that something would be bad, and he is indicating that it has a familiar ring, suggesting that he has heard or seen something similar before.


Passage number 122.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.   I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it states agreement without any conflicting views or opposition.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Questions.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It consists only of a statement ("Questions. President Evans") and does not present any conflicting or opposing ideas.


Passage number 124.
 MR. EVANS.  I wonder if Bill Dudley could just elaborate a bit.   You mentioned the dollar funding issues.  What’s the channel that that might transpire from.  Back in 2008, European banks were trying to finance dollar assets and they needed dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Evans is simply asking for further explanation or elaboration on a specific topic.


Passage number 125.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But there still is a structural European dollar funding shortfall.  It’s not as big as it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply presents a fact about the current status of the European dollar funding shortfall compared to the past.


Passage number 126.
 MR. EVANS.  But I would have thought these were euro funding issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states Mr. Evans' thoughts about the funding issues being related to euros.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 127.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.   They have a book of business, and that book includes funding their dollar assets.  If their credit quality were to come into question, their counterparties would back away.  If U.S. banks back away, even though the crisis isn’t with respect to dollar assets, you could still have a dollar funding shortfall because of counterparty risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "If U.S. banks back away, even though the crisis isn't with respect to dollar assets, you could still have a dollar funding shortfall because of counterparty risk" suggests a potential disagreement or conflicting viewpoint about the possibility of a dollar funding shortfall due to counterparty risk, even if the crisis is not directly related to dollar assets.


Passage number 128.
 MR. EVANS.  Okay.  So it’s general risk aversion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about risk aversion without any opposing views or arguments presented.


Passage number 129.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with what Nathan said.  If it goes to Spain, the European bank exposures are big enough to matter.  And I think there’s a general perception that the European banks have been very slow to recognize their problems and to raise capital.  There has been a bit more perception of regulatory forbearance in Europe, so if you have this piled on top of it, it becomes a pretty big deal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with Nathan's statement about the importance of European bank exposures in Spain. They also express a general perception that European banks have been slow in recognizing their problems and raising capital, and that there has been regulatory forbearance in Europe.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there are no further questions and addresses someone as President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 131.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  What’s the maturity structure on Spain’s debt.  How much is short term; how much is long term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking for factual information about the maturity structure of Spain's debt. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 132.
 MR. SHEETS.  I know the maturity structure on Greek debt.  It’s about eight years on average, which is the only reason this thing hasn’t been even worse.  I don’t know off the top of my head the maturity structure for Spain, but that’s something that’s knowable, and we can get it to you quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have the information readily available but that it is knowable and can be obtained quickly.


Passage number 133.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that there are other questions but does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 135.
 [No response]  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we need to start the go-round, but I guess I would be happy to leave that till tomorrow morning if that’s your preference.  Yes.  All right, I believe that the reception is available on the terrace to be followed by an informal dinner with no business.  Thank you and I’ll see you tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m. [Meeting recessed] 4 The chart is appended to this transcript (appendix 4).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 136.
  April 28—Morning Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We had a number of phone calls from Europe this morning.  Markets are fairly stressed.  For example, some of the banks are having difficulty getting dollars at this point, so there is a great deal of concern.  The markets have apparently fully priced in default by Greece, so there’s a lot of discussion going on about how to address that concern, and, in particular, whether other countries that are similarly situated should take preemptive steps to forestall concerns about their fiscal situation.  We’ll have additional calls later today and tomorrow. The Vice Chairman was on a call this morning.  We’ll let you go first in the go-round, and you can report additionally on that. I understand Nathan has distributed a chart to answer a question that was raised yesterday about the residual maturity of outstanding debt.4  Does anyone have any questions about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions that there is a lot of discussion and concern regarding the default by Greece and whether other countries should take preemptive steps. This suggests that there is contention or disagreement about how to address the situation.


Passage number 137.
 MR. KOHN.  Mr. Chairman, my question, is for Brian Sack.  Where would the U.S. be on this chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a question being addressed to Brian Sack.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 138.
 MR. WARSH: Sixty months, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The statement made by Mr. Warsh indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the length of time being discussed. The phrase "I think" suggests that there may be differing opinions or perspectives on the matter.


Passage number 139.
 MR. SACK.  I believe it is approaching five years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any form of disagreement or contention. It simply states the belief that it has been nearly five years.


Passage number 140.
 MR. KOHN.  Okay.  So it would be the lowest bar on the chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any explicit statements of contention or disagreement. The speaker simply refers to a specific bar on a chart without contradicting or conflicting with any other information.


Passage number 141.
  MR. SACK.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Sack replied with "Yes."


Passage number 142.
 MR. KOHN.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the information given to them.


Passage number 143.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are you trying to cheer us all up. On a different topic, after hearing our discussion yesterday, I consulted with a few people, and I thought it might be worthwhile to have the staff give us a bit more information on 5 The material used by Mr. Sack is appended to this transcript (appendix 5) the redemption options, and they, as usual, have come through with useful information.  Let me turn it over, if I may, to Brian Sack, to run through this information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a suggestion for getting more information on a certain topic and mentioning that the staff has provided useful information.


Passage number 144.
 MR. SACK.5  In yesterday’s discussion of the redemption strategy for the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities, several FOMC members raised the possibility of running down our holdings of longer-term securities while continuing to reinvest in shorter-term issues.  We circulated a table to you this morning that summarizes the amount of redemptions achieved under several potential strategies along these lines. A decision to redeem all maturing holdings of Treasury securities would achieve a cumulative decline in the SOMA portfolio of $330 billion by 2013.  This outcome serves as a good baseline for comparison. The FOMC could, instead, decide to redeem only those assets with original maturities above a certain level.  If it redeemed all assets with an original maturity of three years or more, redemptions by 2013 fall to $254 billion.  And, of course, raising the threshold maturity level further would scale the redemptions back even more.  Redemptions fall to $158 billion with a five-year threshold and to $34 billion with a seven-year threshold. Note, however, that the approach of using the original maturity of Treasury securities to decide what is redeemed is somewhat arbitrary.  It is not the case that our holdings of a particular maturity are always reinvested in securities of the same maturity.  Instead, the proceeds from all securities maturing on a given day are aggregated and allocated to newly issued securities in a manner that does not depend on the original maturity.  What determines the evolution of the duration of our portfolio is the type of securities that we buy with these maturing proceeds. With that in mind, another approach is to direct the reinvestments of the proceeds of all maturing securities into relatively short-term Treasury instruments.  Unfortunately, we have limited scope to switch our holdings into Treasury bills in the primary market.  The reason is the statutory limitation that we can only roll over our maturing holdings into new issues when the day of the maturity matches the day the new securities are issued.  Few coupon securities mature on the days of Treasury bill issuance.  As a result, we would only be able to acquire about $66 billion of bills at Treasury auctions through 2013, leaving $264 billion of redemptions over that period. If the strategy were expanded to include reinvestment in two-year notes, the FOMC could roll over more debt, bringing redemptions down to $123 billion.  And if it were expanded to include three-year notes as well, then all maturing holdings could be rolled over into new issues.   Of course, an alternative strategy is not to rely only on the primary market, but to purchase securities in the secondary market. Under that strategy, even if the FOMC restricted new investments to bills, it could bring its redemptions down to zero if it chose.  Alternatively, it could achieve any level of redemptions that it wanted between zero and the full redemption amount under this approach.   The staff can continue to study the advantages of various approaches and provide more information to the Committee, such as the path of the duration of SOMA holdings under these alternative approaches, if the Committee wants. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting different strategies for the redemption of Treasury securities held by the Federal Reserve. There is no contention or disagreement between the ideas presented in the passage.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Any questions for Brian.  [No response.]  I think I owe you a bit of an apology.  I think the Treasury redemptions idea was a little half-baked.  My sense is that we’re not quite ready to work through this.  I think the question is:  What is our objective.  Are we trying to get to a specific maturity structure as we normalize our portfolio.  How quickly.  What are the implications for the balance sheet in general, and for things like capital gains and losses.  I want to hear everybody’s views on this—perhaps in the policy round might be the best time.  But I want at least to raise the option that we might want to instruct staff to give us a fuller description of the issues, including issues relating to Treasury issuance, and so on, before we take this action.  But if there is a strong view to move ahead, we certainly can discuss that.  Any questions or comments.  [No response.]  If not, let’s go ahead with the go-round, and let the Vice Chairman move up so he can talk about Greece.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting their opinion and proposing a discussion on a specific topic, but there is no response or opposing viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 146.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was going to talk about Greece anyway, but I didn’t realize it was going to keep getting so much worse in the last 48 hours.  Where we are right now is that the IMF and the Greek government are negotiating a package, and they hope to complete those negotiations by the end of the week.  Should they actually continue, as we expect, those negotiations are expected to lead to a three-year program, €75 billion, or maybe even a little bit more, that would allow Greece to roll over all of its maturing obligations over that period.  I think the Greeks are willing to agree to this, because  their alternatives are horrible.  Obviously, agreeing to it doesn’t mean you actually will implement everything.  It buys you some time, though, at least, to get that first disbursement that you need to be able to roll over the €9½ billion of maturing debt that they have due on May 19. The problem at this point is that the markets have moved well beyond this.  As of this morning, two-year Greek sovereign debt yields rose to 25 percent, which, if you do the math, implies either a very high probability of restructuring or a very big loss, if there’s a restructuring, or some combination thereof.  So the markets are basically saying that the Greek debt level, even with this package, is probably not viable over time. I think the Europeans are still going to press ahead and try to get this out by the weekend.  The next hurdle for this will be the German electorate.  They have not been told, as far as I am aware, that there’s going to be a bigger package.  They’ve been told that it’s going to be a €25 or €30 billion package, of which the German share would be about €8 billion.  Obviously, if it is a €75 billion package—€25 billion IMF, €50 billion Europe—the German share is going to be quite a bit higher than what they’ve been told.  I think the German official view on this is, “Well, we’re going to show how much the Greeks are doing.”  This is going to be a very austere package, with four years of fiscal retrenchment accumulating to something on the order of 13 percent of GDP.  So they’ll use that to show that the Greeks are doing enough.  But we’ll see. The ECB is looking at the issue of what happens if the Greek sovereign debt is downgraded by Moody’s.  Yesterday it was downgraded to junk status by S&P.  If it were downgraded to junk status by the other rating agencies, then it would no longer be eligible as ECB collateral.  Lucas Papademos was on the call.  He said that the ECB does have emergency measures that it can take to ensure that liquidity is forthcoming.  I think he was pretty reassuring on that score, even though he didn’t want to get into the details of what those emergency  measures might actually be.  The Bank of Greece can lend to the Greek banks, so that seems to be okay at this point. The second big issue, of course, is that the contagion has already begun to Ireland and Portugal, and, to a lesser extent, to Spain and Italy.  The good news is that they’re at better starting points than Greece in terms of their debt-to-GDP ratios and in terms of their current account positions.  Some countries, like Ireland, have already demonstrated quite a bit of social cohesion and are already adopting pretty significant fiscal consolidation.  The bad news is that there’s nothing beyond what these countries can do for themselves.  There’s no discussion, at this point at least, of packages being cobbled together by Europe to provide aid to these other entities.  So Europe may aid Greece, but, if there’s going to be a package for Portugal, Ireland, or Spain, at this point it’s only from the IMF, and that means a much smaller package.  So I think the big thing over the next couple days will be to see what Portugal, Spain, and Ireland say about their willingness to do fiscal consolidation and how credible that is, because that’s really the firewall at this point.  They’re certainly going to be urged to do as much as they can, but we’ll see if that’s sufficient. In terms of the channels of contagion back to the United States, I think there are several potential channels.  First, at a minimum, if all of this goes really, really well, you’re going to have a lot more fiscal consolidation in Europe a lot sooner than we had thought a year ago.  If it goes well, it means that Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and maybe to a lesser degree, Italy, are all going to undertake fiscal consolidation that’s going to happen quite soon.  So Europe is going to be much weaker than we had thought.  Second, obviously, the dollar is another source of impact on us, and I think the Greenbook looked at that in some detail.  The trade weighted value of the dollar hasn’t really actually moved much, so I think the consequences from that channel are pretty small. Third, there’s obviously a risk of contagion through the banking system, because, as Nathan outlined yesterday, the European banks hold a lot of sovereign debt in Europe—not so much Greece, not so much Portugal, but when you add in Spain and Italy, it gets to be a very, very large number.  One risk here, of course, is that U.S. banks could start to back off from European banks, or the healthy European banks could start to back off from the weaker ones, and then you’d start to see funding pressures among the banking community in Europe.  So far, we would say we’ve seen just a little inkling of dollar funding pressures to date.  Interestingly, yesterday the German Eurodollar futures contract went up by—what was it, Brian, five or six basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is outlining the current situation regarding Greece and its negotiations with the IMF and the European government. They are also discussing the potential impact on other countries and the channels of contagion. There are no opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas presented.


Passage number 147.
 MR. SACK.  Six.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not state any statements or arguments that would lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 148.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Six basis points, at a time when all other yields in the U.S. were tending to go down.  And there are some reports of people pulling back a little bit in terms of cutting their lines to the Portuguese banks.  It isn’t at the level yet where it’s going to have any great consequence if it stops where it is now.  But, as we’ve seen in the past, oftentimes it can go from very little things to very big things very, very quickly.  I think the minimum effect on us is going to be a drag on our economic growth, if things go well.  If things go badly, the effects are going to be bigger.  My view is that this is just one more reason why we want to stay where we are right now in terms of our monetary policy course.  And I feel very strongly that we don’t want to do anything today that’s surprising to markets.  So on the Treasury redemptions  front, I fully support the idea of having the staff look at this in more detail and bringing it up again at the June meeting, but I wouldn’t do anything today. Because I’m starting the policy round, I have a couple of other things to touch on that aren’t about Greece.  There’s another issue in terms of financial stability that’s a bit of a risk to the outlook, and that’s the credit ratings of major U.S. banks.  Apparently, the credit rating agencies are looking at the regulatory reform legislation as possibly quite negative for how they would rate U.S. banks, because if the legislation results in much diminished potential for government support to the banks, the rating agencies might decide to eliminate or reduce the degree of uplift to the ratings that is provided by government support.  Right now, major U.S. banking institutions get anywhere from one to four notches of uplift to their ratings from the implied government support.  If the legislation comes through in a way that’s very austere or limiting in terms of the government to support the banks, the rating agencies could actually downgrade the banks as a consequence.  This could become a big deal if these rating agencies’ downgrades were big enough to cause the short-term funding ratings to be downgraded to A2/P2. Theoretically, at least, this could happen for four major institutions—Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, Bank of America, and Citigroup.  If it were to happen, these institutions would probably encounter liquidity problems over the medium-term horizon. We looked at what would happen for these four institutions.  Three of the four would be fine on a 30-day horizon—they have a big enough liquidity buffer to handle 30 days—but, after that, all of them would run into difficulty.  I don’t think that the likelihood of this happening is particularly high, especially at a time when U.S. banks have raised a lot of capital and have much greater liquidity buffers than they had before, and when CDS spreads for these institutions have come down dramatically.  But I wanted to flag it as a risk, because the rating agencies have  brought this up as a potential issue.  They haven’t said what they are going to do.  It’s sort of a timing issue: the implementation of Basel II is going to happen later, and U.S. financial regulatory reform is going to happen earlier, so there’s a little bit of a mismatch in terms of timing here, which is just another risk. In terms of the economy, abstracting from all of these financial stability issues, to my mind, things haven’t really changed very much since the last meeting.  GDP is on a little bit stronger track, inflation is a little bit weaker, so that combination is mostly offsetting.  I’m not particularly excited about the strength in GDP.  I’m very sympathetic with David’s remarks yesterday about the fact that job trends are still very weak and the income trends are very anemic.  The fact is that we’re going to lose a lot of support that we’ve had from inventories, and we’re going to lose some support that we have had from the fiscal side.  And state and local governments are clearly going to be tightening their belts.  So I think that the outlook really hasn’t changed that much.  I notice that, when I look at the longer-term forecasts of the Committee for 2011 and 2012, there’s very little change to GDP or the unemployment trajectory relative to last time; the only thing that has really changed is that inflation is actually projected to be a little lower.  All of that seems to be very consistent with the idea that nothing really has changed, so there’s no real reason to change course.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their views and observations on various topics, but does not explicitly argue against or contradict any other position.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Rosengren.


Passage number 150.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is heartening that the incoming data are coming in somewhat stronger than I expected at the last meeting.  That said, my forecast is very similar to that of the Greenbook, with moderate growth this year that picks up as the various headwinds subside.  The discussions I’ve had with businesses are consistent with this forecast.  Most contacts are seeing modest improvement but are still very tentative.  Before they’re willing  to hire or undertake very large investments, they want to see more evidence that we are in a sustained recovery.  There are still important sectors of the economy that remain weak, as was highlighted yesterday, such as commercial real estate and state and local spending, and I expect that it will be some time before we see much improvement in these areas. My forecast also has continued disinflation, and many of the models used in my research department imply more disinflation than in the Greenbook.  Wages and salaries continue to decline, and employers I have talked to report little pricing power.  However, they have noted plans to restore some of the benefits that were reduced over the past two years. I would note that bank lending continues to shrink significantly.  This seems inconsistent with concerns raised that excess reserves will be inflationary.  Such an outcome would presumably occur through substantial bank lending, and, in fact, the problem continues to be too little lending, not too much lending.  According to many of the bankers I’ve talked to, this is not likely to turn around any time soon.  As many bankers remain capital constrained, many banks are waiting to understand the impact of regulatory reform, and most banks are still working through significant nonperforming loans.  With bankers remaining hesitant to lend, an asset bubble funded by leveraged institutions seems unlikely.  While the economy is improving, we are likely to remain far from my goal of full employment and inflation at 2 percent over the forecast horizon. I want to thank the Vice Chair for talking about Greece.  I do think it highlights the point that over time we may need a more structured discussion of tails of the distribution; the Greenbook is focused on the modal forecast.  I know the scenario analysis is partly intended to get at that, but, given what’s happening with financial regulatory reform, and given that we have a case study with Greece and possibly these downgrades, it seems to me that thinking about how  to structure a discussion that gets at tails of the distribution, and thinking through how we could get a more systematic way of doing that, would be useful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their forecast and discussing various aspects of the economy.


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Of course, the alternative scenarios, to some extent, look at those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "thank you" does not show any disagreement or contention. Additionally, the phrase "of course" suggests agreement. The rest of the passage does not present any contrasting arguments or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 152.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  They do that.  But I was thinking more along the following lines.  Take the example of Greece. It would be helpful to have data on country risk exposure from the BIS, to have some idea of what our large 10 or 15 institutions were holding, not only the sovereign debt but the credit default swaps to the Greek banks themselves.  We don’t really talk about paths of contagion.  And when we think about what happened with the real estate crisis, I think we kind of knew there was an issue, but we didn’t have a structured way to have a full discussion of that.  And I think it’s useful to get an update.   But this might be an opportunity to think about how we could think through all of the channels and how that might influence what we do, particularly on supervisory policy, so we do a better job of meshing supervisory policy and monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that it would be helpful to have more data on country risk exposure and paths of contagion in order to have a more informed discussion about supervisory policy and monetary policy.


Passage number 153.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That point is very well taken.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "That point is very well taken" suggests that the speaker agrees and acknowledges the validity of a certain point.


Passage number 154.
 MR. STOCKTON.  Could I just mention a couple of instances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a request for permission to share a couple of instances.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without knowing the specific passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 156.
 MR. STOCKTON.  In fact, we’re in the process of doing exactly that kind of scenario analysis that will not be just the type of event that’s within the conventional 70 percent confidence interval, but we’ll be thinking about more extreme outcomes both for monetary policy and supervisory policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are conducting scenario analysis that goes beyond conventional confidence intervals to consider more extreme outcomes for monetary and supervisory policies.


Passage number 157.
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Specifically, we’re in the planning stages right now of a project for thinking about a widening sovereign debt crisis that potentially spills over and creates a banking panic in Europe; so we’re working on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no mention of contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating the current planning stages of a project.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that President Plosser is good.


Passage number 159.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude and signs off with the name "President Lacker."


Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 161.
  MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Business contacts and directors in the Sixth District are a bit more positive and optimistic about the economy than they were six weeks ago.  Sales growth is reported in a number of sectors, including retail, transportation services, and manufacturing.  Retailers in my District, including one very large national retailer, explained the spurt in consumer activity as highly value-focused and responsive to aggressive discounting and incentives.  Construction activity continues to be subdued in both residential and nonresidential categories, and, contrary to President Plosser’s anecdote, one national homebuilder I spoke to reported that, following a very strong March in terms of sales, April was shaping up to be very weak. While acknowledging some encouraging developments, most of my contacts across the Southeast viewed the signs of improvement as inconclusive.  They continue to temper greater optimism with a cautious approach to hiring and business spending.  Businesses continue to pursue productivity enhancements in their spending on equipment and software.  In several conversations, we heard that investment spending is either mandatory for replacement and maintenance, or aimed at labor-saving efficiencies.  We heard for the most part continuing reluctance to hire permanent employees.  Our contacts in the temporary services business reported growing activity, and we also heard opinions that large firms have renewed offshoring activity. Banks in the Sixth District continue to struggle to varying degrees with problems related to real estate loans. The position of smaller banks is more tenuous than that of regional banks.  The wave of small bank failures will persist through 2010, while some regional banks are showing signs of stabilizing.  Anecdotal input from borrowers suggests somewhat stronger appetite on the part of District banks for C&I lending.  One midsized telecommunications  company reported a marked improvement in bank posture toward lending for expansion.  There seems to be lots of variation by industry.  Our survey work found no small manufacturing companies denied credit, but this was not true for construction and retail.  We also heard reports from a variety of sources that investor funds are active in making a market for troubled bank assets, including real estate, providing a floor for valuations. Regarding the national economy, stronger incoming data has led us to mark up our economic growth forecast marginally higher than our January submission.  That said, our forecast projects more modest growth than the Greenbook baseline, particularly in 2011 and 2012.  We see less desire on the part of firms to invest for growth or expand inventory.  We also take the view that the recent strength in consumer spending won’t be sustained.  We see a slower pace of reduction of unemployment weighing on household spending.  Our outlook for unemployment is worse than the Greenbook’s because of firms’ persistent caution in hiring full-time U.S. employees.  We’ve assumed a little more productivity growth and a lot less job creation in comparison to the Greenbook. Regarding inflation, the incoming retail price data argue persuasively that disinflation is still occurring and more so than we anticipated in January.  As a consequence, we have marked down our near-term outlook for core inflation. I see the balance of risks for economic growth biased to the upside.  That is to say, I think there is a greater chance I’m proven wrong by stronger growth than by weaker growth.  Manufacturing activity is quite strong, and consumer activity so far has exceeded my expectations.  So it’s possible that underlying consumer demand is more sustainable than I am forecasting.  I continue to see the risks to our inflation forecast as broadly balanced.  Our business contacts frequently express anxiousness about the possibility of higher inflation down  the road, but we do not get a sense that many are acting on this concern, and expectations seem to be well anchored for now.  In summary, the recovery, in my view, is immature and has not yet achieved a solid foundation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Lockhart, is presenting information and insights about the economy based on his contacts and observations. While there may be some differences in opinion among the contacts he mentions, there is no direct disagreement or argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence "Thank you. President Pianalto" simply expresses gratitude towards someone without any contradiction or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 163.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am seeing early signs of a recovery in the Fourth District, and incoming information has improved my outlook for economic growth in the first half of this year.  In fact, I now expect output growth for the first half of the year to be roughly a full percentage point better than my January forecast submission.  Economic activity has strengthened in the last quarter, and my business contacts are more confident that we are on a sustainable recovery path than they were just a few months ago.  But it’s still not clear how much of the strength that we’ve seen recently is tied to nonrecurring factors, like inventory restocking, stimulus programs, and other short-term supports. My economic growth outlook for the remainder of this year and in 2011 is still subdued relative to the recoveries we’ve typically seen after steep recessions.  And it’s consistent with what most of my business contacts are telling me they expect.  They remain very cautious about growth prospects going forward.  In fact, two very large manufacturers in my District had first-quarter earnings that exceeded expectations, but they were criticized by analysts for not moving up their earnings for the rest of the year.  They are saying that they just have never been through an episode like this one, and this first-quarter strong performance just isn’t sustainable in their minds right now.  So it’s that kind of caution, along with the immense challenges of relocating people who have been unemployed for long spells, that is keeping growth in my medium-term outlook below the Greenbook baseline.  These issues are also reflected in my interpretation of the high levels of productivity growth we saw in the later part of last year.  My outlook for productivity growth during the next few years is less sanguine than the Greenbook’s.  My business contacts continue to report that they are expecting to keep hiring limited, while still easily meeting expected increases in demand.  So these reports do suggest elevated productivity growth in the near term.  However, my business contacts also report that they are being very disciplined in their capital investments, especially in their U.S. facilities, which will limit investment-driven productivity growth.  In addition, they report that the available labor pool contains an unusually large fraction of people with very long unemployment spells, people who have to reintegrate into the economy with some loss of skills and productivity.  Combining these disparate trends, I expect a notable deceleration in productivity growth over the next few years, relative to the Greenbook baseline.  And my slower productivity growth then translates into a slower output expansion path than the one in the Greenbook baseline. My assumption for relatively slower productivity growth than the Greenbook also has some implications for my inflation outlook.  My inflation outlook is already very low in the near term.  It drops below 1 percent in the current quarter.  From there, it gradually increases in response to stable inflation expectations and an accommodative monetary policy, and it reaches 1.5 percent by the end of 2012.  If, instead, productivity were to evolve along the Greenbook baseline, unit labor cost in my outlook would likely be even lower than I now expect, with the result that inflation would remain fairly flat, near 1 percent, rather than edging up as in my current outlook. A pattern of subdued inflation is quite evident in the price data.  My staff, as you know, has been calculating the median CPI for years as a measure of underlying inflation pressures.   The 12-month increase in the median CPI has fallen precipitously, to a record low of 0.6 percent in March—evidence of disinflationary forces at work.  And even if we exclude housing, the 12-month trend in the median CPI still stands at an extraordinarily low 1.2 percent. Consulting with my business contacts on how they see the pricing developments in their businesses has tended to confirm very low inflation rates.  Businesses that are in some of the harder-hit industries, such as commercial and residential construction, continue to talk about significant price-cutting.  But even in sectors where activity is recovering, ample productivity growth enables companies to hold prices steady, even when commodity prices are picking up.  It’s not easy to convert pricing anecdotes into retail-level price measures, but the reports on pricing decisions strike me as unusually tame at this time. The incoming data on output have helped to confirm my sense that the risks to my outlook for economic growth are balanced.  But in terms of inflation, I see the risks as weighted to the downside.  For example, as I have noted, productivity growth along the Greenbook path would put further downward pressure on unit labor costs than is embedded in my outlook.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, is expressing her views and outlook on economic growth and inflation based on her discussions with business contacts and her interpretation of the data. She acknowledges the cautiousness of her business contacts and their concerns about the sustainability of recent strong performance. She also discusses her slower productivity growth outlook compared to the Greenbook baseline and its implications for inflation. Overall, she presents her views without indicating any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 164.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude directed towards the First Vice President, Holcomb.


Passage number 165.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eleventh District economy does not appear to be uniquely distinct from the U.S. economy.  Like the nation, the Eleventh District economy seems to be on an improved and improving trajectory, obviously, from a low base.  This view is reflected in the economic projections submitted by Dallas for economic growth averaging just under 4 percent this year and next, and 4.5 percent in 2012, with declining unemployment and subdued inflation.  I’m told that our economists have a higher level of confidence in these projections, all the more so for having put them in writing.  Since the March FOMC meeting, economic conditions in the Dallas District have continued to firm up.  As you heard, Mr. Chairman, when you visited Dallas three weeks ago, the outlook in the District is guardedly positive, or, to use the term you introduced in summarizing your discussion with our directors, there is “constrained optimism.”  New data, as well as anecdotal evidence, suggest continued strengthening in the District.  District employment has increased for three straight months, and most measures of economic activity, with the exception of commercial real estate, continue to improve.  Factory output is expanding, drilling activity is strong, consumer confidence is edging up, and Texas retail sales and exports are rising.  Our Texas leading index continues to show gains, and our April manufacturing survey shows further acceleration of business activity, with most of the current activity and labor measures reaching their highest levels since before the recession. The main concern that we have encountered is a lack of confidence that the improvements will continue.  Our directors in particular have expressed concern about the sustainability of these trends.  Most of our directors have been providing somewhat upbeat reports about their companies, their industries, and their local economies, but are concerned about the impact of the withdrawal of government life supports.  This has constrained their willingness to make capital expenditures.  In addition, several directors indicated that their companies have right-sized during the downturn, meaning that they will not hire back most or all of the employees that were let go, even when times improve, because of new efficiencies that were introduced into their operations.  As you can imagine, it’s difficult to constrain optimism in Texas.  But, for now, that’s where we are.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides information about the state of the Eleventh District economy and the concerns of some directors, but there is no disagreement expressed within the passage.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans, how’s the optimism in Chicago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is simply asking about the level of optimism in Chicago, showing a polite and neutral tone.


Passage number 167.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of thanks to President Yellen.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Bullard.


Passage number 169.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy appears to have been one of the weaker Districts in the most recent Beige Book survey.  We intend to watch this closely to see to what extent this is an aberration or the start of a longer-term development.  The District has, however, experienced some signs of life after the most recent recession.  There has been a turnaround in new private building permits, for instance, and we have seen employment gains in a few sectors.  District firms are increasing capital expenditures, even while they say they are reluctant to add to payrolls.  For several years, it has appeared that the Eighth District labor market performed somewhat better than the nation as a whole.  We recently received benchmark revisions for the last several years, which now suggest that the nation and the District are more alike than we thought, with District employment declines during the  recession only slightly better than the nation as a whole.  Large transportation firms in the District indicate that business is recovering dramatically.  I interpret this as a very positive sign for the economy going forward. Nationally, the economic recovery remains largely on track.  I expect a reasonable pace of economic growth over the next two years and beyond.  I think that the growth will be strong enough to encourage gradual improvement in U.S. labor markets.  While firms continue to stress that they are reluctant to hire—we’ve heard several comments like that again today—I think that these firms will be inclined to add workers as the economy continues to improve. Inflation, indeed, remains subdued.  I think that core inflation will continue to be importantly affected by developments in rental markets.  Behavior in rental markets is likely to be distorted for the next several years relative to the behavior of the last 20 years.  We should at least monitor the core index without the shelter component.  Discarding the shelter component is not really right, but neither is discarding the food and energy components. One common argument for continued focus on core inflation is that it is a good predictor of headline inflation.  My sense, based on some St. Louis staff analysis, is that the empirical relationship on this dimension breaks down if we use data from the mid-1990s to the present; that is, core inflation is not such a good predictor of headline inflation over the last 15 years.  We will probably do better over the next several years, given the distortion in housing markets, to focus on headline inflation and simply admit that prices are more volatile than we would ideally prefer, but there is not much that we can do about that volatility given the nature of the shocks to the global macroeconomy.  I expect medium- and longer-run inflation expectations to continue to edge higher during the remainder of 2010, as the economy continues to improve.  I see the Greek sovereign debt situation as a growing risk—and I wrote this before the news this morning—to the outlook.  An unhappy ending there, which is looking increasingly likely, could feed continuing sovereign debt problems in several other countries, adding to financial stress worldwide.  Should a larger country follow Greece and lead to a loss of confidence in fiscal rectitude, speculation about the U.S. could follow.  Speculation of this type may not be entirely rational.  Longer-term rates could, nevertheless, rise, even in the U.S., and complicate monetary policy decisions going forward.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and his interpretation of the current state of the economy. He is also expressing his expectations and concerns for the future.


Passage number 170.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply expresses gratitude towards President Hoenig without presenting any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 171.
   MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Tenth District’s economy continues to expand at a pretty steady pace.  Manufacturing, agriculture, and now consumer spending are showing strength and are contributing to the improvement of the overall economy within the region.  Energy conditions have actually softened somewhat but remain a contributor to our recovery overall.  Commercial real estate continues to be the weakest sector of our economy.  Looking ahead, though, our contacts expect the recovery to continue at a relatively solid pace, and a growing number of firms are anticipating employment gains through the end of the year.  For the first weeks of April, District factory managers reported a sharp rise in production and shipments and new orders.  Manufacturers and transportation companies expect the rebound in shipments to continue over the next few months, from every indication they have.  And employment levels in manufacturing are expected to edge up with this stronger activity.  A temporary employment company headquartered in our region has reported to me that their sales, that is, their placements, are up 40 percent since the beginning of the year.  Conditions in the agricultural sector continue to improve.  And I would note that continued strong gains in farmland values have pushed value-to-rent ratios to record highs in our area.  We have received yet more reports of strong investor interest in farmland as well. While the energy sector, as I said, has remained a broad source of strength in the District, in recent weeks softer prices for natural gas have slowed the expansion of our drilling activity, and natural gas is about 60 percent of our drilling.  In addition, the profits of renewable energy firms have also declined, as might be expected. Our examiners and our contacts report that commercial real estate continues to be weak, with sales, rents, and prices posting some further declines, and we are seeing further deterioration in the quality of that commercial real estate on some of their books.  One favorable sign is that the degree of deterioration seems to be slowing.  As I think I mentioned last time, the cap rates are improving in the class A space, although the industrial space and the B and C space are still under very serious pressure. District wage and retail price pressures remain subdued, as others report.  However, manufacturing reported a modest rise in the prices of finished goods and an expectation of further increases, at least over the summer months.  Manufacturers and transportation companies in our region are systematically reporting that raw material prices have continued to rise. Like the region, the national data show the economy is expanding at a reasonably solid pace, as others have said.  I have edged up my forecast for GDP growth as well, to about 3½ percent.  The recent strength in consumer and business spending and exports suggests the economy is transitioning from a recovery driven by fiscal stimulus and inventory adjustments to one that I think is more sustainably driven by private spending.  The recent strength also suggests that the pace of recovery may prove faster than anticipated.  The recent improvement in the labor  conditions is another encouraging sign for the recovery.  Last month’s solid gain in private payrolls, rapid growth of employment in temporary help services that I noted, and evidence of a modest uptick in job openings, all suggest broader job growth will improve. In noting these more positive numbers, I haven’t lost sight of the important uncertainties that we face.  Commercial real estate, which I mentioned, continues to be adversely affected, and that is affecting bank lending.  Uncertainties remain in the job market, although there are improvements.  And fiscal policy, with the end of the Bush tax cuts coming, and the mounting deficits for state governments as well, will almost certainly complicate monetary policy in the quarters, perhaps years, ahead.  I also am very much aware of the international activities that we’ve described here already this morning. I expect core consumer inflation to remain low for now, and, as I said, just under 1 percent.  Over time, though, I expect core consumer inflation will gravitate towards our longer-term expectations.  The gravitational pull will be helped along on the other side by a push from an improving economy, perhaps a decline in the dollar, depending on the international experiences, and rising commodity prices.  To varying degrees, these forces reflect, I think, the effects of important, sustained fiscal and monetary policy.  With this outlook, I think the time has come to be talking, as we did yesterday—and I will talk more about it in the policy round—about a careful but deliberate exit strategy from our current policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily presents an overview of the Tenth District's economy and the speaker's expectations for its future performance.


Passage number 172.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 173.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economy is improving in the Ninth District.  My contacts report that agriculture and natural resources remain significant sources of strength in the Dakotas and eastern Montana.  For those of you who are perhaps interested in making a few bucks on the side, you can head out to Williston, North Dakota, where  the oil industry is very hot.  But bring a sleeping bag, because there are no rooms at the hotels or anywhere else.  Others have beaten you there.  In Minnesota, large manufacturing firms, even the ones engaged in residential investment, are beginning to see significant growth in orders.  And this is especially true if they have a global presence.  However, we have heard two forms of concern in the District.  First, many of our small business contacts complain of not being able to get credit.  Second, we are still not hearing of plans to make permanent hires. I believe that this picture roughly coheres with the story of the national economy.  Bank lending continues to fall.  Our local contacts, some with national operations, ascribe this decline to multiple causes, including regulatory uncertainty, supervisory pressures, asset quality problems, and low loan demand.  Fortunately, investment, especially in equipment and software, is, nonetheless, growing.  Nonfinancial corporations are successfully raising funds in equity markets and in corporate bond markets.  The U.S. financial system is working toward a recovery in which banks are playing an unusually subsidiary role. With that said, small businesses traditionally rely on banks as a source of funds, and, at the same time, small businesses have been an important source of employment growth in the early part of the last two recoveries.  Barring changes in financing or hiring patterns, these elements imply that output will recover more slowly than in the usual recovery, and employment recovery will be even slower. Recent realizations of inflation have been low, and my outlook for inflation is correspondingly low over the coming year.  Nonetheless, we should keep an eye on measures of longer-run expected inflation.  The Board’s measure of the 10-year, 10-year forward break-even inflation rate, which is telling us about inflation in the 2020s, drifted up by nearly 30 basis points  since the last FOMC, and is close to 3 percent.  It has gone up by 65 basis points since September. Our most difficult, but most important, job is keeping long-run inflation expectations anchored.  I thought, in terms of fulfilling our mandate, the scariest picture in the Ihrig memo we looked at yesterday was, in fact, figure 7.  That was the most significant deviation from our mandate that I saw.  And I see balance sheet reduction as playing the key role in that process of controlling our long-run inflationary expectations.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and observations about the economy in the Ninth District and sharing the speaker's perspective on certain issues related to credit, hiring, investment, and inflation.


Passage number 174.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows gratitude towards Governor Kohn.


Passage number 175.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am glad to hear about those employment opportunities in Williston, North Dakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude for the information about employment opportunities in Williston, North Dakota.


Passage number 176.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You’ll be free soon, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a light-hearted comment about someone soon being free.


Passage number 177.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage contains a simple expression of gratitude and addresses Governor Warsh.


Passage number 178.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude towards Governor Tarullo.


Passage number 180.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  I understand that coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take 20 minutes and come back after that.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and suggesting taking a break.


Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Bill.  [No response.] If not, let me say first, as I noted this morning—and with apologies for the head fake—my recommendation to the Committee is that we let the staff have one more intermeeting period to evaluate the implications of various redemption strategies for the evolution of the maturity structure of our balance sheet—for the size of the balance sheet and its composition—and to make sure that there are no unexpected problems with Treasury auctions and similar considerations.  If you disagree with that, and you would like to reconsider, please feel free to say so in your commentary.  Or, if you have suggestions or recommendations to the staff for their analysis, please make them as well.   Let’s begin the go-round, and I’ll start with President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by the speaker, offering a recommendation and inviting discussion or suggestions.


Passage number 182.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe that a sustained economic recovery is, in fact, under way.  I believe that economic growth risks, as I stated earlier, are slightly to the upside, and inflation risks are tilted to the upside over the medium to longer term.  I think we have to recognize that unemployment, C&I lending, and commercial real estate lending are all historically lagging indicators to the economy, not leading indicators.  And I  anticipate that, as the economy gains strength, those indicators will recover, as they normally do during a cyclical recovery. Thus, I think it is time for taking initial steps to normalize interest rates and the size and composition of our balance sheet.  I think that time is rapidly approaching.  It’s not too soon, I think, to consider changes in our statement language to prepare the public and the markets for an eventual start of our exit from this period of extraordinary policy accommodation.  We have exited from our extraordinary liquidity facilities, and I think we should prepare to exit from our extraordinary balance sheet policies. I view the start of moving rates up from zero or selling assets from our portfolio not necessarily as a tightening of policy in the usual sense but as a step towards normalization of policy, in the same way that unwinding our liquidity facilities was a step towards normalization.  With the size of our balance sheet, with interest rates near zero, policy will remain accommodative for some time to come, well after we begin the normalization process.  Moreover, as I said earlier, by the time of our next meeting, we will have experienced four quarters of fairly strong output growth, according to the forecast, at least one additional quarter of employment growth, and, from my perspective, that means the underlying equilibrium real rates of interest will be rising.  If we don’t adjust policy in response to such growth, we will implicitly be increasing the degree of accommodation, not just holding it constant.  As I mentioned earlier, some may be perfectly happy with letting policy become more accommodative in this manner.  But we should acknowledge that that’s our intention, not suggest that we don’t want to tighten. Once again, I’m in favor of alternative C.  I think it’s time for us seriously to consider backing away from our “extended period” language.  The longer we maintain it, I think, the more  difficult it’s going to become for us to unwind from it.  We could consider using language such as the Bank of Canada did in its last meeting, where the time for extraordinary low rates “is passing”—maybe not past, but passing.  So I favor including something like paragraph 4 in alternative C into B, which I suspect will be our choice here, which indicates the Committee will be using asset sales to begin restoring the balance sheet to a more normal size and composition.  But the timing and pace of those sales will be contingent on the economic outlook. The majority of the Committee, I’m sure, will prefer alternative B to C.  But, in that case, I would like to make sure that the statement includes the message that asset sales are, in fact, on the table.  We may not be ready for them yet, but they are an important tool for our exit.  Thus, I do support moving ahead with redemptions of Treasuries.  I understand, Mr. Chairman, that we may want to wait another period, but I think that would be the first step we could take, and a modest one at that, to emphasize our efforts to shrink our balance sheet. Finally, I would hope we could get to further discussions of our longer-term operating framework, including our operating target, how long we think we will want to be on a floor system, and whether we’re going to have a corridor system or continue on the floor system.  I think those decisions have important implications for how we approach the shrinking of our balance sheet as we go forward.  I hope we can continue to have a discussion of that to help guide those decisions about our exit and our communication strategies as we exit.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own viewpoint and suggesting changes to the policy.


Passage number 183.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, we will certainly continue those discussions.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response indicates a willingness to continue discussions, suggesting a cooperative and agreeable tone.


Passage number 184.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, though I am sympathetic to some of the language expressed in alternative A.  While there has been some  improvement in the economy, the recovery remains fragile, despite the significant support from monetary and fiscal stimulus.  Should the economy weaken as accommodation is removed, or as a result of an external shock, such as what we’ve been discussing this morning, our tools to offset such adverse circumstances are quite limited.  In addition, disinflation in prices and wages continues, which should provide us the flexibility to maintain accommodative policy until we make much more progress on bringing the unemployment rate down.  To avoid an erosion of central bank credibility, we should seek to minimize the time that we’re missing on both elements of our mandate.  This will require maintaining our accommodative policy for an extended period of time.  I support postponing the Treasury decision until we can more fully discuss the options at the next meeting, and I would signal in the minutes that mortgage-backed securities sales will only occur after tightening in short-term interest rates has begun.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses support for alternative B and also shows sympathy for alternative A. He explains that while there has been some improvement in the economy, there is still fragility and limited tools to offset adverse circumstances. He also mentions ongoing disinflation and the need to maintain accommodative policy. There is no indication of disagreement or contention between different parties in the passage.


Passage number 185.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to someone named President Yellen.


Passage number 186.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  While it’s good news that economic growth is picking up, we’re climbing out of a very deep hole.  The economy is operating far below maximum sustainable employment, and inflation is undesirably low.  Like the Greenbook, I expect both sets of circumstances to persist for several years.  It does not make sense to tighten just because we are beginning to move in the right direction.  Policy must take into account the enormous gap that exists between where we are and where we ought to be.  These gaps explain why the Bluebook’s optimal policy path and, as you noted, Mr. Chairman, rule-based recommendations almost without exception call for the funds rate to remain at zero for quite a long time.  There is one exception in the rule-based recommendations, and that is the difference rule, which, according to the Bluebook, would raise rates in response to more rapid economic growth.  But the computation reported in the Bluebook takes no account of the fact that we have been constrained from cutting rates in line with the rule as conditions deteriorated.  Taking the zero-bound constraint into account, even a difference rule would recommend that the time to withdraw stimulus remains a long way off.  Because I see no case for tightening monetary policy soon, I support maintaining the “extended period” language. In my view, the risks associated with tightening policy prematurely far exceed any risks from tightening policy too late.  That owes to the zero bound on interest rates.  The Greenbook alternative simulations illustrate the point.  In the scenarios that feature weaker economic growth, or lower inflation, the zero bound constrains the ability of policy to react.  In contrast, in those scenarios where economic growth is stronger, or inflation is higher, there is no corresponding constraint on raising rates.  Thus, the inherent uncertainty about the outlook, coupled with the asymmetric nature of the zero bound, creates an option value to waiting and argues for greater patience in raising rates. I believe, with respect to our “extended period” language, that we have sent the message loud and clear that this does not imply an unconditional commitment to a zero interest rate for any fixed calendar period.  This is apparent in conversations I’m having with market participants, and it’s consistent with the market responses that we see to news concerning economic conditions.  For example, the implied probability of an increase in the funds rate at an eight-month horizon clearly responds to economic surprises.  We see strong upward movements in response to positive surprises, particularly those concerning unemployment.  So I remain comfortable with the “extended period” language.  On the issue of Treasury redemptions, Mr. Chairman, I support your suggestion.  I have an open mind on this issue, as I indicated yesterday, about what we ultimately do, but I’d like to wait and see further staff analysis.  On asset sales, I think the minutes will and should contain a complete treatment of our discussion on this, and I wouldn’t include anything in the statement on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Yellen states her support for alternative B and explains her reasoning behind it. She also mentions her comfort with the "extended period" language and her support for further analysis on Treasury redemptions and a complete treatment of the discussion on asset sales in the minutes.


Passage number 187.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 188.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When I wrote this, we faced three substantive questions.  I think one of them has been taken off the table to a certain extent.  The first is:  Should we weaken the extended period language.  The second is:  Should we reinvest maturing Treasuries.  The third is:  Should we include any language about sales in the statement. In addressing these questions, I focused on four elements of our current situation:  Unemployment is high; inflation is low; near-term expectations of inflation are also low; but longer-run expectations of inflation have drifted upwards.  These four elements led me to say, first, that I do not think we should weaken the “extended period” language.  Unemployment is high; inflation and near-term expectations of inflation are both low; the recovery is in its early stages.  It is true that longer-run inflation expectations have drifted up, but what I was looking at is inflation 10 years hence.  I think the best way to correct that problem is to offer forward guidance about the balance sheet and, as many of you have been doing, including the Chairman, to counsel the Congress to exhibit fiscal responsibility. Should we reinvest our maturing Treasuries.  I guess we’re going to see more analysis of that.  My own presumption right now is that I would be inclined to do that, but I’ll wait to see further analysis by the staff.  Finally, let me talk a little bit about sales.  I was very struck with what Governor Warsh said yesterday.  I think that we should be conveying to the public the degree of consensus around this table—no more than that and no less than that.  I believe the way we should be communicating is through the statement, not through the minutes or through our speeches or through our testimony.  We have actual consensus around this table about what we’re going to be doing.  I think we owe it to the public to convey that.  And the right way to do it is through our direct statement to the public. What would that look like.  Right up front, I would say it would not look like paragraph 4 of alternative C—I’m not arguing for that.  But I think we should state clearly what we have agreed upon, as I understood from the conversation yesterday:  “The Committee’s long-run goal is to normalize the balance sheet in terms of both scale and composition.  In keeping with that objective, it expects to undertake a five-year program of gradual asset sales once the recovery is firmly established.  The initiation and exact timing of these transactions will depend on market conditions.” I think there is a fair amount of heterogeneity about when we’re going to start and how we’re going to pace the sales, but I believe these three sentences that I’ve described encapsulate the full range of opinion around the table.  And if we have reached that conclusion, I think we owe it, as I say, to the public to convey that to them and not to have it hidden away in the minutes somewhere and not hidden away in different ways in our speeches, where the press ends up focusing on the differences among us as opposed to the similarities. I was going to say one last thing about asset sales, and it’s in response to President Rosengren’s statement about when we’re going to start.  As I heard it, and others can correct me if I’m wrong, it seemed that a majority of people did want to wait to start sales, at least at this  moment, until after we start to tighten with other policies.  But I don’t think that was a consensus view around the table by any means, and I think it would be unwise for the minutes to show that that kind of consensus had been reached.  That’s my own perspective.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, is discussing his own views and opinions on the three questions mentioned. He does mention different opinions and perspectives from others, but there is no clear disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 189.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You were a bit ambiguous.  Did you say you favored redemptions or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification because the person they are addressing made a statement that was unclear or contradictory.


Passage number 190.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I am in favor of redemptions, but it’s always good to have more analysis, so I’m certainly happy to see more analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kocherlakota expresses his approval of redemptions and also states that having additional analysis is a positive thing.


Passage number 191.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 192.
 MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In looking at policy options, it’s somewhat easier for me to speak on behalf of President Fisher because, as Governor Duke reminded me yesterday, his views are not unknown to this group.  [Laughter]  Were he here, I believe he would speak strongly and advocate for a policy approach consistent with that expressed in policy alternative B.  In addition, he would favor the approach represented in the second alternative for paragraph 4, which would stop reinvestment of maturing Treasuries.  The only caveat, however, and I’m advised that I may sound somewhat like a broken record, is that Richard would prefer removal of the “extended period” language and substitute “for some time” as is used in alternative C as a way to set up changes to come.  Finally, Richard would appreciate the opportunity to participate in the Committee’s further discussion on redemptions and asset sales.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is simply a statement about the views and preferences of President Fisher.


Passage number 193.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of Governor Kohn don't present any conflicting ideas or contradictory opinions.


Passage number 194.
 MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B with the “extended period” language and the implication in the first paragraph that the economy is gradually  strengthening—I think it’s well conveyed in that paragraph.  I guess that it has been eight years of meetings, and I’ve never done anything but alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states their preference for alternative B and expresses agreement with the implication that the economy is gradually strengthening.


Passage number 195.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What are the odds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "What are the odds." The passage is simply posing a question and does not express any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 196.
  [Laughter] MR. KOHN.  I think alternative B is both doing the right thing and consistent with what the Vice Chairman and Governor Warsh noted, namely, that we shouldn’t be surprising markets at this current time. I think it’s the right thing because, even with exceptionally low rates for an extended period, the economic recovery, in my view, is expected to be gradual, with very low resource utilization for quite some time and with very low inflation and stable inflation expectations.  President Kocherlakota cited the ten-by-ten inflation outlook.  I’ve never actually looked at that, and if there is some longer-run inflation increase, it’s probably, as you noted, Narayana, related to some extent to fiscal policy.  The five-by-fives have been stable, and I would expect them to stay that way.  In fact, we miss both parts of our dual mandate through 2012 pretty much. I think there is a possibility that economic growth is faster and that we’re on a much stronger path—I think we can’t deny that, given the incoming information.  But the output gaps and the inflation gaps are so large that, even if growth does turn out to be faster, even if we’re on the cusp of something much stronger, we won’t lose anything by waiting.  The risk of being too late to tighten is exceedingly small, even allowing for time to change language and to evolve to warning markets, if that becomes necessary, and if we are a little too late we can always tighten more vigorously.  So I don’t see any risk to waiting at this point and to retaining the “extended period” language. It is possible that low rates will create asset price distortions.  I’d like to make a couple of points on that.  I think, to a considerable extent, that’s what they’re supposed to do, right.  That’s  the channel through which monetary policy affects the economy—we raise asset prices and lower bond yields.  We’ve got these really low interest rates in order to stimulate the economy through loose financial conditions.  Second, it’s not clear that asset prices are out of line with fundamentals.  I agreed with your analysis, Mr. Chairman, and with that of others around the table, as you talked about equity prices and bond yields.  Usually the difficult distortions in asset prices—the ones where the movie ends very poorly—are accompanied by rapid credit growth and increasing leverage.  We’ve got very sluggish credit growth and, as best we can determine, leverage that is, if anything, still contracting, both in the financial sector and in the nonfinancial sector.  It’s possible that at some point these asset prices could get so out of line that their correction would itself create an economic problem, and I suppose that raising rates before that happens is a form of insurance against it.  But, given the size of the output gap and given the size of the inflation gap, this insurance would have a very, very high price and we would do better to aim our macro and micro prudential regulatory tools at any of these distortions rather than sacrifice macroeconomic stability. On the redemptions, I agree with your recommendation to get more staff analysis before making a final decision.  I agree with President Plosser—this would be a first step in tightening. Obviously, given my outlook, I’d prefer not to take that step, but I also agree with President Plosser that you need a fuller analysis of how this is going to fit into the whole portfolio. On asset sales, I think we do agree that they will be part of the exit strategy at some point, but what the market is really interested in is when.  And, as President Kocherlakota noted, we haven’t agreed on whether it will be before or after tightening.  So I think we can get at the nuances of this discussion much better in the minutes than by trying to find two or three  sentences that define the center of gravity of the Committee in the announcement.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the Vice Chairman and Governor Warsh that they should not surprise the markets and believes that alternative B is the right approach. The speaker also agrees with President Kocherlakota's point about inflation outlook and acknowledges the possibility of faster economic growth but believes that waiting is still the best option. The speaker also discusses the potential risks of low interest rates on asset prices and suggests that macro and micro prudential regulatory tools should be used to address any distortions. The speaker expresses agreement with the recommendation to gather more staff analysis before making a final decision on redemptions and acknowledges that asset sales will be part of the exit strategy at some point. Overall, there is a general consensus and agreement in this passage.


Passage number 197.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage consists of only one sentence and there is no contention or disagreement expressed within it. It is simply an expression of gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 198.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 199.
  MR. HOENIG.  I’m not sure if I agree with Jim or not.  [Laughter]  I prefer alternative C, and I think we need to get rid of the “extended period” language.  I acknowledge that we’ve tried to clarify that we can always change course, but that language is there for a purpose—it does give a clear signal as to our intentions. I also want to say, before I go into more detail, that I truly have the same goals that the Committee as a whole has in terms of the dual mandate.  My perspective is longer run.  I do feel that maintaining excessively low rates over an extended period of time—we’re not going to be tight any time soon; I can’t imagine it—raises the question of the degree of accommodation that then builds the imbalances forward, the excess and the credit growth that you can’t catch up with at the other end.  That’s what I worry about, having experienced it. On the tail risks, I fully appreciate the concerns about the situation in Europe, and Bill’s comments this morning were very sobering.  I think we need to be very proactive this time in monitoring and discussing these developments, with—I don’t know what we’re calling them now—LFI briefings at our meetings going forward on where these institutions lie along the risk scale to help us engage on financial stability issues.  Our power of lender of last resort and as liquidity provider could come into play, and I encourage thinking about that for the June meeting, if we can.  Hopefully, we don’t need to do it sooner than that. Now I want to pick up from where we were yesterday and suggest to the Committee that we continue our efforts to chart a course of strategy where we normalize the stance of monetary policy within five years. It’s my view that, by taking careful and deliberate steps, we can return the economy and the markets to a more normal environment with the best long-run benefits or consequences.  The achievement of this goal will be reflected in the realization of a nominal fed funds rate close to whatever we judge to be neutral— probably a quarter above 2 percent and a  combined Federal Reserve balance sheet half its current size—and an economy growing steadily with less chance of creating a new set of imbalances and longer-run issues, either in terms of inflation or asset valuation. I realize these are outcomes we all want.  I propose that we describe this as an exit strategy of two fundamental steps.  The first step would work off the fact that we are well down the road in terms of unwinding the extraordinary policy actions that we introduced in response to the intensification of the financial turmoil that began in the fall of 2008—we have closed the special liquidity facilities and returned the discount window to more normal operations.  To complete this step, we should let the public know—if not at this meeting, then soon—that we intend to carefully raise the fed funds rate towards 1 percent as early as this September, or in the early fall of this year.  In doing so,  we also would make it known that, at that point, we would pause and take stock before we move rates further, that we would judge where we are and what conditions are; of course, this is all subject to conditions changing. This process has risks, I realize, but risks are unavoidable.  Saying and doing nothing has risks also, because waiting until we are certain everything is right could be too late.  I think this course offers us the best likely outcome, since most people realize rates have to move, and these very low rates have serious risks.  I think there are benefits to announcing the first step of our exit strategy as a movement towards 1 percent, after which we will pause.  It can legitimately be explained as a continuation of the unwinding.  The markets don’t have to be disrupted as much.  It can also be explained as a rational move to take the fed funds rate from an unsustainable level of between zero and a quarter percent.  Of course, that means getting rid of the “extended period” language now.  The second step for normalizing policy would then begin only after a pause and an assessment of the outlook.  We would explain this to the public and the markets, giving them clear guidance.  And we would explain that further moves would depend on our views on conditions and would not necessarily proceed in a stairstep manner.  The policy rate would then increase from 1 percent toward 2 percent and then on to neutral, as conditions allowed.  Indeed, depending on economic and financial conditions, I can envision that the Committee would begin raising rates beyond 1 percent at some point in 2011.  Also, as part of normalizing the balance sheet, we would wait and then—as we move the fed funds rate up and confidence in the economy builds—we would begin selling the MBS portfolio.  As I noted in yesterday’s go-round, I recommend that we eliminate MBS from our balance sheet within that five-year period, depending on the circumstances, of course. With this proposal, I urge the Committee to set out publicly its longer-run strategy for monetary policy soon, because the fact is that the economy is recovering.  Yes, it has a long climb, but it is recovering.  Real policy rates are exceptionally low.  In regard to the actions outlined here, policy will remain accommodative for years to come.  The strategy outlined here would reasonably parallel the likely decline in the unemployment rate, so, as it moves, we’re moving the rate up, and that will preclude the likely steady increase in imbalances and longer-run inflationary pressures that otherwise will occur over the quarters and years ahead.  I think this is a reasonable, balanced exit that reduces the longer-run event of pushing rates on the other side of the cycle—which we tend to do—too high.  It gives us a more level, systematic approach, once it is announced and clarified, that is subject to the shocks that we have to deal with as a Committee.  So I offer that up as the way to think ahead.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, is proposing a course of action and expressing his views on monetary policy.


Passage number 200.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  That’s very thought-provoking.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit disagreement or contention in the passage. It appears to be a polite and appreciative response to an unidentified person's statement.


Passage number 201.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  My interpretation of Bill English’s very good summary and analysis of the market reaction to alternatives is that language changes today equal tightening itself, not preparation for tightening.  And I believe the economic recovery is too tentative to move away from the current accommodative position, so I continue to believe we’re well served by the “extended period” language.  I’m also satisfied with the description of economic conditions in alternative B. Regarding the Treasury reinvestment options in paragraph 4, I take it that the recommendation to postpone that for further study and analysis, in my mind, takes paragraph 4 off the table, which I agree with.  But for what it’s worth, I would have supported, and do support, the status quo of reinvesting maturing Treasury securities, and I’m not in favor of allowing Treasuries to roll off.  I think the impact would be modest, and the gains would not be substantial.  I would have also recommended that it’s better to communicate the reinvestment strategy in the minutes or the directive, than to elevate that discussion essentially to the policy levels reflected in the statement.  Having said that, I’m flexible about addressing redemptions or asset sales in the statement.  But, considering my assessment of the current state of the economy and outlook and the sobering issues of financial stability risk that the Vice Chairman, among others example, discussed regarding the contagion risk from Greece, at this meeting, in this statement, I prefer a plain vanilla approach.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and discussing their interpretation and opinions on various aspects of the topic being discussed.


Passage number 202.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 203.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.   Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Evans.


Passage number 204.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I generally have no change in my policy recommendation.  I favor alternative B as written, which I take to be without paragraph 4 on the Treasury redemptions issue.  I support your proposal to continue to study the Treasury  redemptions—a very important issue.  I take this position because my inflation outlook continues to envision underrunning my version of price stability for—I’d say ”some time,” but that means ”less than six months”—a very long period of time [laughter].  In addition, the unemployment rate is high, and there’s a tremendous amount of slack out there.  I think the U.S. economy is performing better today, so that’s a good sign, but I am growing increasingly concerned about the international risks.  It’s difficult to see how that ends well, so, on balance, I think this continues to be a good time to wait and monitor the situation. Because my comments were so brief, I wanted to take a moment to comment on what President Bullard said—I thought he raised a number of very interesting issues.  I didn’t write down all your proposed language changes, but I did have two thoughts.  One is on the question about the Taylor rule and the fact that we’re at the zero bound.  The staff has done a lot of very innovative things in trying to assess the implications of our asset purchase programs.  It seems to me there’s a possibility to take our 80 basis point estimate of the quantitative easing effect on longer-term Treasuries and ask, “Well, if I wanted to create a synthetic funds rate, what would that mean.”  You know, five to one is a pretty conservative estimate of the effect of the federal funds rate on longer-term rates, if it were based on a monetary policy shock, and that would translate into 400 basis points on the funds rate.  During the period when the funds rate is at zero, such a synthetic funds rate would look a little bit more like the Taylor rule, if that were a reasonable thing to do.  So I think that could be an interesting approach for puzzling through these things. On the “extended period” language, I continue to think that it’s a guideline.  A lot of us have gone out and indicated the state-contingency of that language, and that message seems to be coming across—for example, President Yellen commented that markets seem to be responding  to news beyond the six-month horizon—so that indicates that they are thinking that there is that contingency.  President Bullard had suggested adding more state-contingency, along the lines of the language in alternative A.  In principle, I like being more explicit, I like putting markers out there.  But I just worry—I’m not optimistic that the Fed and market watchers would get that right if we tried to make that type of change.  I don’t think they’d get it right initially, and, over the longer term, it might get caught up in some of the confusion over the European situation.  So while I can be sympathetic to that, I like the “extended period” language.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage expresses the speaker's personal opinion and provides explanations for their stance on various issues. There is no indication of disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 205.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Pianalto.


Passage number 206.
  MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  In my view, policy needs to remain accommodative until we see clearer evidence that the recovery is self-sustaining and we see the abatement of any further deflationary pressures.  I also support your suggestion to postpone the decision on Treasury securities reinvestments until we see further staff analysis.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Pianalto expresses her support for alternative B and agrees with the suggestion to postpone the decision on Treasury securities reinvestments.


Passage number 207.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage consists of a short expression of gratitude ("Thank you") followed by the name "Governor Warsh." There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this brief text.


Passage number 208.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start with a couple of substantive notes before turning to the statement.  The first I’ll mention is asset sales.  The way I think about our asset purchases is that we bought assets people didn’t want at prices they wouldn’t pay.  To the extent that markets are now interested in buying these assets at prices that are substantially similar to prices at which we’d be willing to sell, we should take them up on that rare opportunity.  So I’m an opportunistic seller of assets, just as a substantive matter.  I don’t think that the unwinding of our balance sheet would constitute a material tightening of monetary  policy so long as we followed the Bernanke adjectives:  gradual, well communicated, well understood, no fire sales, all the things we talked about yesterday. Second is the “extended period” language.  I don’t feel constrained by what that does to our options going forward.  I think that, if conditions change, we can change policies as quickly as we need to.  So the literalist in me is uncomfortable, and that might be true for others around this table, but I must say that I think markets have come, after a long period of deliberation, to understand what that means.  I do have sympathy with the view expressed by a few around this table that if we are too loose for too long, we could see bubbles.  I would state it maybe even more simply, and it’s the hard question I think we’re going to need to analyze in the next few months:  Are we seeing misallocations of capital, even if they’re short of bubbles.  In particular, I would keep good track of what’s happening to funds that are racing out of money market mutual funds yielding nothing and where they’re going next.  I would say that, to the extent we see material misallocations of capital and we have not yet moved policy, it should concern us.  At this point, those misallocations are hard to see, though it’s not impossible to come up with an anecdote about them. Let me turn now to the tactics and process and parlance of how we move forward.  I can support alternative B, and I do think we are wise to await further resolution, as it were, of the European shock.  I don’t think we’re really giving up much by waiting until June, but I think we should be using the period between now and June, principally in the minutes, to see whether we can’t describe what our policy alternatives might be in June and thereafter.  I think that I heard some kind of broad consensus consistent with what Narayana said about how we think about asset sales vis-à-vis the rest of our policy tools.  I hope that we are not conflating two policy tools into one.  I don’t think it’s prudent for us to say that we’ll only move one after we’ve  moved the other.  I think there are too many nonlinear events, too many changes in mortgage finance—too many that might hit us.  It would be better to think about asset sales and communicate our plans for asset sales in the context of what’s going on in the real economy and financial markets. As a result, I’m more agnostic about whether that will precede or follow changes in the policy rates.  I think that if markets understood that consensus, which is not focused on LIFO or FIFO or anything else, but which instead is focused on what we really see in the economy, then we would be doing ourselves and markets a good favor.  One of the few benefits of the extraordinary period we’ve been in is that we’ve created lots of products.  It turns out that they gave us lots of options on ways to unwind the liquidity measures we’ve put in place.  I think it’s giving us some greater room, some greater flexibility, in the conduct of monetary policy, and I wouldn’t want to conflate them.  I would tie them to real economic and financial conditions, and I think laying down a goal post of five years as a medium-term prospect sounds fine.  We don’t have to say, nor should we say, when that process begins. Finally, on redemptions, again, I think we should be communicating the robustness of our discussion on redemptions, because what matters most about that is what it signals.  I think the minutes and our speeches can help us, but I would be presumptively in favor of Treasury redemptions pending further analysis and our June discussion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mostly consists of the speaker expressing their own opinions and ideas.


Passage number 209.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude.


Passage number 210.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also favor alternative B.  I have to say I am sad to note that this is the last time I can shorten my remarks by piggybacking onto the reasons that were cited by Governor Kohn, and I’ll have to come up with my own reasons in the future.  My banking experience has taught me that execution does matter and that strong execution of an okay plan is actually better than weak execution of a great plan.  So I would reiterate rather than repeat my comments from the last meeting and join Governor Warsh in saying that the clarity and consistency of our communication is, in my mind, every bit as important as the ultimate policy path that we choose.  I would also agree with President Kocherlakota that once we’ve reached a consensus, we should put it in our statement very clearly.  But I don’t think we should put it in there until we’ve reached a consensus, so I don’t think we should do it now. Finally, with the situation in Europe, markets have plenty to wonder about and speculate about, so this is certainly not a time for us to add something else for them to chew on.  Governor Tarullo has now taught me to count the red words on the page, so in order to get down to the appropriate number of red words, I would leave out paragraph 4.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their agreement with alternative B and also shares their personal thoughts and experiences related to banking. They also agree with President Kocherlakota's suggestion but state that it should be implemented only once a consensus is reached. The speaker also suggests leaving out a certain paragraph to meet the required length.


Passage number 211.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’ll double-cross you and put them in blue next time.  [Laughter]  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a light-hearted comment followed by laughter.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 212.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B with the language in paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 5 precisely as they are.  I continue to be sympathetic to President Bullard’s desire both to do policy in a more state-contingent fashion and to say so, but I agree with President Evans that the interpretation of any such move in that direction now is likely to be wrongly interpreted by the markets. I’m against inclusion of anything from alternatives A, B, or C in paragraph 4.  For reasons some of you have said, I think we’re not at a point where it is useful to communicate such consensus as there is in the Delphic tones that the FOMC statements take.  So, for the present, a rich description in the minutes plus, again, I hope, the opportunity for the Chairman to  speak to these issues with the assurance of being backed up by the Committee is probably the best way to go until June.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is stating his preference for alternative B with specific language, while also expressing disagreement with including anything from alternatives A, B, or C in paragraph 4.


Passage number 213.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.   Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 214.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  I just want to give you an update on the Greece situation as it continues to unfold.  There was a press conference in Berlin today that went pretty well—the market reacted favorably.  It’s because they basically reinforced the idea that they are going to do this thing for Greece without restructuring.  There was an unconfirmed press report that the size would be scaled up—there were numbers as high as €120 billion, but subsequent to that Spain was downgraded a notch by S&P to AA from AA+, and the enthusiasm then evaporated completely.  This just tells you that this is a very fluid situation.  Even though there are some upticks in the mood occasionally, it’s still getting worse, generally, and I think we’re going to have to keep our eye on this very, very closely over the near term.  As I said before, I think it really reinforces the notion of not doing much at this meeting. I think the outlook is also broadly consistent with that.  The near-term economic growth outlook is a little bit better.  Inflation is a little bit lower than what we want.  The medium-term outlook hasn’t changed appreciably since the last meeting.  In the Bluebook, most of the unconstrained federal funds rates are below the current rate, and most of them haven’t changed much, either, since the last meeting.  So it seems to me that, given that the Greek situation is creating a huge amount of uncertainty, and given that we don’t want to create any drama, and considering everything that has happened since the last meeting, it all points to alternative B and keeping the “extended period” language in.  My sense is that the Committee’s view is that, if we’re not going to do anything about Treasury redemptions, then we don’t need paragraph 4 at this meeting, and I would concur with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 215.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  I would like to recommend alternative B, which I think most people were comfortable with.  We would exclude entirely paragraph 4.  There’s no reason to make reference to it if we’re not undertaking redemptions at this time. I’d like to make a few comments and a general observation, and then I’ll come back to a language question.  First of all, on the “extended period” language, I do really feel, as was mentioned by Governor Warsh, that this is not much of a constraint at this point.  We have done a good job of expressing the conditionality associated with our policy.  In addition, I think that at this point the language has kind of flipped—at one point it was pushing out our ease further than the data might otherwise imply, but at this point, I think we’re in a situation where the removal of the language will bring the expected tightening up even more than the data would imply.  So, to some extent, it’s an historical accident that we’re at this point.  Now that we are at this point, I’d say that we need to think very carefully about the steps that we take as we come to the point where we change the language, because, when we do change the language, it will be de facto a tightening of policy.  There is a piece of evidence in favor of what I’m saying.  If you look at dealers’ expectations, on the one hand they do not expect any change in this language at this meeting; on the other hand, a very substantial number of them expect a tightening before the end of the year.  So those two things are not inconsistent, and, again, we need to think carefully before we take that step since, it will have a lot of information in it. Second, on communications about sales, let me say to President Kocherlakota that I appreciated your comments, and you’ve been very constructive on this whole topic.  I do think that, although we have a broad consensus, we have not yet identified a specific plan, so we will be better off putting this in the minutes and allowing some socialization in the markets and in the  public.  Then, when the time comes for us to lay out a specific plan, this will not be a total shock—we will have done our job of communicating and warning the public in advance.  I remind you that, when we began the purchases, the first reference we made to it was when we stated how much we were going to buy and over what time period.  So I would advocate that strategy, while agreeing that there was a substantial consensus around the table that sales are needed in order both to normalize policy and to normalize our balance sheet. Now let me make a general comment.  I recognize that it might appear to some of you that I’m someone who has a weight of zero on inflation and a weight of one on employment.  That’s certainly not the case.  I believe I have a balanced view of both sides of our dual mandate.  But I think there’s kind of a psychological problem.  We have eight meetings a year, and therefore we have to do eight things every year—it’s very hard psychologically to be patient.  But right now I do believe that we are in a situation where we have real threats of weakness and of failure of the recovery and disinflation.  While there are certainly real concerns on the other side of this—and I understand the concerns that those of you who would like to move more quickly have raised—they’re still more prospective than real.  Financial imbalances and inflation are risks, and we need to pay attention to them, but I don’t think that at this point they quite outweigh the real and present danger that we face in the economy.  So that’s why I would like to maintain the low policy rate for now.  When the appropriate time comes, of course, we will move. I’d also like to point out that, as President Hoenig mentioned, we have been in a gradual process of normalization and tightening.  This goes back to last year, and I think it has been very successful.  I would just encourage everyone to think of it in those terms, namely, that we will continue to move forward as economic conditions warrant, conditionally, in a process of  normalization.  If there is no large, discrete jump in market prices— I think that will be a sign of good communication, good preparation, and good management.  So I’m very much in agreement that we need to normalize.  I think that we need to be patient in terms of looking at the relative risks that we face, but, of course, we will move at the appropriate time and will continue to move toward a more normal level of the policy rate.  So, again, my recommendation is to hold off on any significant change in the policy statement.  We will have two job reports between now and June, and it’s entirely possible that we’re going to have a different perspective at that time, but right now I think, again, we are still very early in the recovery process. With respect to language, the most creativity was exhibited by President Bullard.  Again, I’m not in favor of dropping “extended period.”  However, President Bullard did suggest replacing the second paragraph of alternative B with the inflation paragraph from alternative C.  I believe we actually discussed this last time and decided not to make the change.  But I personally do not have any credible objection to the second paragraph of C.  If anyone else wants to speak in favor or against, I’d be happy to put that on the table. President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 216.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Surprise, I would think that would be a good move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a positive opinion about a hypothetical action.


Passage number 217.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else interested.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 218.
 MR. KOHN.  I think we already make that point in the last sentence of paragraph 3.  I don’t see how someone could interpret this as purely passive when we say the Committee will “monitor the outlook” and “employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic recovery and price stability.”  If we’re going to add something to paragraph 2, I would add something to paragraph 1 and symmetrically take responsibility for employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, is expressing his opinion and providing an explanation for why he disagrees with the idea that the statement is purely passive. He suggests adding a statement about employment in paragraph 1 to balance the focus on economic recovery and price stability in paragraph 2.


Passage number 219.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, as there is no passage provided to analyze.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 220.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I favor doing as little as possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "doing as little as possible" implies a desire for minimal effort or involvement, which can be seen as a form of laziness or lack of motivation. It may be a viewpoint that contradicts the idea of striving for excellence or putting in significant effort in a certain context.


Passage number 221.
   CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Anyone else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "All right. Anyone else" simply indicates a speaker's willingness to listen to others or invite additional input or opinions.


Passage number 222.
 MR. TARULLO.  I’m with Vice Chairman Dudley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is stating his affiliation with Vice Chairman Dudley, indicating unity or agreement between them.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Well, again, the basic point of alternative C paragraph 2 is entirely valid, and I don’t object to our making that point frequently, but, once again, there’s a little hysteresis, I think, in this process.  Any comments.  [No response]  All right, let me then propose that we adopt alternative B, excluding paragraph 4.  Matt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the validity of alternative C paragraph 2 and suggests adopting alternative B excluding paragraph 4 without any objections or comments from others.


Passage number 224.
 MR. LUECKE.  This vote will encompass the language in alternative B on page 3 of the monetary policy alternatives without the language in the brackets, as well as the language on page 8 in the directive, also without the language within brackets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply describing what the vote will encompass. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 225.
 Chairman Bernanke  Yes Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes President Bullard   Yes Governor Duke   Yes President Hoenig   No Governor Kohn   Yes President Pianalto   Yes President Rosengren  Yes Governor Tarullo   Yes Governor Warsh   Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much. The next meeting is June 22 and 23—a two-day meeting.  It will be another opportunity to discuss important topics.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 226.
 MR. HOENIG.  To follow up on what I said earlier, could we think about a more organized discussion around our systemic issues.  Would that be possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Hoenig is suggesting a more organized discussion to address systemic issues, without challenging or opposing any previous statements or ideas.


Passage number 227.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do people agree that we will be ready at least to discuss plans on that issue.  Although there is some constraint in terms of the amount of time that the staff has, I think that’s a very, very useful suggestion.  Anyone else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there may be a time constraint, but the suggestion is considered useful.


Passage number 228.
  MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement from Mr. Tarullo addressing Mr. Chairman.


Passage number 229.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually seeing the passage. Please provide the passage to analyze.


Passage number 230.
 MR. TARULLO.  Is it possible that Governor Kohn would say a few words for posterity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if Governor Kohn is able to say a few words.


Passage number 231.
  MR. KOHN.  I think he said 221 meetings’ worth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their understanding of what was said.


Passage number 232.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  Just a few more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It contains laughter, indicating a light-hearted or positive tone.


Passage number 233.
  MR. KOHN.  Good luck.  [Laughter and extended applause.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of a simple statement of well-wishing and an audience response of laughter and applause, indicating agreement and support.


Passage number 234.
] VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We should ask for a little more than those two words [laughter].  “You’ll need it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that someone should ask for a little more than just two words, which is stated humorously by including laughter. The sentence "You'll need it" further supports this idea by implying that the additional request would be beneficial.


