Passage number 1.
   Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on May 9, 2010A conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Sunday, May 9, 2010, at 11:20 a.m.  Those present were the following: Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James Bullard Elizabeth Duke Thomas M. Hoenig Donald L. Kohn Sandra Pianalto Eric Rosengren Daniel K. Tarullo Kevin Warsh Charles L. Evans, Richard Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively Brian F. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Nathan Sheets, Economist David J. Stockton, Economist Alan D. Barkema, Thomas A. Connors, Jeff Fuhrer, Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Michael Leahy, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Valerie Hinojosa and Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analysts, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsHarvey Rosenblum and John C. Williams, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and San Francisco, respectively  David Altig, Patricia C. Mosser, Arthur J. Rolnick, Daniel G. Sullivan, and John A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply lists the participants in a conference call.


Passage number 2.
 MR. SACK.  Yes, I am.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply affirms their own identity without any contradictory statements or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 3.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have not discussed this with you over the weekend.  Could you just comment on what you see now and on anything you want to report on your discussions in Basel about the state of financial markets in general or swaps markets and the interbank market in particular.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Are there any questions for Brian, or does anybody else want to add any color.  [No response.]  I see no questions.  Let me turn then to Nathan Sheets.  Are you there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there are any questions or if anyone wants to add anything before moving on to someone else.


Passage number 5.
 MR. SHEETS.  I am indeed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, the speaker simply states a personal fact, without introducing any conflicting ideas or expressing any disagreements.


Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nathan, could you just comment on the technicalities of getting this together.  I assume that we would not be able actually to implement anything for a few days and that we would just want to go with a statement today.  Is that your understanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification from Nathan about the technical aspects of a plan and confirming their understanding.


Passage number 7.
 MR. SHEETS.  That is.  We are having consultations with staff at the foreign central banks and essentially dusting off the technical apparatus that we used when the swap lines were functioning.  Our sense is that we could certainly do an announcement tonight and that we can agree on some common language with them.  That would allow them to do auctions probably by Tuesday, and then the disbursement of any auction funds would probably be by Wednesday or Thursday of next week.  So if it’s the will of the Committee, our sense on the technical side is that we can move pretty quickly with this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Sheets regarding the timeline and process for consultations and actions related to swap lines.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  I didn’t warn you about this, Nathan, but do you have commentary from what you have picked up in Basel about the state of the economy or the state of the markets in Europe or anything about sentiment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply asking for Nathan's commentary or information on the state of the economy or markets in Europe, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 9.
MR. SHEETS.  People are very, very nervous.  In terms of specific policy announcements, people are waiting for the press release from Ecofin.  Nobody had as much information as you just articulated to us.  One point that came up several times in the meetings was that European participants noted that the real risks to their banking systems are tied into this sovereign stress:  Their banks are holding sovereign instruments; the increased funding costs for the sovereigns are passed through in the increased funding costs to the banking system; and, perhaps most importantly, the stressed sovereigns are reducing the capacity of governments to provide a backstop for the banking system.  So they see the heart and soul of the stresses on the banking system as reflecting these sovereign stresses rather than some sort of previously existing balance sheet problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting information and summarizing discussions that were held, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 10.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nathan, I have a technical question.  If there’s risk that the euro might depreciate further, will that affect our security in our swaps.  How can we be sure that we have a secure position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a request for information and clarification about the potential impact of the euro depreciating on security in swaps.


Passage number 11.
  MR. SHEETS.  My feeling is that our primary source of surety is the goodwill guarantee that these major central banks give us that they will make good on unwinding the swap.  Now, if the euro were to fall substantially, that would result in our euro holdings being worth less than the swap value of the dollars.  One protection we have against that is that these are relatively short-term transactions.  In the past, we have not taken steps like trying to do margins or mark to market or that sort of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not suggest any disagreement or contention. It primarily presents the speaker's perspective and explanation of their beliefs.


Passage number 12.
 MR. SACK.  Just to be clear, all we’re talking about here, though, is affecting the value of the collateral, not the return of the funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact, clarifying that the discussion is solely focused on influencing the value of the collateral, not the return of the funds. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 13.
 MR. SHEETS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "yes" indicates that there is contention or disagreement in the passage. However, without any specific context or the actual passage being provided, it is not possible to determine the exact nature of the contention or disagreement.


Passage number 14.
 MR. SACK.  But they still have promised to repay the full amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. This statement simply states that someone has promised to repay a full amount without any conflicting opinions or opposition.


Passage number 15.
MR. SHEETS.  That’s right.  That’s the primary source of surety.  Even if the euro falls and becomes worth less than the dollar, the ECB is still contractually obligated to repay us.  So the decline in the value of the euro would be important only in the state of nature where the ECB had defaulted, and we would put essentially zero possibility on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sheets, is stating a fact about the primary source of surety and expressing their confidence in the ECB's contractual obligation to repay.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Trish, did you have something to add to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. Trish is simply being asked if she has something to add to the conversation.


Passage number 17.
   MS. MOSSER.  I was going to make the same point, namely, that the contracts are such that, absent the ECB or one of the central banks defaulting to us, we will get all of our dollars back.  The contracts are not dependent on future exchange rate levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Ms. Mosser, is simply stating a fact about the contracts and their independence from future exchange rate levels.


Passage number 18.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Questions.  I see President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states that the speaker sees President Plosser, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 19.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have just a quick question.  Can you review for us, Nathan or Brian, the terms of these swaps and the maturities that we’re considering.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question for clarification.


Passage number 20.
 MR. SHEETS.  I think that that would be at the discretion of the Committee.  But in the past these maturities have ranged from overnight, to one week, to one month, out to three months.  And we’ve tailored the maturity of various auctions to meet the perceived liquidity strains that existed in the markets.  Ideally, we’d continue to have that kind of flexibility to determine the tenor of the swap funds based on market conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and stating their opinion about the ideal approach to determining the tenor of swap funds based on market conditions.


Passage number 21.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Mr. Chairman, this is Bill Dudley.  I think in our discussions here, the general view has probably been to replicate as nearly as possible what we had before, because the market has comfort and knowledge of that, and we also have a good experience with it.  If we followed what we had before, we would have a penalty of 1 percentage point.  And the real decision I think we would have to make is:  Do we want to make it unlimited, that is, a fixed-rate tender swap, or do we want to cap the amount.  I would favor afixed-rate tender, with the market taking as much as it wanted at the penalty rate, as we did the last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a suggestion and expressing their preference.


Passage number 22.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What was the maturity distribution last time, Bill.  Do you remember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question asking for information and does not indicate any argument or differing viewpoints.


Passage number 23.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  Different countries had different auction cycles.  They followed the TAF, so there was a 28-day TAF and an 84-day TAF, obviously.  In addition to that, they had weekly cycles. I think that that’s really a second-order consideration, because they have to decide what the appropriate maturity would be, what would work best from their perspective.  Of course, what would be different this time is that we wouldn’t be reintroducing the TAF.  Instead, they would just be conducting TAF-like auctions independent from us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides information about different countries' auction cycles and mentions that they followed the TAF (Term Auction Facility) with different durations. It also mentions that the appropriate maturity for auctions is a second-order consideration. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 24.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.   Thank you.  Other questions for Nathan.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrases "Thank you" and "Other questions for Nathan" indicate that the speaker is expressing gratitude and a desire for further information or clarification, but there is no indication of any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 25.
 MR. LACKER.  You didn’t state this, but I’m assuming that the intended use of the swap lines is for liquidity auctions, as we had last time, and not for intervention in foreign exchange markets.  Is that correct.  On a related note, have you been asked to intervene in foreign exchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification on the intended use of swap lines and whether they will be used for liquidity auctions or intervention in foreign exchange markets.


Passage number 26.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, we have not been asked to do it.  Go ahead, Nathan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have not been asked to do something. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 27.
 MR. SHEETS.  In response to the first question, it would be the case that these funds would be restricted to be used for liquidity purposes.  They wouldn’t be available for foreign exchange market intervention, as was the case with similar kinds of contracts that prevailed when we had the swap lines in place before, with similar kinds of safeguards to keep the funds from being used for that purpose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the restrictions on the use of funds for liquidity purposes and clarifying that they cannot be used for foreign exchange market intervention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
 MR. LACKER.  Will we sterilize these ourselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "we" implies that the speaker, Mr. Lacker, has a differing opinion or stance from those being addressed. There is a possible disagreement about who will be responsible for the sterilization mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 29.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s a very good question.  Go ahead, Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply acknowledges the question as a good one and prompts Brian to proceed with whatever he was going to say.


Passage number 30.
 MR. SACK.  At the moment, it’s not clear that we have a need to sterilize them.  We are operating with a target band for the funds rate.  We are drifting up to the upper end of that band.  So we could, but I think it’s not obvious that we need to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states their viewpoint and acknowledges that sterilization is a possibility but not necessarily needed.


Passage number 31.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We also don’t know what the take-up of these swap lines will be in practice. So it would seem to me that it would be premature to consider whether sterilization was appropriate when you don’t even know the magnitude of the swaps that will be outstanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage is stating that there is a lack of knowledge regarding the take-up of swap lines and therefore it would be premature to consider sterilization. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 32.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that’s a very important question for us to discuss, but I don’t think we have to decide that today, fortunately.  We may want to discuss it, particularly in the context of our reserve-draining tools.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It simply presents an idea and suggests discussing it in the future.


Passage number 33.
  MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we put the swap lines in place last year or the year before, there were questions at that time about what the status of the dollar reserves was in the ECB countries, and why would they not use those reserves.  As I recall, the answer was that they simply wanted a supplemental capability and that they were protective of their reserve positions.  Do we know the status of their reserve positions today.  And what likelihood is there that they would actually draw down their reserves to provide some of this liquidity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward inquiry about the status of reserve positions and the likelihood of using them for liquidity.


Passage number 34.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’ll let Nathan respond to that.  But let me say—just going back to our previous discussions—that they saw value and we saw value in segregating the reserves, which could be used for exchange rate intervention, and the swaps, which were designated and dedicated to providing bank liquidity.  The other aspect of it is that confidenceand symbolism are important parts of the benefits of this, I think.  Nathan, do you have anything to add to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is deferring to Nathan's response and then giving their own opinion on the value of segregating reserves and swaps. They also mention the importance of confidence and symbolism in relation to the subject. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 35.
 MR. SHEETS.  Brian actually has these data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement or contention in the passage. This is indicated by the use of the word "actually," which implies that there is a contradiction or dispute about Brian having the data.


Passage number 36.
  MR. SACK.  We have an estimate of the amount of reserves for the euro area, so that would be the ECB and all of the member central banks.  It looks as if it’s somewhere just above $150 billion.  About half of that is actually held in custody at the New York Fed, so that gives us a chance to have a glimpse at its composition.  In general terms, a lot of it is in Treasuries and agencies, not surprisingly.  I think that gives you a sense of the status of their reserves.  But, again, for them to use those reserves introduces a couple of complications.  It would require them to go out and sell dollar assets, which we might not want to encourage in this market environment.  Or, if they’re not going to sell dollar assets, they have to use those securities as collateral in dollar repo funding transactions.  And, of course, if they’re taking dollar funding, they could be taking it from other market participants.  The FX swaps, in a way, are an addition in terms of the amount of dollar funding, whereas using the reserves are not necessarily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the composition and potential complications of using reserves for the euro area.


Passage number 37.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Two-hander from President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 38.
 MR. LACKER.  If we don’t sterilize swap draws, we’re going to be taking dollar funding from market participants in the U.S. and passing it on through the ECB.  I’m not quite sure I get that.  Plus, there’s the issue of selling U.S. Treasuries.  Treasuries are getting scarce.  Their price is going up because of the flight to quality.  So I’m not quite sure I understand your line of argument, Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification about the argument being made by Brian.


Passage number 39.
 MR. SACK.  I agree with your second point.  I was just pointing out that it will require dollar asset sales.  You’re right that it’s in an asset class where there is demand.  But, relative to the case of using swaps, it’s an incremental source of selling.I didn’t fully follow the first part.  I think if we sterilize the operations, then, yes, we would be removing short-term dollar funding from the market, just as would be the case if the euro area countries had to use their holdings as collateral.  But that’s if we sterilize it.  If we don’t sterilize, then I think it’s this net addition of dollar funding that I talked about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker begins by expressing agreement with the second point mentioned and then goes on to clarify their understanding of the first part.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 40.
 MR. LACKER.  But if we don’t sterilize, we’re adding to bank reserves, we’re essentially taking the funding from banks and lending it on through the ECB.  If we do sterilize with reserve draining, then what are we doing.  We’re taking it from money market mutual funds and handing it on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents two alternative actions (sterilization versus non-sterilization) and suggests that the outcome differs depending on the approach. This indicates that there is a disagreement or debate about the best course of action.


Passage number 41.
 MR. SACK.  If we don’t sterilize, I don’t see how we’re taking funding from anyone.  We’re just introducing new funding into the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sack is simply expressing his opinion, stating that he doesn't see how not sterilizing would affect funding in any way and that new funding would be introduced into the market.


Passage number 42.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s creating a monetary base.  President Fisher, do you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about creating a monetary base and then transitions to asking President Fisher if he has a question.


Passage number 43.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  The last time we activated our swap lines, of course, others piled on—we had Singapore, Chile, Mexico, and so on.  My question is:  What’s the risk of other countries that are going to want to pile on. As for my second question, maybe this isn’t the right time to ask it, but I’ll ask it anyway.  Let’s say Ecofin does come forward and we announce these swap lines.  I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, that doing so would serve not only substantive purposes, but it also has a psychological impact.  But let’s assume that it doesn’t work.  What are the next steps that we might be asked to engage in.  I just want to have us think through a little bit, without taking too much time, a decision tree going forward.I think my first question presents a different set of political risks from the ones you’ve already highlighted, Mr. Chairman.  So I’d be interested in Brian’s and Nathan’s judgment on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply contains questions from Mr. Fisher, seeking clarification and asking for opinions.


Passage number 44.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We haven’t heard from anybody other than the G-7.  I think that there’s a whole new level of political risk if we go to emerging markets.  I would never say “never”—it depends on how market conditions evolve, and so on.  But my strong inclination would not be to go beyond the G-7. In terms of what we do next, I’m not sure there’s a whole lot more that the Federal Reserve can do.  The fundamental issues have to do with fiscal stability in Europe, and that’s something only they themselves can solve.  I think our additional actions would be along the lines of making sure that our banks are stable.  If we had to do some kind of—I’m extrapolating wildly here—new SCAP or something in the future, we could consider it.  But, quite honestly, I can’t see what else we could do, other than, as I mentioned on Friday, respond to the macroeconomic conditions of the United States, as necessary.  But that’s all I can think of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their viewpoint and states that there may not be much more that the Federal Reserve can do in certain situations.


Passage number 45.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a polite expression of gratitude, showing agreement or acknowledgment rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The following passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 47.
 MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to go back to Jeff’s point about sterilization for a minute.  I’m wondering about the optics.  If the ECB announces that its interventions in these markets are going to be sterilized, and we, on the other hand, say we’re not going to sterilize, in effect we’re doing quantitative easing in the United States, whereas they are, in fact, resisting by sterilizing their own intervention in the other markets.  So I’m a little bit curious about the imbalance in how we’re going to treat that.  It sort of goes back to Jeff’soriginal question.  I think it’s a difficult question.  Do we want to be easing here on behalf of the Europeans in that case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Plosser is expressing concern about the differing approaches to sterilization between the ECB and the United States. He questions whether it is fair for the US to engage in quantitative easing while the ECB is sterilizing their interventions. This suggests a disagreement over the appropriate approach to take.


Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You have to understand that our buying U.S. Treasuries and the ECB’s buying Greek bonds are very different matters.  They’re taking very significant risks with their credibility, with their political standing, and with the value of the euro.  I think what they’re trying to do with the sterilization is to ensure that this decision doesn’t bleed over into a major run on the euro.  I think that’s why they’re doing what they’re doing.  I don’t think we have quite the same risks.  Having said that—and I take Brian Sack’s point that, in terms of market conditions, given where we are, we’re probably talking about only a few basis points in market conditions—I’m embarrassed that I haven’t brought a proposal on sterilization.  I think we do need to talk about it. But from the ECB’s point of view, particularly given their relatively more conservative approach to this point, they’re the ones who are crossing an important line by expressing a willingness to buy any asset, including Greek bank debt or whatever it might be that they deem to be part of a disorderly market. I don’t think the dollar is going to suffer vis-à-vis the euro on these announcements.  But, again, your point about sterilization is important.  We should continue to think about that.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not have any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing the differences between the actions of the US and ECB in buying bonds and the potential risks involved. They also mention the need to think about sterilization. While there may be differing opinions on some aspects, there is no direct contention or disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 49.
 MR. HOENIG.  I have a couple of questions, and, if the timing isn’t right, we can defer the discussion.  One is in reference to what Bill Dudley said, if I understood it correctly.  Were you saying that these swaps would be kind of open-ended, subject to the demand for them.  Is that correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of questions being asked.


Passage number 50.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, it depends on how they’re structured.  They could be structured as a fixed size, or they could be structured as a fixed-rate unlimited tender.  In the last rounds after Lehman, we did them as fixed-rate unlimited size.  The reason for that, of course, is that we’re not making a statement about what amount of liquidity the market demands.  We’re just saying that we’ll supply whatever liquidity, at a penalty interest rate.  That worked pretty well, because, as markets normalized, the amount outstanding went down, and it wound down very smoothly as the process unfolded. Actually, I would argue that if we were to propose a fixed size, we probably would get more demand than if we did an unlimited tender, because with a fixed size, people would be worried that it will run out.  But if it’s unlimited, there’s less anxiety—it serves as more of a backstop to the market than as something the market has to use.  I would think, from a balance sheet perspective, that a fixed-rate tender would result in less demand relative to a large FX swap program.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options for structuring liquidity operations and explaining the advantages of each. They provide reasoning for their preferences but do not argue against any particular option.


Passage number 51.
 MR. HOENIG.  That leads to my second question and kind of comes back to the political challenge we have, Mr. Chairman.  I think it’s important to have a discussion on how we would announce this, because the misinformation or the misinterpretations of our actions could multiply, given the history that we’ve just suffered through.  I think it’s very important that we be very forthcoming.  If we’ve given any thought to how this announcement would look, it would be of interest to me at this point, or before we get off the call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing the importance of having a discussion and being forthcoming about the announcement they are referring to.


Passage number 52.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Michelle, do you want to comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 53.
 MS. SMITH.  Sure.  I had a few sort of unorganized thoughts about this.  One thing that I think would be important is that our announcement should follow Ecofin’s announcement, and that it should be as international as possible—so it would be the Federal Reserve, the Bank ofJapan, the Bank of Canada, and so on.  In other words, it should be some sort of broader G-7 effort. I would also make a few other points.  This is safe—we have never lost a penny, either in the recent crisis experience or in the ongoing swap situations we’ve had with Mexico and Canada.  This is not novel—this is what central banks do.  It is not a bailout, it’s not altruism—this is in our interest.  We have a recovery just getting going here in the United States, and this helps keep European problems—and we wouldn’t say this in a statement—in Europe.  I have a question about whether there’s anything new we can do on transparency in this arena.  If we could somehow say that we’re doing this in some newer, more transparent, quicker way, I think that would help us to mitigate some of the political risk.  I don’t know if we can do that, but if we could, I think that would be helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It consists of statements and suggestions made by Ms. Smith, without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 54.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We can publish the amounts of the auction sizes for each of the counterparties that we have.  They’re doing an auction, they’re announcing the results, and we could just aggregate that information and publish it as it happens.  Each time they have an auction, we could publish the individual counterparties and total results.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests a course of action without any conflicting views or opinions expressed.


Passage number 55.
 MR. KOHN.  We could publish the amounts for each counterparty each week at the same time the H.4.1 comes out, so everybody knows everything on a weekly basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Kohn suggesting a potential course of action.


Passage number 56.
 MS. SMITH.  The thing I would really try to underscore is that what the central banks are doing is not a response to Europe’s problems.  Europe’s problems are being responded to with real measures in Europe.  What we’re doing is helping to facilitate—structural plumbing, flows, and so on—and protecting ourselves and our interests.  So I’d emphasize that this isn’t about the Fed responding, doing a bailout, or anything like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker clearly states that the central banks are not responding to Europe's problems and that they are focused on facilitating structural plumbing and protecting their own interests.


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there contracts with the other central banks, or agreements, or something similar that we could release.  Nathan.  Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 58.
 MR. SHEETS.  We have never released swap agreements to the public.  It could be done, but we’d probably want to look them over very carefully first, just for the sake of transparency and clarity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Sheets states that they have never released swap agreements to the public and suggests that if they were to do so, they would review them carefully for transparency and clarity.


Passage number 59.
 MS. SMITH.  I would say that it would be better if we could release those.  You saw the kinds of things that members of the Congress said in some of the hearings.  Anything that we’re keeping secret is just going to fuel their speculation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a belief or opinion. There is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments being presented.


Passage number 60.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nathan, and maybe Scott, as well, assuming we proceed with this, it would help if we could look at those agreements and ask if there’s anything there that would prevent a release.  If there is, is it possible to rewrite new agreements that would be publicly disclosable.  I can’t see fundamentally why there would be any problem with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting the idea of reviewing agreements and potentially rewriting new ones if necessary, in order to ensure a public release. They express their belief that there shouldn't be any issues with this proposal.


Passage number 61.
 MR. ALVAREZ.  I can’t either.  We’ve given out the contracts in our other facilities.  I don’t see anything off the top of my head that we couldn’t sterilize if we had to.  I think the agreements are actually very simple, very straightforward, and could be made available.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Alvarez, expresses a positive sentiment about the contracts and states that he does not see any issues with sterilizing the mentioned items. He further emphasizes that the agreements are simple and straightforward.


Passage number 62.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So all we would have to say today would be that we will be releasing those contracts.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by President Bullard is presented as a straightforward action that will be taken.


Passage number 63.
 MR. BULLARD.  These are international agreements, so you would have to get agreement from the foreign central bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the requirement of obtaining agreement from a foreign central bank for international agreements.


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we can ask them.  They are, in this case, the ones who are asking for the swap lines—they want them very badly.  I think they would let us let us characterize the situation—for example, who asked for the swap, or whatever—any way that wethink is beneficial from a communications point of view.  But your point is correct.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the other party wants the swap lines and suggests that they can ask the other party for their input on how to characterize the situation. Although there might be some differing opinions on the communication strategy, there is no explicit disagreement.


Passage number 65.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I just want to underscore that I think all of Michelle’s points were spot on, and we need additional efforts, particularly because it’s our money, such as releasing the contracts, so that we better inform those who feel we’re conspiring against them.  Mr. Chairman, I’d also like to talk a bit offline with you—I noticed you were looking at your watch, and I’m conscious of that—about certain people I think should be spoken to in a timely way, so that there’s no confusion. I’d also say—and I’m sure Michelle has already thought this through—that we need to be able to state this in the simplest possible English, so that it’s clearly understood that this is something where we don’t bear a risk of loss, that it’s in our own best interest to do this, that taking this step is a very cheap way to provide insurance against further contagion, and that it’s certainly a better option than what might ensue if this were to infect our own system.  So I’m basically underscoring the points that Michelle made.  They may have been unorganized thoughts, but I think they touched all the right bases. I also want to ask that we consider—and, again, this is a question of timing, because we can’t run any risk of leaks—broadening our base a little bit in terms of key senators.  I have one, as you know, particularly in mind that we have worked with very closely—hand-in-glove—and I don’t want to undermine their sense of confidence in, and I want to enhance their understanding, which is limited, of these rather esoteric but essential tools.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Michelle's points and is suggesting additional efforts and ideas to further support those points.


Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I was looking at my watch because I have a 2:00 p.m. G-7 call, but that leaves us plenty of time, so there’s no concern about that. President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the speaker's schedule and the available time.


Passage number 67.
MR. HOENIG.   Thank you.  Just to carry this a bit further, I agree with what you said, Michelle.  In terms of the reaction of some members of the Congress, I think their concern is that we might be exposing the taxpayer to the risk of having to pick up the tab to save organizations in Europe.  I agree with you, and with President Fisher, that it’s important to explain in simple language that these are liquidity facilities, that we’re not risking taxpayer money, and that we’re willing to show the contracts to verify that we will get paid back in full dollars.  I think doing so would go a long ways not to ending the criticism but to mitigating the sense of concern.  So I think you’re on the right track.  And I hope that as soon as we hang up here you start drafting that, because it’s going to take multiple drafts to get it as simple and yet as thorough as possible.  That’s my suggestion and an admonition on that.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Michelle and President Fisher's ideas, and provides a suggestion for further action.


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions President Bullard without providing any information or context to imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 69.
 MR. BULLARD.  Just to come in with an unpleasant comment—the probability of the ECB not surviving has probably moved off of zero to some small positive probability that it would actually unravel.  So, in the debate about this, I think people will not be hesitant to speculate on the future of the euro and the future of the ECB.  I think it’s something to consider when we’re trying to present this.  I think our best point is to say that we’ve been through this before, that it worked great before, so we can do it again, and we expect it to work well again this time.  But I don’t want to be naïve about the idea that the ECB is forever, because that’s exactly what this crisis is about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is a small possibility that the ECB may not survive, but also believes that the success of the ECB in the past means it can overcome current challenges.


Passage number 70.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s a good point.  Linda, do you want to add anything.  Oh, I’m sorry.  Narayana.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The expressions used ("That's a good point" and "Oh, I'm sorry") suggest agreement and politeness rather than contention.


Passage number 71.
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I have just a quick question for you.  In terms of these broad-scale interventions the ECB is contemplating, they are going to be restricting themselves to euro-denominated assets.  Is that your understanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply asking for clarification on a specific aspect of the ECB's interventions.


Passage number 72.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, that’s my understanding. If you have nothing further, I’ll give Linda a chance to comment on the politics.  I guess she’s comfortable with what we’ve described up to now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding and suggesting that Linda should comment on the politics if she has anything to add. The mention of Linda's comfort suggests that there is agreement or consensus among the speakers.


Passage number 73.
 MR. HOENIG.  I have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply states that they have a question, without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 74.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, sorry.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is an apology from the speaker, acknowledging their mistake.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
 MR. HOENIG.  Would there be pushback on this in the political context, where someone might say, “Well, shouldn’t you collateralize this with their reserves.”  Is that going to come up.  And if it is, how do we answer that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there may be contention or disagreement in the political context regarding whether the collateralization of reserves should be required. The question indicates that someone might argue for collateralization, while others may have differing opinions.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, it is collateralized with euros.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply provides information about the collateral of an asset being in euros. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 77.
 MR. HOENIG.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage only mentions "MR. HOENIG" without providing any context or information that would suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 78.
  I mean, with the reserves they have denominated in dollars that they could then collateralize, so if it did go into default we would— CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a statement and then realizing something.


Passage number 79.
 MR. HOENIG.  It’s a question that I fear someone will ask, so I’ll ask it now, so we can anticipate it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have a question that they believe someone else might ask.


Passage number 80.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nathan, maybe you can jump in here.  I think we have done that in the past, but we have given the major central banks the courtesy of taking their signature.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking for Nathan's input and mentioning that they have given the major central banks the courtesy of taking their signature in the past.


Passage number 81.
 MR. SHEETS.  Yes, that’s right.  We had what was called offset rights with the emerging market economies.  That meant that we could attach anything that they were holding at the New York Fed in the event that they failed to unwind the swap that had been contractually agreed upon.  We haven’t had that with the advanced economies, with the ECB and the like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the lack of offset rights with advanced economies like ECB.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 82.
MR. KOHN.  It would look like a vote of no confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the speaker, Mr. Kohn, states that "It would look like a vote of no confidence," which can be interpreted as a disagreement or opposition to something that has been suggested or proposed.


Passage number 83.
 MR. SHEETS.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The answer is "Yes." There is contention or disagreement implied in the passage as indicated by the presence of the word "Yes."


Passage number 84.
 MR. KOHN.  And it would be at a time when that would be pretty counterproductive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. There is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Particularly if we were not releasing the contract.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is making a hypothetical condition about not releasing a contract.


Passage number 86.
 MR. HOENIG.  I agree with you.  But someone is going to ask you that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 87.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The answer is that we have both the euros and the ECB’s commitment, and the ECB will be effectively backed up by Ecofin and the European Union.  If the continent of Europe is bankrupt, we all have problems.  But it seems relatively unlikely, to put it mildly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a fact and expressing a personal opinion about the likelihood of Europe going bankrupt.


Passage number 88.
 MR. HOENIG.  Agreed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "agreed" indicates that there is agreement between two or more parties.


Passage number 89.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We still have a chance for a go-round.  Let me just make sure everyone is getting a chance to speak.  Is there anyone else who has a question for any staff member or for me.  I’m happy to respond if you have questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply offering an opportunity for others to ask questions and seeking a response if there are any queries.


Passage number 90.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, I have just one more question.  The fundamental issue these are addressing is dollar-denominated maturity transformation by European banking institutions that are exposed to euro-denominated sovereign credit risk, which has led some to have trouble funding.  I’m familiar with the change in liquidity management by some large active U.S. institutions over the last three years.  This maturity transformation by European institutions was obviously a problem very early on, in late 2007.  I wonder if anyone on the call has some insight into or would be able to characterize the relative progress made by European institutions in reducing the riskiness of their dollar-denominated maturity transformation activities since late 2007.  If that progress has lagged notably behind the progress of U.S. institutions, I wonder whether this would be a good opportunity, as part of the conversations around this service we’reoffering the Europeans, to urge them to take stronger action to assure that they make progress in reducing the riskiness of their dollar portfolios.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking information and potentially suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 91.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s a good question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 92.
   MR. KOHN.  We’ve been asking that question in Basel this weekend.  President Lacker is absolutely right in the way he characterized it.  But the euro area banks have taken some pretty strong actions; they’ve reduced their dollar exposures by about half from the peak.  Like U.S. banks, they have lots of legacy dollar assets that they’re trying to get rid of that are slowing running off, but they still have some left.  From the chart I’m looking at, it’s down by about 50 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with President Lacker's characterization of the situation and acknowledges the actions taken by euro area banks to reduce their dollar exposures by about half.


Passage number 93.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides the title or position of Governor Tarullo and does not mention any statements or actions that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 94.
 MR. TARULLO.  Jeff, there are two things I’d say.  One, while Don has given the aggregate statistics, my impression is that some of the institutions have made a good deal more progress than others in changing their maturity structures, so the problems are acute in some of the European institutions and significant but less acute in others. With respect to your question about whether to use this opportunity for lecturing them on the need to make more progress, my instinct would be that, at this juncture, right when we’re activating the swap lines, it’s probably not the moment to say that and to kind of offer a quid pro quo, namely, that we want you to do more.  But I do think that, as we go back to Basel on both capital and liquidity reforms, this is going to strengthen our hand for making some of the arguments we want to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their impression and instinct on the topic of European institutions' progress in changing their maturity structures.


Passage number 95.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Any other questions.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude and offering to answer any additional questions.


Passage number 96.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to ask a slightly different question about the outlook in Europe.  With all of the austerity measures for Southern Europe, it looks asif it would be very difficult for Europe to avoid a recession.  For example, what’s the chance that Germany can avoid a recession, given that they export so much to the rest of Europe.  And if we’re going to talk about the ECB sterilizing, which short-term interest rates are going to be driven up in Europe.  I’d say it’s probably the stronger sovereign debt.  If anybody on the staff could give us an idea of what our increasing risk is there, and how it affects the U.S., that would be appreciated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Evans where he expresses his concern and poses a question to the staff regarding the outlook in Europe and its potential impact on the United States.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 97.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’ll go to Nathan in just a second, but let me comment that, in all of these calls, the Germans keep saying what a great example they’re going to set by consolidating their own fiscal position.  And we keep trying to point out to them that it may not necessarily be in the overall interest of the continent—it’s a strange mind-set. Nathan, or anyone, do you have a view on the outlook for Europe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement between the speaker and the Germans regarding the idea of consolidating the fiscal position. The speaker believes that it may not be in the overall interest of the continent, while the Germans perceive it as a great example to set.


Passage number 98.
  MR. SHEETS.  The recent data for Europe, particularly for Germany, have been surprisingly strong.  I think the characterization by President Evans is right on.  For the Germans, particularly, their export machine is getting cranked up, and they’re doing a lot of exporting to emerging Asia and to some of the oil-producing countries. I very much share your view that there are risks to all of them moving together to do fiscal consolidation and that this would ideally be a time when the Germans were taking steps to strengthen their domestic demand and provide a buffer for the necessary, unavoidable fiscal consolidation that has to go on elsewhere in the euro area. All in all, I would say there’s a reasonable chance that the Germans would be able to avoid recession, but, if everybody moves together on fiscal consolidation, I would expect to see some not very good growth numbers coming out of Europe over the next number of quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes the recent data for Europe, particularly for Germany, as surprisingly strong. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 99.
MR. KOHN.  I would add to that, Mr. Chairman, that I think that the ECB monetary base will rise quite substantially, because they’re not going to sterilize the term lending that they’re doing to the banks—the sterilization is very limited, and their base will be rising quite a lot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 100.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions.  [No response.]  Let’s have a quick go-round.  A lot of the issues have already been discussed, but I certainly want everybody to have a chance to give a view.  Governor Tarullo had a few comments on banking, so let’s start with you, Dan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for everyone's input and giving Governor Tarullo a chance to share his comments.


Passage number 101.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Actually, I managed to get my comments in in response to some of the questions.  Just to rehearse a bit of what we discussed on Friday afternoon, to this point we haven’t seen an impact in our financial system of any substantial magnitude.  But, as everybody recalls, such an impact isn’t seen until the moment it occurs. None of us is happy with where we are.  I think I would have done things differently from the Europeans three months ago.  I would have done things differently from the Europeans two months ago.  And I probably would have done things differently two weeks ago.  But we’re in this position now, and, although optimally we could use the contribution of the swaps as a way to leverage a better package from Ecofin, I just don’t see that as a realistic possibility right now.  There will likely be a lot of unpleasantness in markets tomorrow no matter what all this looks like, and I don’t think we are in a position to calibrate whether it would be better to wait one day, two days, three days, or four days.  I think it’s something that we’re just going to have to make a judgment on.  To the degree that we can stop this unpleasant spiral from getting going with any more speed than it will already assume tomorrow, I think that a reestablishment of swap lines is probably the best thing we can do for our own financial system.  Therefore, I would support theChairman’s request that we give him authority to activate the swap lines at such time as he deems prudent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their viewpoint and expressing their support for the Chairman's request.


Passage number 102.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I’m now going to go around the Reserve Banks by order of District, so I will start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a plan of action.


Passage number 103.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I’m supportive of having the swap line.  I think we should do things for economic reasons, not political reasons.  And I think the economics, given that we’re in the middle of a crisis, indicate that it’s appropriate to have a swap line with the other central banks that are in the G-7.  So I support the move to open up the swap lines.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses support for having a swap line and believes it should be done for economic reasons. There is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 104.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I support doing this.  Obviously, it would be better if we could get greater concessions and fiscal consolidation in Europe.  But the reality is that the swaps will mitigate the bad feedback loop that’s occurring because of the intersection of the sovereign risk problems with the state of the European banks.  If we weren’t to do this now, I think things would just get worse, and we would be forced into doing it later.  The reality is that doing it earlier will actually mitigate the extent of the problems to some degree.  But we shouldn’t fool ourselves.  The swaps are addressing a symptom of the problem.  The underlying problem is the European fiscal situation, the credibility of their fiscal plans, and the health of the European banks.  This just will mitigate how that spreads.  Still, I think it’s worth doing, because, as we’ve seen, the propagation mechanisms and these amplifying dynamics that we’ve seen in the earlier parts of the crisis can be pretty important.  So I think anything we can do to get out in front of that is a good thing rather than a bad thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The author supports doing the swaps to mitigate the bad feedback loop caused by sovereign risk problems and the state of European banks. However, they also acknowledge that the swaps only address a symptom of the problem and the underlying issues are the European fiscal situation, the credibility of fiscal plans, and the health of European banks. The author still believes it is worth doing, but there is a recognition that the swaps alone are not a complete solution.


Passage number 106.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Thank you" and the mention of President Plosser do not involve any conflicting statements or opinions.


Passage number 107.
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m broadly supportive as well.  I think this is something that we need to do.  I would just stress two points.  I think the discussion we’ve had up to now about transparency is incredibly important.  I agree that we should make the contracts available, if we can.  Explaining this as carefully as we can is in our own best interest at this point and helps protect us not only on the political side but on other sides as well.  I also hope that we will continue to have further discussion at some point about the issue of sterilization—where we stand and how we want to think about that as we go forward.  We don’t know what the amounts are going to end up being, and it may partly depend on how we think about that.  With those two stipulations, I agree mostly with what President Dudley said, namely that we’re attacking a symptom, not a root cause of the problem—Europe has to deal with that—but we need to cooperate where we can.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 108.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Again, I take your point on sterilization.  It interacts with our tools one way or another—we’d have to do something specific to sterilize, and we need to talk very soon about the availability of the reserve-draining tools as well as what we’re going to do about potential asset sales.  I understand that. Again, Michelle, Nathan, and Scott, we want to be sure to work towards as much transparency as possible.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It primarily focuses on discussing practical considerations and a desire for transparency.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 109.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, am supportive of giving you approval to proceed with the swap lines, contingent upon Ecofin coming up with strong measures, as well as some follow-up that you’re going to do to control some of the political fallout.  Like others, I believe it’s critical that we take these actions based on the economic merits, so I’m supportive of your moving forward.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. While Ms. Pianalto expresses support for giving approval to proceed with the swap lines, she also mentions the need for strong measures from Ecofin and the control of political fallout. This suggests that there may be some disagreement or concerns regarding the details or potential consequences of the proposed actions.


Passage number 110.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Don Kohn wanted to come in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Don Kohn wanted to come in.


Passage number 111.
MR. KOHN.  I think I can be brief.  I also support authorizing you to reinstate these swap lines.  I think we’re in a very dangerous situation.  We saw on Thursday and Friday the beginnings of a generalized flight from risk, and the United States will not be immune from the effects of that if it gathers any kind of momentum.  My understanding from talking to some Japanese central bankers is that it’s not only European banks that are beginning to encounter trouble, but other banks as well.  So extending the swap lines, say, to the Bank of Japan makes some sense. I think there are a lot of reasons why it’s so dangerous.  Dan cited one, namely, the halting, insufficient response of the Europeans at first, and the fact that the governments are involved, so there’s no backstop.  When the sovereigns are involved, it’s as dangerous a situation as you could ever get into.  I also think the private sector remembers September and October of 2008, and they’re going to that adverse equilibrium as fast as they can.  They are protecting themselves very, very rapidly.  So I think that, as sort of an addendum to a basically European package, we need to be there if we can.  I agree with everything that has been said about transparency, releasing the contracts, instantaneous or nearly instantaneous publishing of which central banks are drawing on the lines, and so on.  I also think, unfortunately, from your perspective, Mr. Chairman, that you shouldn’t leave the Democrats to the Administration while you do the Republicans.  I think you ought to be contacting both sides of the aisle as the central banker.  And we can talk about sterilization later.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, expresses his support for authorizing the reinstatement of swap lines and explains his concerns about the potential dangers and risks involved. He also suggests the need for transparency and bipartisan communication.


Passage number 112.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sure I will be.  Sorry—back to the go-around order.   President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Sorry—back to the go-around order" suggests that the speaker is interrupting themselves or redirecting their focus, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the past, I’ve generally opposed swaps as a matter of regime choice.  I still oppose them, but this is not the time to take a gigantic bold leap towards a regime I’d like.  So I won’t oppose this now, and I’ll support giving you the discretion to enter into these, as you said.  I think the political risks are tremendous.  I think there’s a good chance we will dodge them with expert communication, and I think the comments of President Fisher and others about needing to manage those aggressively are worthwhile.  I think the confluence of those risks with this environment and what we’re doing here isn’t an accident.  This is one of a set of essentially fiscal policy actions we’ve taken in the last three years that have generated this firestorm around us.  The continuing fallout of that generates the environment that makes this fiscal policy action more politically risky for us. On sterilization, I’d love to use this as an opportunity to argue for selling an equivalent amount of MBS, but we can wait until another date for that.  Those are my comments.  I support your decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker expresses his opposition to swaps as a matter of regime choice, but states that he will not oppose them at this time. He also expresses concerns about the political risks and suggests alternative actions, such as selling an equivalent amount of MBS.


Passage number 114.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any information that suggests contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing gratitude to President Lockhart.


Passage number 115.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support giving you the authority to agree with the Europeans to reinstate the swap lines.  Michelle Smith actually captured one of my sentiments, and that is that we should do what’s necessary to combat this within the European banking sector, trying to keep it from having a contagion effect and hitting us here in the United States.  I think the contagion risk is real, and it is, as Don said, not inconceivable that it beats a path to the United States, and we all know that the result would be a possibly severe adjustment in the United States at a very delicate time.  So, in weighing the political risks versus doing the right thing economically, I think we should subordinate the political considerations to the economic intervention.I agree with all the commentary on transparency.  This is a situation where we should lay out all the information necessary in order to try to keep the discussion of it at a serious level as opposed to the kind of discussion we’ve seen in the last year or so in the political circles.  Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses support for giving the authority to agree with the Europeans to reinstate the swap lines and highlights the potential risks of contagion in the European banking sector. The speaker also emphasizes the importance of transparency in discussing the issue.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It is a polite expression of gratitude from someone named President Evans.


Passage number 117.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support giving you the authority for the swap lines.  I’m really concerned that Europe is likely to be on fire by our June meeting.  I’m worried that the Asian response is not going to be as helpful as everybody would like and that we might have more serious trade discussions about what the appropriate exchange rate values will be for some of those trading partners.  I’m not sure if I heard it correctly, but if we’re talking about swaps on the order of $150 billion or so, and if that’s feasible and it would have a beneficial effect, then that seems to be an extremely reasonable and acceptable degree of risk, and I clearly support that.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses support for giving the authority for swap lines and shares their concerns about the situation in Europe and the response from Asian trading partners. They also express support for the proposed amount of swaps and see it as a reasonable and acceptable degree of risk.


Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We didn’t specify a maximum.  My proposal, at this point, would be uncapped.  But we’ll certainly monitor that very carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 119.
 MR. EVANS.  I only mentioned that because I think somebody mentioned a number like that, but that’s fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that someone mentioned a certain number, but they are okay with it.


Passage number 120.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s the amount of reserves that the ECB has.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states a fact about the amount of reserves that the ECB has. It does not involve any contention or disagreement between individuals or parties. The mention of "President Bullard" does not provide any context for potential disagreement.


Passage number 121.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m generally supportive of reactivating the swap lines with major central banks around the world to respond to this crisis.  When I heard Jean-Claude Trichet talking a few months ago about the recent crisis, he called the swaps “decisive” in dealing with it.I think there will possibly be heavy political pushback.  I would caution everyone that the bailout debate is not really a rational debate about what has actually happened—people are confusing the Treasury and the Fed, they’re confusing everything with everything else.  So the political environment may be very difficult.  It may require all of us to talk to whomever we can to try to get information out.  If we do not get information out, other people define us and take over the debate.  I think that’s an important consideration. Our best point is that the swaps worked quite well the last time around with the penalty rate, and that they are a backstop mechanism.  I agree with the unlimited size idea.  I would expect that, if the crisis worsens, we would see a swelling of this similar to the one we saw last time—probably not as bad as the last time—but then that would eventually go away as the situation improved. I think we can also make some progress on this by emphasizing that there are still a lot of government guarantees in place at major financial institutions around the world.  It’s a little bit irrational at this point for markets to be worried about the backing of financial institutions, when countries around the world have said repeatedly that they’re going to back these institutions, come hell or high water.  I think if we can emphasize that, it will get some of the irrational expectations out of the market. I do think there is a non-zero risk of euro disintegration in this process and that we have to track that very carefully.  I don’t think it’s very likely at this point, but the probability has clearly moved off zero, and sometimes, in a crisis like this, things can happen very rapidly.  You may get a country that unilaterally, say, decides to withdraw and the entire agreement falls apart. I’m not actually that big a fan of announcing a lot of coordinated actions all at once.  I think that that confuses markets.  I would prefer to dribble out good news one bit at a time, but Iknow I’m probably in the minority on that.  For that reason, I think that it may be that reactivation of the swap lines is not the main news story, and that actually might be helpful in this case.  But my preference would be to announce various actions one a time as they happen.  Those are my comments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is mostly the speaker's opinion and suggestions on the reactivation of swap lines and addressing the financial crisis.


Passage number 122.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 123.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support giving you the authority to enter into swap line agreements with the G-7.  At times I’m a little confused by which central banks you’re talking about, but I would be supportive of the central banks of the G-7 plus Switzerland. I agree totally with President Rosengren’s opening remarks that we should be doing this based on economics, not based on politics.  However, the main political demand I’ve heard over and over again is for more transparency.  I’m delighted to hear that we’re contemplating being as transparent as possible about these agreements, and I counsel you to follow up on that as much as you can.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kocherlakota, expresses his support for giving the authority to enter into swap line agreements with the G-7 central banks. He agrees with the idea of doing it based on economics rather than politics and also supports the demand for more transparency in these agreements.


Passage number 124.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Just to be clear, you’re right.  It’s the G-7, plus Switzerland—the ECB, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of Canada, and the Swiss National Bank.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying and agreeing with the other person's statement.


Passage number 125.
 MR. HOENIG.  Mr. Chairman, I support reengaging these swaps.  We are the most important central bank.  For liquidity, we need to provide the dollars to make sure this doesn’t unwind on us into a global disaster.  To reemphasize, I think the quality of our statement announcing this is probably the most important challenge we have, because we are going to get pushback.  We are going to get some off-the-wall questions, and I think we need to anticipate them, including the point about our being in an economic recovery.  We want to maintain that,both for ourselves and for the globe.  And then, how transparent we are should be described.  With that encouragement, I’m supportive of this action, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 126.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite expression of gratitude followed by a sign-off indicating that someone named President Fisher is the sender.


Passage number 127.
 MR. FISHER.  I’m supportive, Mr. Chairman.  I think we should do what’s right for the sake of the economy, and yet we should be wary of the politics, which have been discussed at great length. I think we should not just issue a statement, but we should have Michelle draft an FAQ.  We want to answer the questions we want to have asked, anticipate them, state very clearly and in simple English what our answers are.  I was asking myself earlier if it might be worth your actually doing a press conference.  There are risks to doing so, but, in this atmosphere now, all of us are being asked different questions, and I want to make sure we have clarity and a straightforward explanation coming from one source, which, of course, has to be you, as Chairman.  So consider either a press conference or, in addition to a statement, in some other format answering questions that we know will be asked of us in the most direct fashion. I would urge you, as Don mentioned, not just to reach out to Republicans, but also to Democrats.  And, again, I want to have an offline discussion, if I can, with Linda and you quickly about one particular senator who I think needs to be included in that group.  But, obviously, I’d recommend front-running to the degree you can, with regard to sensitive time and risk of leakage, as well as contact with key Ds and Rs from you directly before the announcement is made, or simultaneously, or however it can be done. In sum, I’m supportive and continue to be worried about the politics of this, but I think they can be handled.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support for a particular course of action and offering suggestions on how to proceed.


Passage number 128.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 129.
MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m very strongly supportive of giving you the discretion to enter into these swap arrangements.  I think this is an incredibly perilous moment and that it’s essential that we participate in a forceful, coordinated global effort to contain the risks to the global financial system and economy at this point.  I think it’s clearly the right thing for us to do for the sake of the global economy and the U.S. economy.   We’ve had a very good discussion, I think, and very helpful suggestions in this go-around about the political and communications challenges.  And I’m very supportive of the comments that you’ve heard about the need to manage the communications and the potential political fallout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Yellen expresses strong support for giving the chairman discretion to enter into swap arrangements to contain risks to the global financial system and economy. She also mentions that there have been helpful suggestions about managing political and communications challenges, and she agrees with the need to do so.


Passage number 130.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It consists of a polite expression of thanks followed by a courtesy title, "Governor Warsh."


Passage number 131.
 MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have just a few comments.  First, to state what everyone has been saying, this is a mess.  I would say this is as fundamental a weekend for the global financial architecture as any we have had over the last few years.  I think for some difficult risks to the system we need systemic risk councils and triangles, and the like, to get to the bottom of them.  This wasn’t one of them.  So it’s disappointing that we find ourselves collectively in a global economic mire at this point.  I would say that policymakers, particularly in Europe, have underestimated the risks of spending by those who can ill afford it, have been made complacent by low sovereign costs of credit, and did not take advantage of the window of opportunity that our firms did to recapitalize.  So I think the banking system in Europe will now get asked the hardest questions.  And I think that, unlike the U.S. experience, the question in markets will be whether the sovereigns have the ability, the financial wherewithal, to write the kinds of checks that the United States at least underwrote some time ago.  I think the risks in the near term are probably mostly about a disorderly move in the euro and a walk-back fromexposure to European financial institutions, even those that were thought to be tiered into a stronger category. With respect to the moves by the European Central Bank, if they come about as Jean-Claude said to Ben earlier today, then they bring to my mind the well-known bazooka that we heard about a couple of years ago at the end of the last Administration.  I would be surprised if this bazooka isn’t tested, and that’s a huge challenge.  That the ECB is willing to do this, I think, shows how seriously they assess the risks. I think talk will quickly turn to the “malicious shorts” that brought this on Europe, and they will likely look to U.S. financial institutions that had the gall to hedge themselves over the last weeks and months as somehow precipitating this.  So I think our financial institutions will be part of this narrative, even if from a prudential perspective we would think that for them to pare back their exposures as risks mounted was perfectly appropriate. The ECB is putting itself in a position of having to be a transitional authority; but I think markets will wonder, “As a transitional authority to what.”  These sovereigns are going to have very tough questions, and I would tend to think that the political challenges among many of these member states will be massive. On the swaps themselves, I think what we’ve all said is that we’re making this decision based on what is in the best interest of the U.S. economy.  We’re certainly sensitive to the integrated nature of our financial markets and global economies, but I think I’d put myself in the category of thinking that this is important to do for our own sake. With respect to the communications of this, I think it’s important to describe our role as supportive but secondary.  This is not the antidote to problems in Europe or the U.S., and I think we ought not to oversell its relative import.  The half-life of policy initiatives out of Europe inthis cycle has been falling.  I wouldn’t expect that to change with dramatic speed, so we should be in the business here of under-promising, but being as supportive as we can in the interests of the U.S.  Finally, I think we’re going to see massive flows into U.S. safe-haven securities, for liquidity at least as much as for safety, but we should not be lulled into that false sense of complacency that others have. I think this is a very tough period in front of us, and I regret to say that I suspect we will have another videoconference before our next regularly scheduled FOMC meeting.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and observations about the global financial situation, without conflicting with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 132.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Your forecasting has been good on that so far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that the forecasting has been good, indicating agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 133.
 MR. WARSH.  Regrettably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or comment made by Mr. Warsh.


Passage number 134.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage you provided, "Governor Duke," does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions the title "Governor Duke" without providing any context or additional details.


Passage number 135.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I fully support giving you the authority to open the swap lines, subject to the conditions you outlined.  I think we have to take the right actions for the economy, and, frankly, the fact that we have to discuss the political risk underscores the seriousness of the GAO audit provision.  I do have a little bit of a faint hope—there are some lawmakers that were supporting the GAO audit issue, not so much because they thought it was a great idea but because they didn’t see the harm in it.  And, while it can’t go in Michelle’s statement, I think that this is an opportunity for some one-on-one conversations to use this as an illustration of how important it is that we be able to take the right action and to take it quickly, without concern about political interference.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Duke expresses her full support for giving the chairman the authority to open the swap lines and highlights the seriousness of the GAO audit provision. She also mentions the hope that lawmakers who supported the audit issue will understand the importance of taking the right action quickly, without political interference.


Passage number 136.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We will have a formal vote in a second.  Brian, are you going to read this.  Before we take the vote, I’ll ask if there are any final questions or comments.  Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It consists of polite expressions of gratitude, clarifications, and requests for input or clarification.


Passage number 137.
MR. MADIGAN.  The Committee would be asked to vote on the following resolution.  The Committee authorizes the Chairman to agree to establish swap lines with the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, the Swiss National Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of Canada, as discussed by the Committee today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the Committee would vote on a resolution to authorize the Chairman to establish swap lines with certain central banks.


Passage number 138.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any comments on the statement.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 139.
 MR. BULLARD.  On the Bank of Canada, it just occurred to me that we, of course, have a swap line with Canada already, and we also have one with Mexico, and I wonder if there would be any considerations about that situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential for contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker raises the possibility of considering the situation regarding the swap lines with Canada and Mexico, implying that there may be differing opinions or concerns about this arrangement.


Passage number 140.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We doubled up before, right, Nathan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "We doubled up before, right, Nathan" suggests agreement or confirmation of a previous action.


Passage number 141.
 MR. SHEETS.  That’s right.  We had temporary liquidity swap lines with both of them at the same time that we had the NAFA lines.  And it didn’t create any operational or communication or other kinds of problems.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that having temporary liquidity swap lines with both parties simultaneously did not cause any issues.


Passage number 142.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it does not provide any specific information or claim that could be disputed or debated.


Passage number 143.
 MR. BULLARD.  So we’re intentionally leaving Mexico out of this list, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 144.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sorry.  No, Mexico is not on this list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that Mexico is not included in a specific list.


Passage number 145.
 MR. BULLARD.  Intentionally.  Should you say something like, “The existing swap lines will remain in place,” or something like that.  I don’t know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is seeking clarification or suggestion from someone else about what to say or how to phrase a statement.


Passage number 146.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  I don’t think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No explanation was provided to support this answer.


Passage number 147.
 MS. SMITH.  We’ll answer that question if we get it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Smith simply states that they will answer the question if they receive it.


Passage number 148.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Michelle says we’ll answer that question if we get it.  Maybe that is a better way to handle it.  Anything else.  [No response.]  All right.  Matt, could you call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The dialogue suggests a discussion of how to handle a question and then shifts to a request for someone to call the roll.


Passage number 149.
 MR. LUECKE.   Yes.  This vote will encompass the text that Brian Madigan has read.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Luecke simply affirms that the vote will include the text that Brian Madigan has read.


