Passage number 1.
   Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on August 10, 2010  A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 10, 2010, at 8:00 a.m.  Those present were the following:  Ben Bernanke, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James Bullard Elizabeth Duke Thomas M. Hoenig Donald L. Kohn Sandra Pianalto Eric Rosengren Daniel K. Tarullo Kevin Warsh  Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee  Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively  William B. English, Secretary and Economist Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Richard M. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel Nathan Sheets, Economist   James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Steven B. Kamin, Lawrence Slifman, Mark S. Sniderman, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director, Board of GovernorsWilliam Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; David Reifschneider and William Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Stephen A. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Stephen D. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Eric M. Engen, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors John C. Driscoll and Jennifer E. Roush, Senior Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Kimberley E. Braun, Records Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David Sapenaro, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Loretta J. Mester and Robert H. Rasche, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and St. Louis, respectively David Altig, Ron Feldman, Craig S. Hakkio, Glenn D. Rudebusch, Daniel G. Sullivan, Geoff Tootell, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, Kansas City, San Francisco, Chicago, and Boston, respectively Linda Goldberg, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Annmarie S. Rowe-Straker, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Pia Orrenius, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Robert L.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the people present at the meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of RichmondTranscript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on August 10, 2010 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  As usual, this is a joint FOMC–Board meeting.  I need a motion to close the Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the procedure for closing the Board meeting.


Passage number 3.
 MR. KOHN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "So moved". It simply means that Mr. Kohn is in agreement with or supports whatever was just proposed or discussed.


Passage number 4.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I’m sure most of you know that we tried very hard to get our additional Board members confirmed in time for this meeting.  Unfortunately, it was not to be.  We hope that, when the Senate returns in September, we will have action; but, for today, I have once again asked Governor Kohn to lend us his wisdom.  This is absolutely, positively [laughter] Don’s last meeting, and we thank you, Don, for once again helping us out.  Don will, in fact, without any contingency, be leaving on September 1.  And we thank you again for your service and for helping us make these difficult decisions. September 1 is also a sad day, because it will be the last day for our colleague, Brian Madigan.  Brian is very modest about being recognized, so it took a direct order from the Chairman to get him even to come to the beginning of this meeting.  [Laughter]  Brian has attended 145 scheduled FOMC meetings, and he became both the FOMC Secretary and the head of the Monetary Affairs Division in August of 2007—I’m not ascribing any causality there.  Brian has made enormous contributions, as you all recognize.  He has given us about six or seven years’ worth of work in the last three years, and his dedication and his insight have been extraordinarily helpful.  To honor his service, we have put together a little gift for Brian, signed dollar bills.  No one has ever explained to me why signing these bills is legal, by the way. [Laughter].  Brian, thank you for all you have done for the Federal Reserve.  [Extended applause].  Do you want to say something, Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply expressing gratitude and recognition for the service of Don and Brian.


Passage number 5.
MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  It has been a privilege to serve on the Board staff and on the Committee staff for a number of years, especially for the past two years when the Federal Reserve has played such a critical role.  I want to thank you again for all the support and help you have given me and, again, for the privilege of being able to serve the Committee.  Thanks again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of gratitude and appreciation.


Passage number 6.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian.  [Applause]  Well, on that sad note, let me just remind everybody that today is a one-day meeting, so we’ll need to be especially efficient to accomplish everything on our agenda. Before I turn to the financial briefing, Vice Chairman Dudley wants to introduce someone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is thanking Brian, acknowledging applause, and setting the tone for the meeting with a reminder about efficiency.


Passage number 7.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would like to introduce Annmarie Rowe-Straker, who is sitting next to Brian Sack.  Annmarie is joining us from the Markets Group at the New York Fed.  Welcome, Annmarie, to your first meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply introducing Annmarie Rowe-Straker.


Passage number 8.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Welcome.  Let’s begin, then, with our first item, which is a briefing on financial developments, and I’ll turn to Brian Sack.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the beginning of a meeting and the topic being discussed.


Passage number 9.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian.  Brian referred to two memos on financial stability, which are a regular input to this meeting, as are additional quarterly memos.  I propose that we continue to expand and integrate financial stability analysis into these meetings; that will be a natural concomitant of the expansion of our responsibilities under the financial regulatory reform bill, which we’ll discuss in September.  I urge everyone to think about this issue and make any suggestions you’d like about how we can better monitor financial conditions.  Are there questions for Brian.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage mainly consists of a statement and a proposal from President Fisher, urging everyone to think about the issue and make suggestions about how to better monitor financial conditions. There are no conflicting viewpoints presented or any signs of disagreement.


Passage number 10.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to get a quick briefing from Brian on the private sector’s issuance of securities.  I’m thinking particularly of the datasheet on page 64 of the Tealbook that shows the volume of issuance.  My interpretation of the volume of issuance is that we are back to fairly decent levels—at least the 2006 and 2007 levels—both for investment-grade corporate debt and junk, or high-yield, debt; and, noticeably, there’s much more activity recently in the commercial paper markets.  If you go back to page 62, which talks about spreads, spreads have pretty much returned to the norm.  In fact, if you look at the far- and near-term forward high-yield corporate bond spreads, as well as commercial paper corporate bond yields, we’ve made progress since the last FOMC meeting.  But, even in the commercial paper markets, we’re back to almost zero in terms of spreads.  So my questions are:  Is the issuance schedule robust.  Could we describe it that way.  Or has it returned to near normal.  In addition, what does it tell you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements and questions about the private sector's issuance of securities.


Passage number 11.
MR. SACK.  Issuance has been robust, especially in corporate bonds, and it has been so for the better part of the past year.  I think it’s telling us that capital markets for high-quality corporations are open.  These firms have tapped the commercial bond market fairly extensively, and that market is not constraining them in any meaningful way.  I think much of the issuance has been used to pay down bank debt and other sources of debt.  The overall need for funding from the corporate sector is still somewhat sluggish, but I don’t think the capital markets are imposing a significant constraint.  In contrast, from the Senior Loan Officer Survey, it seems that, even though standards and terms on business loans from banks may be beginning to ease, they still remain relatively tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 12.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude and a mention of President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 13.
  MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr.  Chairman.  Brian, I had a question about graph 5 on the 10-year term premium.  It’s hard to tell, but it looks as if the term premium is falling a lot more than just the difference between the yields on 10- and 2-year Treasury securities, for example.  So my question is:  How are you decomposing the difference in the yields into a term premium and an expectations component.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asked by MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage.


Passage number 14.
 MR. SACK.  This measure is produced by the Board staff based on a research paper by Kim and Wright.  To make this decomposition of yields into policy expectations and the term premium, you need to use some type of structural model; of course, all of those models are imperfect, so I present this as just one measure of the term premium.  The term premium has fallen a lot.  I don’t think it has fallen as much as the 10-year yield, but certainly the model is interpreting much of the decline as a term premium movement.  My guess is that both components are in play in the same direction.  Certainly, policy expectations have been a big partof the story for the rally in Treasuries, but it appears from the evidence we have that the term premium has also played some role.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply presents their analysis of the term premium based on a specific model and acknowledges its imperfections.


Passage number 15.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude or thanks.


Passage number 16.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for Brian.  [No response.]  Seeing no other questions, we need to vote to ratify our open market operations since June.  Can I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating that there are no other questions and the speaker is requesting a motion for a vote.


Passage number 17.
 MR. KOHN.  So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "So moved" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker agrees with or supports the previous statement or motion.


Passage number 18.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s ratified, without objection.  Thank you.  All right, let’s go on to Item 2, which is the economic situation, and I will turn to Larry Slifman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that something is ratified without objection and moves on to the next item.


Passage number 19.
 MR. SHEETS.  According to the advance NIPA data, net exports subtracted an estimated 2¾ percentage points from economic growth in the second quarter.  I wish I could say that we had seen this coming.  But sadly, this outcome is a full 2½ percentage points more negative than we had projected in the June Tealbook.  (I am taking pride in the fact that we at least got the sign right.)  While real exports barreled along at a 10 percent pace in the quarter, just a touch stronger than we had expected, real imports are estimated to have surged nearly 30 percent, their fastest quarterly growth in more than 25 years.  This increase was broad-based and included a large rise in capital goods imports, in line with the strength of U.S. E&S investment.  While the release of the June trade data tomorrow morning will no doubt bring further revisions, the import data to date have shown no signs that the appetite of the U.S. economy for foreign goods has faded in recent months. More generally, we see the strength of imports in the second quarter—as well as the ongoing vigor of exports—as a continuation of the cyclical rebound in U.S. trade.  Both imports and exports fell during the financial crisis more rapidly and more substantially than our models predicted and have bounced back in a similar fashion.  Incorporating the second-quarter data, real imports have now retraced nearly two-thirds of their 20 percent crisis-driven decline, while real exports have recovered more than four-fifths of their 15 percent drop.  The upshot is that, going forward, trade is likely to grow somewhat more slowly than it has over the past year. Specifically, we see import growth moving down to roughly a 5 percent pace in the second half of this year, reflecting some payback from the second-quarter surge and drag from the dollar, which has depreciated about 3 percent in broad real terms since the last FOMC meeting.  In 2011, imports should expand at a 6½ percent rate, as the U.S. recovery gains steam.  Export growth is likely to be somewhat stronger than import growth, hovering in the 8-10 percent range, supported by the solid expansion abroad and stimulus from the dollar.  Taken together, net exports should add just under ½ percentage point to U.S. GDP growth on average through the second half of this year and be about neutral next year.  We certify that these projections for net exports will be within 3 percentage points of the actual outcomes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of facts and projections regarding net exports and the strength of imports and exports.


Passage number 20.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is that a Sarbanes-Oxley requirement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking a question and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 21.
 [Laughter] MR. SHEETS. I should say, “I hope we can certify.” [Laughter]For many of the foreign economies, the pace of economic growth seems to be cooling some, in line with our expectations of a sustained, but moderate, global recovery.  In emerging Asia, GDP growth in China and in Korea stepped down in the second quarter, albeit to still strong rates; and elsewhere in the region, higher-frequency indicators, such as purchasing managers’ indexes, have eased a bit.  In Brazil, the growth of industrial production has slowed as the government has unwound fiscal stimulus measures.  And the recent softening of U.S. growth will likely be echoed in a slower second-half pace of expansion in Mexico and Canada. Markets have shown some uneasiness about these signs of moderation abroad, particularly regarding the outlook for China.  Policy tightening measures in China do seem to have tempered the pace of activity there more quickly than we had expected, leading us to edge down our forecast.  But the authorities have shown a remarkable ability in recent years to keep the economy on an even keel, successfully navigating between the twin risks of overheating and hard landing.  At present, we see scope for policy stimulus, if needed, to maintain economic growth at roughly an 8½ percent rate through the forecast period.  In addition, with Chinese housing prices recently leveling off and credit growth having slowed, financial stability risks there may be diminishing.  Notably, central banks around the world seem to have taken the signs of cooling global activity in stride, with many moving over the intermeeting period to reduce slightly the degree of monetary accommodation. Europe has been an important exception to this picture of near-term moderation.  U.K. GDP surprised sharply on the upside in the second quarter.  And, even more striking, euro-area PMIs and economic sentiment measures have risen through July, and industrial production has trended higher, defying my admittedly grim expectations.  In light of these data, we now estimate that real GDP in the euro area rose 2¾ percent in the second quarter, up a percentage point from our last forecast.  This near-term strength has been concentrated in the core economies, especially Germany, where exports have risen at a rapid pace through June, benefiting from the rebound in global trade.  The weakening of the euro during the first half of the year seems to have provided some support to activity as well.  However, the euro’s appreciation over the intermeeting period—including a 7 percent rise against the dollar—will limit this support somewhat going forward.  In contrast to Germany, indicators for Greece and Portugal underscore the much weaker performance of those economies that are undergoing forced fiscal consolidation. Financial conditions in Europe also appear to have settled some.  Two significant risk events—the ending of the ECB’s first one-year long-term refinancing operation and the publication of the EU-wide bank stress tests—passed without disruption, leaving stock markets modestly higher and risk spreads on sovereign debt generally lower.  Investors also seemed to take comfort from favorable earnings reports from European banks and from several oversubscribed government-debt auctions by vulnerable euro-area countries.  While there is certainly scope to question some aspects of the stress tests, the information released during this exercise—especially details on bank holdings ofsovereign debt—has enabled analysts to gauge for themselves the extent of capital shortfalls, with the range of resulting estimates well within the capacity of European governments to absorb.  Since the completion of the stress tests, funding conditions for more vulnerable European banks have thawed some, but we see little evidence that private investors are poised to open their checkbooks to recapitalize these institutions.  Although the stress tests have provided some confidence regarding the asset side of the European banks’ balance sheets, much uncertainty remains regarding the liability side of their balance sheets and their funding strategies, as well as the medium-term profitability of some banks’ business models.  Given these upbeat macro data and somewhat less strained financial conditions, we have revised growth prospects for the euro area up slightly.  In addition, our sense is that tail risks for the region have eased noticeably.  That said, we continue to expect that euro-area growth will be muted, averaging just 1¼ percent through the end of next year, as the continent contends with an uneven road to fiscal consolidation and the banks struggle to repair their balance sheets. All told, our forecast for the foreign economies is little changed since the last Tealbook, with the small upward revisions to Europe largely offset by modest markdowns elsewhere, most notably in China.  We continue to see aggregate growth abroad stepping down from above 4½ percent in the first half of this year to a more sustainable 3½ percent pace through the forecast period.  Although the recent data seem broadly in line with our projection for a continued—but moderately paced—recovery abroad, we are now at a pivotal point in the cycle at which private domestic spending in many countries will need to strengthen to offset diminishing stimulus from inventories and macroeconomic policies.  Moreover, the softer near-term outlook for the United States is a salient concern for some countries that have relied on considerable support from external demand thus far.  We will watch closely to see whether private spending across the globe rebounds as projected.  Thank you, and we’ll be happy to take your questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It primarily provides an analysis of the global economic outlook.


Passage number 22.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there questions for our colleagues.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of expressions of gratitude and a polite inquiry.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
 MR. LACKER.  The Tealbook reports that you estimate that the extended and emergency unemployment benefits are boosting the unemployment rate by approximately 1 percentage point right now.  That effect has increased over the last 18 months.  Some of this effect, as you report in footnote 5, represents workers who you believe would otherwise be out of the labor force, and some represents workers who would otherwise accept job offers.  I was wondering if you’re willing to take a stab at the decomposition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents statements made by MR. LACKER that may indicate disagreement or contention. MR. LACKER suggests that extended and emergency unemployment benefits are boosting the unemployment rate by approximately 1 percentage point, and this effect has increased over the last 18 months. This statement may be met with disagreement or contention from others who may hold opposing views on the impact of unemployment benefits on the unemployment rate.


Passage number 24.
MR. SLIFMAN.  Quite frankly, these are all really rough guesstimates based on what we’ve seen in history, so I don’t think we want to pin ourselves down that closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Slifman acknowledges that the estimates are rough guesstimates based on historical data. He expresses his opinion that it wouldn't be wise to pin themselves down too closely to these estimates. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 25.
 MR. LACKER.  Thought I’d give you the opportunity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. Mr. Lacker is simply stating that he would like to give the other person an opportunity.


Passage number 26.
 MR. SLIFMAN.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging and agreeing with something that was previously said, starting their response with "Okay."


Passage number 27.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 28.
  MR. FISHER.  I’ll start with a comment that I’ve actually made before.  I think the international briefing and the whole Tealbook, compared with when I first joined the Committee, is much more informative—indeed, it has become superb under your leadership, Mr. Chairman.  I came here before you were Chairman. Nathan, I want to go to a point you made.  You said that we’re at the point where private domestic spending in many countries must basically pick up to offset the decline in government stimulus; I assume that may be true here as well.  I want to go to the first page of the domestic economic developments and outlook briefing, where there’s the following statement:  “Financial conditions appear slightly more supportive of economic growth than in June.”  I’m wondering if, after the inputs of the last few days, you still would argue that.  Nathan, if you would, please argue that on the international side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing positive comments about the briefing and asking for clarification on a specific point.


Passage number 29.
 MR. SLIFMAN.  I’m not quite clear.  What is it that you have in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Slifman is simply asking for clarification about someone's intentions.


Passage number 30.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, I mean that we’re here to debate principally financial and monetary conditions, but you have a statement, “Financial conditions appear slightly more supportive of economic growth than in June.”  Is that still true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply questioning the accuracy of a statement made about financial conditions and whether it is still valid.


Passage number 31.
 MR. SLIFMAN.  Yes, I would say so.  I think that many of the things that Brian pointed to in his briefing certainly are consistent with that statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any disagreement or contention. Instead, the speaker agrees with Brian's briefing and finds it consistent with a statement.


Passage number 32.
 MR. FISHER.  I agree.  Nathan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: In the passage, Mr. Fisher indicates his agreement with a statement made by someone else. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 33.
MR. SHEETS.  I think so.  Stock markets are up generally a little bit.  Longer-term bond yields are down generally.  How to interpret that, I think, is an open issue.  On the other hand, commodity prices are up a little bit and, in certain soft commodity classes, prices are up a lot due to the drought.  But, in general, I think we would still say the situation is slightly more accommodative and more supportive than before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Sheets, is presenting information and providing his interpretation of the situation. While he mentions different trends in stock markets, bond yields, and commodity prices, there is no apparent contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 34.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any information or statements that can be disputed or argued. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 35.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There isn't enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 36.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question for Larry.  I thought it was interesting that you laid out a sort of dichotomous view of the consumer; that is, the consumer could gain confidence if employment continues to improve, and that would play through to spending, or the consumer could be on a continued deleveraging track trying to raise saving, and that would play through to weakness.  My question is:  What tools do we have to dig deeper to try to get a sense of which way that arrow is actually going to go.  It strikes me as being one of the key swing factors in our outlook, and it’s frustrating not to have much more of a profound sense of what really is happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by one individual to another, seeking further information and clarification.


Passage number 37.
 MR. SLIFMAN.  I wish I could point to a specific model result that would be able to give you a satisfactory answer.  Let me take a step back to explain the problem.  Prior to the NIPA revision, it looked like consumption was just following the same old path that one might have expected based on looking at wealth, income, interest rates, transfer payments, and so on.  And that seemed a little odd to us in some ways, because one would have thought that the financial crisis should have led to some abnormally low consumption relative to these standard sorts of determinants.  Now, with the revised data, we’re actually seeing the error in our consumption functions that we thought we should have been getting all along.  So, in some ways, the fact thatwe do have this residual is a bit more satisfying, in the sense that it makes everything hang together a little bit better. But here’s why we have trouble answering your question directly.  When you have a residual, you have to make a decision about how fast it’s going to close.  In making that decision, we didn’t just say, “Oh, the saving rate could be here, or it could be here,” and then just go down the middle of a bimodal distribution and take the mean.  Rather, as we described in the Tealbook, we see households as having different forces weighing on them, and these are behavioral issues.  In other words, households themselves are going to have to weigh these various forces as they make their plans about consumption over the coming year and a half.  And, as we described in the Tealbook, we could see forces that would lead them to want to boost their spending—pent-up demand kinds of forces—or we could see the caution that they have exhibited so far continuing and intensifying to some extent.  Our view is that, in making their decisions, households would probably choose to have their consumption rise roughly in line with their income—neither faster nor slower, but roughly in line.  With that said, we admit that there’s a huge, huge range of uncertainty around that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides an explanation of the problem and discusses the factors that could affect consumption decisions by households.


Passage number 38.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response to that.


Passage number 39.
 MR. LACKER.  I just wanted to ask a follow-up to President Fisher’s question.  He asked whether you thought financial conditions were more supportive of economic growth.  I’m wondering whether growth prospects are more supportive of financial conditions.  That notion popped into my brain the first time I saw that phrase, and I’ve been meaning to ask you about this, particularly since, in the intermeeting period, some of the changes in financial market conditions seem plausibly related to improved prospects for growth, such as equity markets, declining risk premiums, and the like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 40.
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  I’d say that we tend to interpret the situation in the opposite way.  As Brian discussed in his briefing, some of the movement in longer-term interest rates could be due to a fall in the risk premium or term premium—and we could ask what’s driving that—but some of it also seems to be related to a pronounced downward adjustment in the expected path of short-term rates, which is probably related to a weaker economic outlook.  So, in that sense, that portion of the decline in long rates is being driven by a weaker outlook for the real economy rather than the other way around and, possibly, by a more pessimistic view on inflation. It’s also important to be careful when we say that we’re scoring that decline in long-rates as a plus for the economic outlook.  We have an accounting that says we look at the news releases coming in on the real side, and we make an assessment of what they imply for real activity going forward, holding interest rates constant.  Then, that’s offset to some extent by the fact that long rates adjusted down in response to that weaker economic outlook.  On net, however, the effect of the news could be negative or it could be positive, but it’s not as positive as the shift in the long rates itself would say. Similarly, some of the support to the stock market is related to lower interest rates—though, not all of it, as some of it seems to be the decline in risk premiums, as Brian said.  But we need to be careful when we decompose this, because not all of that movement in the stock market is necessarily favorable to the outlook.  Some of it is taking on board the lower interest rates that are also part of the valuation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their interpretation of the situation and discussing different factors that could be influencing interest rates and the stock market. They also caution against assuming that these movements are entirely positive for the economic outlook and highlight the need for careful analysis.


Passage number 41.
 MR. SHEETS.  I think an important addendum from the global perspective is that, with these developments in Europe, our perception—and I think the market’s perception—is thatthere’s less tail risk out there.  That might also be somewhat more supportive of financial conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion on the perception of the market, specifically regarding the perceived decrease in risk.


Passage number 42.
 MR. FISHER.  Excuse me—less tail risk on the downside or upside or which side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a question asking for clarification, but it does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 43.
 MR. SHEETS.  Less downside tail risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 44.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Thank you" indicates that the speaker is expressing gratitude, and there is no indication of disagreement or contention in this short response.


Passage number 45.
 MR. SHEETS.  For example, six weeks ago we were worried about some sort of a near-term apocalypse in Europe, which now seems much, much less likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the worry about a near-term apocalypse in Europe has diminished.


Passage number 46.
 MR. LACKER.  If I could just follow up—the term premium plot that President Kocherlakota referenced would seem to indicate that the bulk of the change in the 10-year rate is not expected interest rates, but rather it’s this term premium.  More broadly, my general impression about the intermeeting period is that we’ve seen a broad shift in asset allocation by investors towards some riskier assets—into longer-term Treasuries, corporate debt, equities.  That broad shift into riskier assets could suggest a little more confidence.  I don’t think of that as an autonomous, exogenous shock; instead, I think of that as related to expectations.  I’m just wondering if that’s an accurate view about financial markets over the intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their impression and wondering if it is accurate.


Passage number 47.
 MR. SACK.  Well, I wouldn’t downplay the shift in policy expectations.  I think what you just described is certainly part of the story, but I think that policy expectations are a big part of the story, and we see that in various ways.  The 5-year Treasury yield fell more than the 10-year yield, so it’s that intermediate horizon, which has a lot of policy sensitivity, that moved the most.  We saw the responses about the expected policy path in our Desk dealer survey shift a lot, as I showed in the briefing.  And there are other signs, too:  If you look at, say, options prices, some of the volatility and upside risk associated with rates a year or two ahead have really come down.  I think the market has seen the policy outlook solidifying around being at these lowlevels for a long time, and that has probably been a big factor—not the entire factor—but  a big factor driving movements in asset prices over the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage as the speaker agrees with the point made by the person they are speaking to and provides further evidence to support that point.


Passage number 48.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did you draw any distinction between the effects of earnings information and broad macroeconomic information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking if the person made a distinction between earnings information and broad macroeconomic information. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 49.
 MR. FISHER.  That’s very important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fisher's statement is straightforward and does not elicit any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 50.
 MR. SACK.  Absolutely.  I pointed to the second quarter earnings in my briefing, and, as you understand, the story there is that, relative to the GDP outlook, the earnings outlook has been surprisingly favorable.  So that’s another factor supporting equities and corporate bonds, even relative to the macro outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply giving a statement about the positive earnings outlook relative to the GDP outlook.


Passage number 51.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Are there other questions for our colleagues.  [No response.]  Seeing none, let’s turn to our go-round, and we’ll start with President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply continuing the discussion without any opposition or disagreement from others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser, B2 is still effectively there in the sense that paragraph 4 can be excluded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The phrase "President Plosser, B2 is still effectively there" suggests that there is a disagreement or contention regarding the status or relevance of B2. It implies that President Plosser believes B2 is still relevant or present, while someone else may argue that it can be excluded based on the information provided in paragraph 4.


Passage number 53.
MR. PLOSSER.  I’ll talk more about that later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate contention or disagreement. It implies that Mr. Plosser will provide further information or elaboration on a topic discussed earlier.


Passage number 54.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards President Bullard.


Passage number 55.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Overall, economic conditions in the Eighth District have improved slightly during the intermeeting period.  Estimates indicate that Eighth District employment was about flat between April and June, but the level of employment remains higher than earlier in the year.  Residential construction and real estate markets in the District have improved.  All major metropolitan areas, i.e.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states information about economic conditions in the Eighth District.


Passage number 56.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude to President Rosengren.


Passage number 57.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The incoming data have been disappointing.  As inventory rebuilding subsided, most forecasts anticipated improvements in final sales.  However, final sales have yet to show any evidence of more rapid growth, averaging less than 2 percent over the past four quarters.  With state and local governments continuing to retrench, consumers saving more, and home sales weak after the curtailment of the tax credit, the second half of the year is likely to be subdued.  Like the Tealbook, I expect no improvement in the unemployment rate for the balance of the year, and I worry that economic growth that barely attains potential, coupled with extremely high unemployment, may begin to affect the longer-run health of the economy.  In particular, such a slow and protracted recovery runs the risk of inflicting collateral damage to labor markets as the long-term unemployed become increasingly discouraged.  The departure of 1.2 million workers from the labor force over the past three months is consistent with this concern. The inflation rate is quite low and further disinflation remains likely, given the underutilized resources in the economy.  Another large negative shock could push disinflation to outright deflation.  It’s easy to imagine the fiscal problems in much of the developed world triggering a crisis that pushes us in this direction. This outcome may have a higher probability than we’d like to believe, judging from the extremely elevated sovereign spreads that remain.  Apparently, many investors are pricing in a high probability of sovereign default in several European countries over a reasonable time period.  Because a negative shock could occur, we should be devoting time to devising and evaluating plausible alternative monetary policy strategies.  While fiscal policies would likely be the most effective tool, there is serious question whether a fiscal policy response would occur.In terms of potential unconventional monetary policy measures, should they become necessary, I would prefer large purchases of mortgages to large purchases of government bonds.  Government bonds are already in high demand, and other assets will not enjoy the same flight to quality as government bonds if the economy deteriorates.  In considering additional purchases of mortgage securities, I would argue that we need to understand better the effects of our first purchase program.  Recent research by Andreas Fuster and Paul Willen in a Boston Fed working paper examined the effects of the LSAP on the mortgage market.  They highlight that borrowers choose among a combination of points and interest rates, and many borrowers with low FICO scores choose mortgages with a higher rate and lower points.  Because we focused our LSAP program on low coupon mortgages, the largest effect was on borrowers with high FICO scores and high incomes who chose low interest rates and more points.  This unintended consequence of the program highlights that we may need to better understand how our actions affect the entire distribution of the mortgage products and potentially focus on those segments of the market that would best support new homebuyers should we decide that a larger LSAP program is necessary in the future. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is simply providing an analysis of the current economic situation and suggesting possible monetary policy measures. There are no conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 58.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Pianalto.


Passage number 59.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook hasn’t changed by that much over the intermeeting period.  In fact, since spring my projections for output have generally been among the weakest on the Committee and weaker than the Tealbook path.  Coming into this meeting, I find that my baseline outlook for both output and inflation is very similar to that of the Tealbook.  Misery, as they say, loves company, but in this case, I wish I had less company. We all recognize that this has been a very difficult forecasting environment.  We are all trying to figure out how to account for the effects of such factors as tight credit conditions, weakhousing markets, poor consumer confidence, and long spells of unemployment. I have been fairly skeptical about how quickly these elements of the economic environment would improve, and, unfortunately, my skepticism appears to be warranted.  Financial markets had not been as skeptical as I have been, but the weaker labor market reports and the benchmark revisions to GDP appear to have convinced many people that we are in for a long slog. The banking sector provides a good example of the headwinds that I am trying to quantify.  While financial market conditions have generally improved, as the staff memos indicate, they continue to carry downside risks.  I asked my bank supervision staff for an assessment of Fourth District banks, including our three SCAP banks.  On the plus side, the loan losses to date have not been as bad as projected under the adverse scenario.  However, many banks are seeing less revenue growth than was anticipated, primarily as a result of sluggish lending conditions.  Moreover, commercial real estate exposures still lurk on bank balance sheets.  To me, these results validate incorporating substantial limits on both credit availability and credit demand into my outlook throughout the recovery period.  As I said, I have tried to include all the various headwind factors into my baseline projection since the spring, but I still worry that I have not fully accounted for the degree of restraint that these factors might be imposing on output and inflation. When I speak to my business contacts, very few admit to optimism.  Nearly all of them express uncertainty about the environment, and nearly all of them wonder where the strength in the economy will come from.  If I were to transform these emotional sentiments into numbers, they could very well look like the weaker recovery scenario in the Tealbook.  Clearly, this scenario brings with it very large social costs and would justify an even more aggressive monetary policy response.On the inflation front, the GDP revisions bumped up the PCE inflation numbers over the last two quarters, but this was largely in the nonmarket items that are very difficult to forecast and are likely unobserved by households.  When looking at either the CPI or the market-based PCE components, the disinflationary trend is evident and is consistent with my forecast that inflation will remain below my longer-term objectives for the next few years.  My baseline projection for inflation assumes no change in inflation expectations.  Unfortunately, as President Bullard pointed out, my staff’s model-based measures of inflation expectations have detected a slight decline in expectations at all time horizons.  If a pronounced decline in inflation expectations were to develop, it would be all the more difficult to prevent actual inflation from declining further. Ordinarily, I like to develop my outlook so that the risks are balanced, in the sense that the probability of output or inflation falling below my projection is equal to the probability of their running above my projection.  In this environment, if we are surprised to the downside, our limited and untested policy tools raise the risk that we would find it even more difficult to achieve our objectives.  We face no such risk for upside surprises.  For this reason, I regard the risks to my outlook for both output and inflation as being skewed to the downside, as I have been indicating since the spring.  And I will hold my views on how to respond to this situation for our upcoming policy discussion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, is discussing her outlook and concerns about the economic environment and potential risks. She mentions that her projections for output have been weaker than others on the Committee, but there is no direct disagreement or contention with anyone else. She also discusses her concerns about inflation and the risks to her outlook, again without any disagreement or contention with others.


Passage number 60.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards President Fisher.


Passage number 61.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude from someone named President Lacker.


Passage number 62.
   MS. PIANALTO.  And it’s not Cleveland.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 63.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  Finally, I want to comment on the impressive rally in U.S. Treasuries over the last several months—for example, the 10-year note has come down 1 percentage point and is well under 3 percent now.  I think this ought to factor in to how we think about the stance of monetary policy.  In particular, I think this indicates that the stance of our monetary policy has eased substantially in the intermeeting period.  Consider normal economic circumstances:  When we’re away from the zero bound, if the demand for money were to shift, and we were not to offset that decline in the demand for money, and the federal funds rate and other interest rates fell, we would judge that to be easier monetary policy.  That’s why we direct the Desk to hold the federal funds rate constant. The staff has been encouraging us for more than a year now to think of quantitative easing as having its effect via interest rates, like the 2-year, 5-year, 10-year rates, and so on.  What we’ve seen is a broad shift in demand; that is, economic conditions have changed in a way that has shifted the demand away from the shorter-term and more liquid assets towards longer-term and less liquid assets.  And we have not offset that by commensurately reducing the assets in our portfolio in a way that keeps longer-term interest rates—which is how the staff has been telling us to measure the effect of quantitative easing—from falling. So I conclude that, relative to that benchmark, policy has eased since the last meeting.  And notice that, in the fed funds rate example, it doesn’t depend on why the demand for moneyhas shifted.  We would say that policy is easier if we let interest rates go down when the demand for money shifts. Now, it’s true that the fall in mortgage rates has increased prepayment speeds, and that has reduced our MBS holdings more rapidly than we had expected.  But that hasn’t added enough to the public’s holdings of longer-term assets to offset fully the increased demand for those longer-term assets.  In essence, the demand for duration has gone up, and we haven’t offset it with an increase in the supply of duration that we took off the market in order to stimulate the economy.  I mention that because, obviously, we’re going to be focusing on whether further stimulus is warranted today, and I’d argue we’ve provided a lot of further stimulus already.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 64.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Earlier we had concerns that our policy was insufficiently conditional.  I guess what this shows is that the markets are appropriately understanding that our expectations are conditional on developments.  So I take that as a good sign, namely, that a weakening in the economy would lead markets to expect more accommodative policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It contains the author's reflection on the market's understanding of the policy's conditions and their expectations.


Passage number 65.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.  In the fed funds example, if that represents expectations, then we have this choice about the extent to which to follow through.  I think that’s facing us now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation:  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply presenting a situation and stating that it is currently facing them.


Passage number 66.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Could I inquire further about the peanut indicator.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for more information about a "peanut indicator."


Passage number 67.
  [Laughter]  What was the implication of the cocktail versus the— MR. LACKER.  Well, cocktail peanuts are sort of a high-end good, you know, and they’ve fallen in the recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about cocktail peanuts being a high-end good that has fallen in the recession.


Passage number 68.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. As an AI language model, I cannot see the content of the passage you are referring to, so I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement within it. Could you please provide the passage you would like me to analyze?


Passage number 69.
 MR. LACKER.  But people are eating more peanut butter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple observation that people are consuming more peanut butter.


Passage number 70.
MR. WARSH.  I took that just to mean there were a lot of mixed nuts hanging around you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's interpretation of a statement made by someone else.


Passage number 71.
  [Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions President Yellen with some laughter.


Passage number 72.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  All summer long we have had a fairly steady drumbeat of disappointing economic news.  Consumer spending and sentiment have soured, and the housing and labor markets continue to struggle.  Like the Tealbook, I have substantially marked down my forecast for real GDP growth over the next few quarters and foresee an even bleaker path for the unemployment rate.  The downshift in my outlook in part mirrors the greater caution and even pessimism that I hear from my business contacts.  A few months ago they were debating whether the recovery was more likely to be U-shaped or V-shaped.  Now they worry about a W-shaped outcome—a double-dip recession. My own view is that a double-dip recession with negative GDP growth is very unlikely.  To me, a more relevant benchmark is whether growth during the next few quarters will fall below potential.  Such a shortfall could signal that the recovery is too anemic to sustain itself on an ongoing basis.  A self-sustaining recovery crucially depends on the private sector stepping up as the impetus to growth from the fiscal stimulus and inventory dynamics ends. The accommodative stance of monetary policy is providing considerable support to private sector spending.  Nonetheless, that stimulus may ultimately prove insufficient to overcome a daunting list of headwinds, including tight credit, impaired household balance sheets, a housing overhang, state and local budget crises, and heightened uncertainty.  A number of people around the table this morning have commented on this heightened uncertainty, and it is a factor slowing the recovery that many of my own business contacts also constantly stress.  Of course, the business environment is always fraught with uncertainty to some degree.  But, as you noted in your congressional testimony, Mr. Chairman, the outlook now seems unusually uncertain.  This matters importantly to the outlook for a reason you articulated in your Ph.D. thesis, namely, that it induces businesses and consumers to defer commitments to long-lived investments, whether in plant and equipment, the workforce, or durable consumer goods.  This logic is leading many of my business contacts to postpone new projects, to defer hiring, and to build up cash reserves.  They are simply too uncertain about whether the recovery will gain traction.  One national survey of small business owners reported that 75 percent believe that the economy is likely to slip into another recession before it fully recovers.  And consumers may also be postponing purchases of big-ticket durables, such as cars, due to an amplified sense of job and income insecurity.  So my outlook, like yours, Mr. Chairman, is unusually uncertain. The recent slowing in spending may simply represent a temporary cooling off, but it may presage something more ominous, like the weaker recovery scenario in the Tealbook.  Various statistical factor forecasting models that my staff tracks all started flashing red during the intermeeting period and now project economic growth well below potential for the rest of this year.  However, even if the probabilities associated with upside and downside forecast scenarios were evenly balanced, the costs associated with these outcomes are most definitely not.  Continued weak growth would be a very grim scenario, given the constrained set of options available for further monetary and fiscal stimulus.  I worry that growth below potential and a deteriorating jobs outlook could trigger adverse feedbacks on consumer and business confidence, further stunting the economy’s forward momentum. Turning briefly to inflation, I think the past two years have been quite kind to the view that the extent of slack in the economy helps predict disinflation.  The unemployment ratereached 6 percent in the middle of 2008, and since then core PCE and CPI inflation have fallen by 1¼ and 1½ percentage points, respectively.  I don’t find such disinflation surprising, given the stories about downward wage pressure that I hear.  One manufacturing executive recently described the swarm of job applicants who showed up for a single warehouse opening.  That prompted his company to drop the position’s base wage by 15 percent.  At the same time, we see no evidence that the doubling of our balance sheet has triggered any rise in inflation expectations and inflation.  The latest inflation data indicate that weakness in prices remains widespread among both goods and services.  It is more pronounced in market-based prices than in imputed prices.  Based on the apparent stability of inflation expectations, the Tealbook projects that inflation will stop falling and hold steady at about 1 percent for the next few years. I, too, hope that the long disinflationary trend of the past two years will end, and I think a further disinflation seems unlikely.  However, the evidence suggests that prices and wages react with a considerable lag to shifts in output and employment, and Japan provides a useful cautionary example.  Japan’s deflation didn’t begin until the mid-1990s, a half-decade after the collapse of Japanese real estate and equity prices.  Furthermore, during the early years of deflation, Japanese long-run inflation expectations remained well anchored, averaging about 1½ percent as measured by consensus forecasts.  So, unfortunately, a Japan-style deflation remains a relevant worst-case scenario for us going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the current economic situation and the author's outlook and concerns.


Passage number 73.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Thank you, President Hoenig" simply expresses gratitude towards President Hoenig without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 75.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a polite expression of gratitude from President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 76.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple expression of thanks from President Evans.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  After reviewing the recent data and insights from my business contacts, I still believe the U.S. economic recovery is continuing, but the near-term and medium-term economic growth prospects seem very modest.  Yes, I can recount several positives from my business reports.  Revenues at heavy equipment manufacturers, Deere and Caterpillar, have risen sharply on the strength of foreign demand, especially from emerging markets.  Manufacturing segments with exposures to the auto sector have also rebounded well, although overall sales and production levels are well below previous business cycle peaks.  Corporate America is flying more business travelers overseas again to support strong activity, and the European financial crisis continues to recede.  Indeed, Europe’s growth prospects have not cratered as I had feared. But there are clear signs of heightened uncertainty and waning momentum in the U.S.  One manufacturing supplier with a broad business base described how non-auto-related customers were pulling back in the last two months.  This is especially evident in those products related to cap-ex that they believe are early indicators of trend shifts.  With the continuing corporate emphasis on productivity gains, businesses are quick to mention that the hurdle for meaningful hiring is very high.  As one CEO stated, “While firms might increase hours, hiring new workers is just a totally different proposition.”  In my directors’ phone call last week, the mood was grim.  One of our great hopes is for banks to begin lending out their vast reserves to fund growing activity, but all I hear frombankers is that businesses and consumers are pulling back on their activities.  My large bank director complained that the psychology of the general economy is poor.  Consequently, it doesn’t seem that increased bank lending is going to happen any time soon.  Similarly, although the big temporary employment firms headquartered in our District report that their business has held up fairly well, they say that client firms are increasingly cautious about the uncertain economic outlook.  Another CEO put it this way:  “It all comes back to jobs.” In light of these developments, I have no substantial disagreements regarding the outlook presented in the Tealbook.  With each passing meeting, it is becoming all too clear that the modest pace of economic recovery will be too slow to return the labor market to anything close to normalcy by 2012.  With the unemployment rate projected to be 7½ to 8 percent in 2012, we’re falling far short of our objectives for the real economy.  Remember, this is the third anniversary of when this all began, this very meeting—we’ll be five years on in 2012. I recognize that there are caveats.  Some unemployment is likely structural and requires costly reallocation across industries, skills, and regions.  This reallocation may be particularly important for sectors like housing, which grew to unsustainable levels.  Associated capital reallocation could lower overall potential output.  Still, these structural factors seem relatively small compared with the current level of unemployment. The other disturbing policy development is that we are underrunning our inflation objective.  Mr. Chairman, on this subject the Committee is in a difficult situation, because we do not have a uniform view on an explicit numerical inflation objective.  That has been already voiced this morning.  Nevertheless, by my reckoning, with the Tealbook’s core PCE inflation projection of 1 percent in 2012, we’re failing by a full percentage point; that is, I have 2 percent as my price stability goal.  If an inflation rate of 1 percent is not a problem, as some haveindicated, then, by symmetry, we should feel the same way about an inflation rate of 3 percent.  I somehow doubt that that’s the case. We’re failing on both dimensions of the dual mandate.  We face both unemployment that is too high and inflation that is too low.  This is not a new development due to recent weak data—that’s my assessment.  It’s a growing realization of the dilemma we face, in my opinion.  The state of affairs should focus us squarely on what more we can do to stimulate demand.  For me, given the lack of conflict between our dual objectives, it’s hard to see why we wouldn’t want to take some significant and meaningful additional measures.  But I’ll hold off saying more until the policy go-round.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, believes that the U.S. economic recovery is continuing, but the near-term and medium-term economic growth prospects are modest. He mentions signs of heightened uncertainty and waning momentum in the U.S., as well as businesses and consumers pulling back on their activities. He also disagrees with the current inflation objective, stating that the Committee is failing on both dimensions of the dual mandate - having unemployment that is too high and inflation that is too low. He argues that more measures should be taken to stimulate demand.


Passage number 78.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.   Thank you.  It’s a little after 10:15 a.m.  I understand coffee is ready.  Let’s take a 20 minute break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement about taking a break.


Passage number 79.
  [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.   Let’s recommence with the Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply mentions taking a break and then suggests continuing with the Vice Chairman. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 80.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought the first round today was interesting.  It seems that people mostly agree on where we are, but there’s quite a bit of disagreement about what we should do about it and how effective those actions would be in shaping the outlook.  In general, I think I’m pretty close to many others.  The economy has hit a soft patch.  That does increase the economy’s vulnerability to adverse shocks.  This has mainly come about because the benefits of inventory restocking have petered out, while, at the same time, the household deleveraging process probably has not yet been completed.  My expectation is that economic growth will be quite slow for the next couple of quarters and then will pick up steam next year.On balance, my level of anxiety about the outlook is up only slightly from the last meeting, but it was relatively elevated then, so I don’t take much comfort from that.  On the one hand, the evidence of slowing is more pervasive, both in consumer spending and in housing, and private sector payroll growth remains anemic.  But, on the other hand, there were some more positive developments.  In particular, the risks from Europe appear to have diminished somewhat, as growth has been firmer than expected, and the bank stress test, while not ideal, has taken place and has been more reassuring than disturbing.  Also, as noted, financial conditions in the United States have eased since the last meeting, with equities recovering a bit, the dollar weakening, and long-term interest rates having fallen. In general, while I think there’s some risk of a double dip, I’d still see that risk as quite low.  After all, policy remains accommodative, financial conditions have eased, and credit availability is starting to improve.  Growth abroad remains solid, and the cyclical parts of the U.S. economy that could conceivably contribute to such a downturn, such as housing and autos, remain at depressed levels, well below their long-term trends. I think this is an important point in assessing the risks of the double dip—in other words, to consider what sectors could turn down and cause the double dip to take place.  Moreover, the revisions to the NIPA data indicate that the household deleveraging process may be more advanced than we previously thought, as consumer spending during the recession was revised downward and disposable income growth was revised upward.  So there was a pretty substantial upward revision to the household saving rate, which is now about 6 percent. Despite all of this, I have now moved to thinking that we should try to do more in terms of providing support to economic activity.  Several factors lead me to this position.  First, it’s going to take a long time—years, not months—to get back to our objective of full employment. So it’s hard for me to justify sitting here and not using our policy tools as aggressively as we can.  Second, we are in a vulnerable period, during which an unexpected shock could push the economy from a slow-growth path into a recession.   Third, anything short of solid economic growth raises concerns about the risk of deflation.  With inflation so low already, even modest further downward pressure on inflation could make this a real risk.  In my view, it’s better to take out some insurance now to reduce that risk than to wait and hope.  Fourth, our current policy is one in which the weaker the economy is, and the lower longer-term interest rates are, the faster we’re shrinking our balance sheet, which is increasing the amount of duration that has to be held by the private sector.  This seems a bit perverse, to me, in an environment in which the economy is weaker than desired to start with.  At a minimum, offsetting the shrinkage of our balance sheet by reinvesting maturing agency debt and agency MBS would seem appropriate in order to keep the policy setting from automatically moving in a tightening direction as the economy weakens.  But that is drifting into the monetary policy discussion, so, I’ll say more on that later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and observations, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 81.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, I’m sorry.  I thought we were going to keep drifting.  [Laughter]  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It involves a statement followed by laughter, implying a light-hearted and possibly humorous conversation.


Passage number 82.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Governor Kohn.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is thanking Governor Kohn and addressing Governor Warsh.


Passage number 83.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The statement is simply expressing gratitude towards someone named Governor Duke.


Passage number 84.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me elaborate a bit more on Governor Warsh’s point about credit turning.  Banks’ credit quality continues to improve, and the recovery in credit is far enough along that bank management and bank analysts are now focused much more on pre-provision net revenue and less on credit costs.  But I don’t get the sense that the regulatory community has made the same shift in focus, so I’ll talk a little bit about real estate loans before addressing the outlook for loan growth. In residential mortgages, the latest evolution of the government loan modification plan was a new requirement for completion and documentation of the specific timing and form of disclosure outreach prior to foreclosure.  This means that the timing of foreclosures has beenpushed out for another few quarters, but it hasn’t seemed to reduce significantly the number that will eventually occur.  Borrower response to modification, short sale, and “cash for keys” offers at this point is lackluster at best.  And rumors about a large-scale principal forgiveness program in the works for GSE loans abounds.  As all of the delinquent and underwater loans get resolved, they could easily overwhelm new originations and hold down aggregate residential loans outstanding for some time. In the commercial real estate space, there are signs that the CRE guidance is working.  We’re seeing both restructure and foreclosure activity, indicating that problems in commercial real estate are being confronted and resolved with a variety of strategies.  Since the guidance came out, we’ve examined more than half the state member banks with average coverage in the CRE portfolio of 40 percent.  This means that we have looked at the actual loan files for 20 percent of the CRE loans in state member banks, in addition to those in the national credit portfolio.  It would seem, then, that we’ve had a good opportunity to weigh in on both loan classifications and loan reserves, but, still, estimates of the remaining loss in CRE loans would indicate that banks have recognized only a small fraction of the embedded losses.  It’s really hard for me to square the notion of large unrecognized losses with this kind of exam coverage.  I’m still investigating to see whether this discrepancy has to do with differences in recognition through reserves or recognition through charge-offs, or whether there’s an anticipation of a significant unanticipated and unrecognized worsening in conditions. Moving on to new loans, banks are actively seeking loan growth, but they admit that new originations are not strong enough to offset payout and charge-off activity.  Credit card payment rates continue to climb.  Commercial line utilization rates continue to drift down.  While bankers report stronger pipelines, it seems clear that the new activity they’re seeing is due more to takingmarket share from others, as the competition for loans heats up, and less to borrowers deciding to increase debt.  Both the smallest and the largest bank with whom I spoke reported purchased mortgage volume at half the level of last year, and the larger bank calculated that refinance activity was 20 to 30 percent lower than would be expected given current rates. In reviewing the Senior Loan Officer Survey results, I noticed that terms and conditions are easing more quickly than standards.  This supports the banker comments that, in competing for the limited loan demand, they are competing on rate and terms, rather than lowering standards, to increase the pool of qualified borrowers.  In particular, standards and terms seem to have improved for jumbo mortgages and for small business loans at large banks, although the small business improvement at large banks could be indicative of political pressure rather than a change in their outlook.  Indeed, at the capstone small business meeting we had here at the Board, one large bank reported startlingly good results from its “second look” programs.  But, in private conversations, I can’t find any other bank that is seeing such results, and most now have an appeals program from their second look program. Finally, the availability of good lending opportunities is so scarce that two CEOs of sizable banks reported that for the first time in their careers they were actually looking at ways to run off deposits.  And a third CEO reported looking at acquisition of failed banks now as a way to find assets into which to deploy excess deposits.  In fact, deposit repricing is on the minds of most bankers in the face of new overdraft regulation, reduction in debit card interchange fees, and interest on demand deposits.  There’s a lot of waiting to see what others will do, but I certainly would look for the end of free checking for small balance, single-service user accounts.  On a positive note for deposits, but a negative note for banks’ willingness and ability to hold or arbitrage reserves, the Dodd–Frank bill changes the assessment base for FDIC insurance fromdeposits to total-assets-less-capital, thus reducing the cost of deposits and increasing the cost of all other liabilities. Putting this all together, it seems that loan growth is currently constricted by three factors:  continuing consumer deleveraging and caution on the part of businesses, the repayment capacity of potential borrowers in the form of either business sales or consumer income as the primary driver for loan approvals, and, for real estate loans, the combination of fewer units to be financed, lower valuation of the properties being financed, and lower loan-to-value ratios applied to those valuations.  Loan growth does not appear to be constrained by capital liquidity or the level of interest rates. Finally, every bank of any size remarked on the number of calls from healthy smaller banks asking if there was any interest in buying them out.  This phenomenon is likely due to the strain of getting through the credit cycle, the perceived additional regulatory burden of the Dodd–Frank bill, and questions about the profitability potential of the community banking model going forward.  It is not likely to result in a lot of consolidation yet, as the potential acquirers are still inwardly focused and waiting for some more clarity on the resolution of problem credits and profit prospects.  But, in the medium term, it would suggest another wave of consolidation and potential problems in smaller rural markets that are served only by small banks, none of which is large enough to be successful on its own.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and observations about the current state of credit and loan growth in the banking industry.


Passage number 85.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement appears to be a simple expression of gratitude and a sign-off, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 86.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m a little worried down here at the end of the table, because for the last 18 months I’ve been able just to refer to whatever Governor Kohn said as capturing my view of the economy, which allows me to concentrate on one or two things. So I’d like to request that, if he carries through on his threat not to show up at the next meeting, maybe he could submit for the record—[laughter]—his ongoing views of the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing a lighthearted remark about Governor Kohn potentially not being present at the next meeting and requesting that he submit his views of the economy for the record if he doesn't attend. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 87.
 MR. WARSH.  That will cost you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a response to a statement or request, indicating a potential cost or consequence.


Passage number 88.
 MS. DUKE.  Said his agent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage does not provide any information or context that would indicate contention or disagreement. Therefore, the answer is no.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 89.
 MR. TARULLO.  With externally bred tail risks in retreat, at least for the present, we’ve all turned our attention again to the key question underlying medium-term economic projections, namely, whether final sources of private demand will become sufficiently self-sustaining to substitute for the waning effects of fiscal stimulus, the absence of further monetary stimulus, and the completion of major inventory replenishment. While it is perhaps too soon to answer this question definitively, the handoff has clearly not gone smoothly.  The prevailing story last spring of a well-established recovery gradually gaining momentum is considerably harder, though not impossible, to tell persuasively.  Indeed, against the backdrop of the generally disappointing data of the last couple of months, it seems to me that the downward revision to estimates of second-quarter economic growth renders quite credible a reading of the last year as a burst of stimulus-induced activity in an environment of decreasing financial instability followed by lackluster growth in the face of continued balance sheet repairs, business model adjustments, and shaky business and consumer confidence. Such a reading is supported by numerous factors already mentioned by a number of our colleagues.  In particular, a close look at employment data shows that there has been no net improvement over the last 12 months.  In fact, we have gone backwards.  From July 2009 to July 2010, the working-age population of the United States increased by about two million.  In that same time frame, the number of employed people in the country decreased by roughly 900,000.  After increasing in the early part of the year, the total number of people employed has declined abit in each of the last three months.  The gains in hours worked earlier this year have been maintained but have shown some signs of abating except, possibly, in manufacturing.  After nine months of increases, temporary employment also fell last month.  In July, the labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratios had given up the modest improvements seen in the spring and were just about where they were at the end of last year, hovering at levels lower than any time since the early 1980s.  Of the six alternative measures of labor underutilization used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which incorporate factors such as discouraged workers and longer-term unemployment, five have increased since last July. Still, this is the past and the present I’ve been describing.  Are there reasons to expect an acceleration of the painfully slow pace of recovery over the next few quarters.  Or, more to the point, are there reasons better than those adduced earlier this year in support of projections of stronger growth, which turned out to have been erroneous or at least premature. The factor most frequently mentioned is that financial conditions have improved considerably since last year.  The tightening of credit terms, as Betsy described, appears to be coming to an end, and the decline in bank lending has slowed considerably.  Large companies have apparently taken advantage of favorable borrowing conditions to reduce their interest expenses.  All of this is true, but it describes not an impetus for faster economic growth, but the conditions that would permit faster growth if the impetus comes from another source.  The same large companies that have so successfully accessed public debt markets are sitting on large amounts of cash, which they will continue to do until they see the promise of increased demand that would warrant investment in new capacity.  Small businesses have the same view, as reflected in the survey released this morning.I want to digress for just a moment to say a word about policy uncertainty and skill mismatches as potential sources of suppressed job creation.  While both undoubtedly play some role today, neither approach is as important as the most important uncertainty, namely, that of future demand for goods and services.  Health care costs are undoubtedly an issue and are likely to continue to be so for the indefinite future.  With respect to job mismatches, I’m not sure, Narayana, that a moderate uptick in job openings from near depression levels to the level that was the lowest of the previous ten years constitutes a real mismatch problem.  As the recovery moves on, we are going to see mismatches.  But right now the basic problem is aggregate demand.  And in response to the JOLTS point, I just note that the survey of hard-to-fill positions indicates that they are at historic lows in small businesses. Other factors cited as grounds for relative optimism include improving export performance, possible release of pent-up demand as consumer confidence improves, a decline in what turns out, after all, to have been significantly increased saving rates once consumers have paid off most of their debt, stronger than expected growth in some foreign markets, the continued recovery in manufacturing following the carnage that began a couple of years ago, and an end to the unusually high productivity growth during the recession. One might question at least parts of each of these mostly benign possibilities.  But even if we grant them all, we’re almost surely looking at no more than the kind of moderately above-trend growth that was the central tendency of this Committee not so long ago.  And, as seen in the forecasts of even the most optimistic of the Blue Chip forecasters, that translates, at best, into an unemployment rate of about 8½ percent at the end of next year, a figure that I strongly suspect would itself mask a continued low employment-to-population ratio.With this employment picture, it seems exceedingly difficult to give a plausible account of medium-term rapid economic growth of a sort that would propel us beyond where we would be had trend growth continued through the last few years.  Thus, even allowing for some increase in the NAIRU, and some reduction in productive capacity, the only truly open question now seems to be whether the economy will be moderately or badly underperforming for the foreseeable future.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are reasons for optimism regarding the economy, such as improved financial conditions and possible release of pent-up demand. However, they argue that despite these factors, the overall picture is one of slow and underperforming growth. The speaker questions the validity of these optimistic factors and suggests that the economy may continue to underperform in the foreseeable future.


Passage number 90.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  As noted by the footnote on alternative B, in the event that we decide to reinvest our agency securities into either Treasuries or agencies, Brian Sack and his team have prepared a technical note that will be released at the same time as the statement, and we will circulate it so that you have plenty of time to look at it.  I thought I’d give Brian just two minutes to say something about the technicalities of reinvestment for either of those two asset classes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Rather, it mentions the plan to release a technical note prepared by Brian Sack and his team regarding the reinvestment of agency securities into either Treasuries or agencies. Additionally, it mentions giving Brian two minutes to speak about the technicalities of reinvestment.


Passage number 91.
MR. SACK.  Let me just describe some of the broad features of the strategy that we would employ should the Committee move in this direction.  First, the Desk would calibrate the total amount of purchases of longer-term Treasury securities or MBS to maintain the Federal Reserve’s holdings of domestic securities at the current level, as the FOMC directed.  The most recent H.4.1 data release indicates that the face value of outright holdings of domestic securities in the SOMA was $2.054 trillion, so we would take that as a target for the size of the portfolio.  The actual amount of our holdings would vary to some degree around that level, given differences in the timing of the settlement of our purchases and the paydowns of MBS. On timing, we would essentially implement this on a monthly schedule.  Principal payments on MBS occur in the second half of the month in a very lumpy fashion—on three particular days.  But we’d learn about the magnitude of those paydowns about a week into the month with the publication of the MBS factors by the GSEs.  That would give us an opportunity to begin purchasing securities ahead of the realized paydown, so that we could smooth the purchases and still remain relatively close to the target.  We would announce a schedule in the middle of the month of the purchases we intend to conduct over the following month.  If we were buying Treasuries, that announcement would include the total amount of the purchases and a detailed schedule of what days we would purchase.  If we were buying MBS, we would be purchasing in the secondary market on a relatively continuous basis, so that announcement would just give the total magnitude of the purchases we would expect. In terms of what securities we would be buying, our intention was to structure the purchases of Treasury securities the same way we did in the first round of large-scale asset purchases.  That means purchases would be concentrated in the 2- to 10-year sector of the nominal yield curve, although some purchases would occur across the curve and in TIPS as well. Under that approach, the duration of the purchases would be between five and five and a half years, which is similar to the typical duration of newly issued MBS.  On that score, then, whether we’re buying Treasuries or MBS, we have pretty much the same duration. Operationally if we were buying Treasuries, we would do it over FedTrade with the primary dealers—if there were no outstanding issues, it could be implemented immediately.  With MBS, as I said, we’d be buying in the secondary market.  We would be executing those trades internally as we did at the end of the first LSAP over Tradeweb. Under any of these plans, we could publish as early as tomorrow our anticipated purchases over the next month, and we could begin operations within a week, if desired.  The purchases over the first month in either case would be expected to total nearly $20 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is providing a description of a strategy, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 92.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  I have one additional point.  In the August 3 re-funding announcement by the Treasury, it was asked how it would change its issuance if the Federal Reserve decided to change its purchase pattern.  The Treasury essentially said it would offset whatever the Fed did.  This means that if, at some point, we decided to acquire more longer-term securities, we should not feel trapped.  For example, suppose that in the future we decided to adopt option 2 from the last meeting, which is rolling over medium-term securities into bills or other short-term securities.  We could do that with the knowledge that the Treasury was going to offset that action, so the net effect on monetary policy would be nil, and we could present it that way.  That gives us a bit more flexibility if we get to that point.  I wouldn’t recommend that we try to do it today because there are too many moving parts.  Any questions for anyone.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of adjusting the issuance of securities based on potential changes in the Federal Reserve's purchase patterns.


Passage number 93.
 MR. LACKER.  Brian, you said that when you found out about the amount of prepayments that would come on these three settlement days, you would buy Treasuries ahead oftime.  You said something about smoothing, but this would introduce fluctuations in total reserve balances.  Why don’t you just do reverse auctions the day of the settlement and announce them in advance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 94.
 MR. SACK.  We decided that we didn’t want to concentrate the settlement of the purchases so much to try to perfectly match those lumpy prepayments of the MBS, so we were left with a couple of choices:  We could wait for those prepayments and then make them up over time, or we could take the approach I described, which was to anticipate those prepayments and begin in advance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage describes a decision-making process regarding the settlement of purchases and presents two possible choices. There is no indication of contention or disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 95.
 MR. LACKER.  I guess I’m asking why you made the decision not to bunch them on the settlement days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply a question asking for an explanation for a decision.


Passage number 96.
 MR. SACK.  We had two reasons.  First, we thought it was probably least disruptive to make the purchases with conventional settlement practices; to use something other than conventional practices would be a change for the markets, plus it would introduce a number of additional parameters, such as credit risk exposures we would have on unsettled trades, and so on.  So we thought there were benefits to maintaining standard settlement timing of purchases. Second, we didn’t think there was much disadvantage in having modest variation of asset holdings around this targeted level as long as the markets understood that that was the targeted level and that over time we would be moving towards that level.  So, if we think there’s a portfolio balance effect associated with the expected stock of our holdings, I think it’s essentially unaffected if we have modest variation around the target level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents two reasons for their decision, explaining the benefits and lack of disadvantage in maintaining standard settlement timing and having modest variation of asset holdings. There is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 97.
 MR. LACKER.  The first factor doesn’t apply to Treasuries.  You can do that any day of the week, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 98.
MR. SACK.  Okay.  Sorry.  To make the settlements lumpy to match the MBS, we could do two things.  We could keep the one-day settlement standard and just do three massive operations toward the end of the month, or we could conduct auctions well in advance of settlement.  I thought you were talking about the latter.  For the former, I think it’s just probably too much to auction off in a few operations.  We’re expecting, as I mentioned, nearly $20 billion of operations this month, and it would raise risks and probably be undesirable to try to do that in just a couple of operations.  I think it’s a lot smoother for the markets and that we’ll end up getting better market functioning and better pricing if we can smooth that out over multiple operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options for conducting settlements and expressing their own opinion on which method would be smoother for the markets.


Passage number 99.
 MR. LACKER.  Just one more question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Lacker has one more question.


Passage number 100.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 101.
 MR. LACKER.  This has to do with duration.  You’re going to reinvest in securities with 5½ years duration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about reinvesting in securities with a specific duration.


Passage number 102.
  MR. SACK.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage, as it only states "Right" as a response and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 103.
 MR. LACKER.  So a security that’s about to be prepaid has an implicit duration that’s pretty short, right.  Is this going to increase our duration on net.  That is, how is the duration going to evolve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification on how the duration of a security will evolve.


Passage number 104.
 MR. SACK.  It will lift our duration.  This is a bit complicated.  The duration of our portfolio is expected to drift up over time in any case as we get the prepayments of the ones that are likely to prepay and then eventually as rates drift up.  Under a strategy where we do not reinvest, our projection of the duration of the SOMA portfolio is 4.1 years as of the end of 2011, and with the reinvestment strategy in the Treasuries, it rises to 4.5 years.  So there is some uplift in the effective duration of the portfolio.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two different durations of the portfolio based on different strategies.


Passage number 105.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman, did you have a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for the Vice Chairman's comment.


Passage number 106.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have two points.  First, one way to think about it, President Lacker, is that, to the extent that these mortgages are being refinanced, if you’re asking the private sector to hold them instead of having the Fed hold them, you’re asking the private sector to take on quite a bit more duration, and that’s going to show up in longer-term rates that the private sector demands, right.  I think the choice should be comparing the option of our holding it with the private sector holding it and deciding whether we’re comfortable with making the private sector hold it and what the implications of that are for longer-term rates. Second, I just want to ask Brian a very quick question.  The statement as proposed is “at the current level.”  Would you feel more comfortable saying “around the current level”.  It’s a very small point, but we’re not going to be “at the current level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 107.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But there’s going to be a simultaneous issuance of the press release which says basically what our target is going to be and the process.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply stating a sequence of events, without any indication of disagreement or contention. It describes the issuance of a press release and the information it will contain.


Passage number 108.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it’s going to move around, though, by, say, $10 or $15 million, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not contentious or controversial. It simply suggests that the value will vary within a specific range.


Passage number 109.
 MR. SACK.  I was more concerned about the directive, which clearly states that it will be kept at approximately this level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement from Mr. Sack regarding his concern about a directive and its stated level. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 110.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Okay." It is a simple expression of agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 111.
 MR. SACK.  Or approximately $2 trillion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage doesn't contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply presents a numerical value without any conflicting opinions or contradictions.


Passage number 112.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And I recognize my error in introducing this topic.  I’ll turn to President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges their own mistake and indicates a willingness to redirect the conversation to President Kocherlakota.


Passage number 113.
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I have a question for you, Mr. Chairman.  When you say the Treasury will offset what we do, is it going to take actions that will leave the duration in the private sector the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is a question being asked by Mr. Kocherlakota and does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is simply a query seeking clarification from the Chairman.


Passage number 114.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  That was the idea.  But that’s not with respect to this action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply states that the idea was different from the current action.


Passage number 115.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m talking about the other action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage alone does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. There is a statement made by Mr. Kocherlakota, but without knowing the context or the responses of others, it is not clear if there is contention or agreement surrounding his statement.


Passage number 116.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It can obviously only affect the Treasuries.  It’s not the MBS part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement simply explains that the subject being discussed (whatever it may be) can only impact Treasuries and not the MBS part. There is no disagreement or contention expressed in this passage.


Passage number 117.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, in terms of the Treasuries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a discussion or difference in terms of Treasuries.


Passage number 118.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Currently we are rolling over Treasury securities into Treasury securities of essentially the same maturity.  If in the future we decide to roll over our longer-term securities into shorter-term securities—bills and other short-term securities—the Treasury has announced its intention, although I think we don’t want to be completely reliant on it, to change its issuance so that the private sector’s holdings are unaffected by our action. Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply explains the current practice of rolling over Treasury securities and mentions a potential future change in the issuance of shorter-term securities. The mention of not wanting to be completely reliant on the Treasury does not indicate disagreement, but rather a cautious approach.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 119.
 MS. DUKE.  I have a question on the note about replacing the maturities.  It looked to me that there was a dollar amount anticipated of somewhere between $240 and $540 billion, and so in calculating the basis-point effect on longer-term rates, what sort of stock does that imply.  What total dollar amount of purchases does that imply.  How long does that imply that we continue to reinvest.  And, finally, how does the market know that that’s the dollar amount that we’re going to reinvest and the time commitment—if that question makes sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker raises multiple questions and seeks clarification about certain details. This suggests that there may be some contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 120.
 MR. ENGLISH.  Yes, it does.  What we’ve assumed is shown on the very back page of the memo in terms of estimates of mortgage-backed securities holdings, and the maximumdifference is about $400 billion.  As we get prepayments on these instruments and reinvest them, the stock of MBS stays constant instead of declining, as it’s currently projected to do.  We do that until, under the assumptions in the memo, early 2012, and then let them run off.  In fact, we would be selling them at that point.  So the maximum difference is about $400 billion.  I think there is a question as to what the market participants expect from this, and we would be announcing an intention to start doing this.  We’re not telling them how long we’re going to do it, so they would assume we’re going to do it for a while, but they may not have in their mind exactly this trajectory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining a plan and discussing assumptions and expectations, but there is no apparent contention or disagreement.


Passage number 121.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the name "Governor Tarullo," so there is no information provided that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 122.
 MR TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude towards someone else.


Passage number 123.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke, were you not finished.  I’m sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I'm sorry" does not convey any disagreement with Governor Duke, but rather indicates remorse or apology for interrupting him.


Passage number 124.
 MS. DUKE.  Does this mean that when we calculate the 20 basis points, it’s the same as announcing a $400 billion purchase of Treasuries or roughly the equivalent.  Is that how we calculated it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 125.
 MR. ENGLISH.  We calculate it by looking at the different portfolios and the effects of those portfolios on longer-term rates.  I think it’s correct to say that it’s broadly similar to $400 billion of purchases followed by sales.  It’s not going to be identical unless you bought them following exactly this trajectory and sold them following exactly this trajectory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing their perspective on how the calculation is done, stating that it is broadly similar to $400 billion of purchases followed by sales. They acknowledge that it may not be identical due to the specific trajectory of buying and selling.


Passage number 126.
 MS. DUKE.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any content or expressions that suggest contention or disagreement. It seems to be a polite and appreciative statement.


Passage number 127.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  It’s not greatly different though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's not greatly different though" implies that the subject being discussed is similar or comparable to something else, but does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 128.
 MR. ENGLISH. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing ideas or opinions.


Passage number 129.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information or context about Governor Tarullo, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 130.
MR. TARULLO.  Bill and Brian, the bracketed language providing the alternative for rolling over into MBS presumably reflects the preference of some people based on a combination of policy and signaling concerns for choosing that alternative.  But you, in particular, Bill, alluded to the potential impairment of the functioning of the MBS market.  Can one or both of you elaborate on the degree of that impairment, that is, how high the costs would be, so that people who have some exogenous preference for rolling over into MBS have a sense of what the offsetting costs are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a request for further information and clarification on a specific topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 131.
 MR. SACK.  It’s difficult, obviously, to calibrate the cost precisely, but I will say I do have some concerns about rolling over into MBS.  We can design the program to be as gentle as possible.  I think that means sticking to production coupons, smoothing purchases as much as we can, probably going back into a dollar roll book, or maybe even coupon swaps.  We can take a number of steps, but we clearly risk putting more strain on the MBS market.  Calibrating that strain is hard, as I mentioned in my briefing.  When we look at the market, there’s a lot of mixed evidence.  For example, trading in the production coupons seems okay, that is, it’s not significantly impaired, yet, at the same time, we have these settlement problems, and everyone’s concerned that at some point they’re going to come back to bite market functioning. So rolling over into MBS would risk putting more strain on the market.  I also think it creates a risk of damaging our reputation with market participants, at least in those circles around MBS markets.  We’ve tried to be as responsible as possible to market functioning in the context of this large program, but, obviously, there’s a lot of attention on the fails and on the role we’ve played in market functioning, and I worry that going back into the MBS market may be seen as being a bit out of touch with some of those strains.  I think there probably are risks.  They are hard to calibrate.  One other thing that might lead you to a second set of Treasury purchases isthat the portfolio balance effects, in our view, are nearly equivalent, given that you’re removing the same amount of duration from the market in either case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses concerns about rolling over into MBS and highlights the potential strain on the MBS market and the risk of damaging the reputation with market participants. They also mention the mixed evidence and possible risks involved. This indicates that there is disagreement and different viewpoints on whether rolling over into MBS is a good idea.


Passage number 132.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the given statement. Mr. Tarullo is being thanked, which suggests a positive interaction or agreement.


Passage number 133.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, did you have a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 134.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, could you summarize the benefits and potential costs of the strategy for the markets, viewed purely from the Desk’s perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, is simply asking Brian to provide a summary of the benefits and potential costs of a strategy from a specific perspective.


Passage number 135.
 MR. SACK.  The benefits and the costs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides no evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 136.
 MR. FISHER.  Yes, purely from the Desk’s standpoint.  How much do we expect to see longer-term rates fall, and what’s the potential cost of doing so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question that seeks information about the expected decrease in longer-term rates and the potential cost of such a decrease.


Passage number 137.
 MR. SACK.  The benefits are lowering longer-term interest rates.  I’d take 20 basis points as an upper bound of the estimates—these things are hard to calibrate, because we don’t know the duration of the effects—so I’d say somewhere in the range of 10 to 20 basis points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an estimate range for the benefits of lowering longer-term interest rates.


Passage number 138.
 MR. ENGLISH.  That might already be built in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 139.
 MR. SACK.  Absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Mr. Sack. Absolutely" suggests agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 140.
 MR. FISHER.  Built in by the market’s expectation of our adopting this strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a straightforward statement about the market's expectation of adopting a certain strategy. There is no indication of contention or disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 141.
 MR. SACK.  Right.  The costs have been discussed around this table in the past, and they include possibly complicating an exit strategy down the road and possibly putting too much risk on the Fed’s balance sheet. I feel that, especially in Treasuries, there are reasons to think we have plenty of ability to exit even if we do this reinvestment:  The draining tools are proceeding nicely in their development; we have a long history of Treasuries; we know how to sell them, if it came to that; in other words, operationally, they’re easy for us to deal with.  I don’t have great concern about it complicating our ability to exit.  I also don’t have great concerns about its effects on the risks toour balance sheet, because I think the economic benefits should be put well in front of any risk to financial return, and also because we have a portfolio with a lot of embedded positive return already, as I showed in my briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 142.
 MR. FISHER.  I guess your argument is that there’s less potential cost in terms of exit strategy with Treasuries than we would have if we had all MBS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It simply states Mr. Fisher's understanding of the argument being made.


Passage number 143.
 MR. SACK.  Yes.  Don’t get me wrong—I think we could exit under either scenario.  But it is true that Treasuries are operationally easier, so, at the margin it complicates the strategy slightly less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that both scenarios are viable options but states that Treasuries are operationally easier, making the strategy slightly less complicated.


Passage number 144.
 MR. FISHER.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "Thank you" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a polite way to express gratitude.


Passage number 145.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s go to the policy round and start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 146.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support option B.  We currently are unlikely to make any progress on either element of our dual mandate over the course of this year.  In fact, it’s quite possible that the unemployment rate could be higher and the inflation rate lower at the end of this year.  Moving in the wrong direction on both elements of our mandate, given how far we are from where we want to be, is highly undesirable.  Making such an outcome less likely is appropriate, and the reinvestment of maturing mortgage-backed securities will highlight that we are now further from the exit and are willing to take more aggressive action if necessary. In considering the likely trajectory for inflation, I would emphasize that I take less comfort than some in anchored inflation expectations.  My staff has been looking at the same charts as the Chairman, and recent work by Jeff Fuhrer examining the deflation experience in Japan has found that longer-run inflation expectations there have been well-anchored above 1 percent for more than a decade.  However, the realized core rate of inflation has remainednegative for almost that entire period, despite the stable longer-run inflation expectations.  While there are many differences between the U.S. and Japanese economies, this comparison suggests to me that the risk of deflation, even in the presence of anchored expectations, is greater than what I would like at this stage of the recovery.  While deflation is only a risk at this time, it is appropriate to take out insurance against that risk.  Should that risk become greater, we will need to take out more insurance.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply stating their support for option B and giving reasons for their position.


Passage number 147.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "Thank you. President Yellen" is a statement expressing gratitude and acknowledging President Yellen without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 148.
 MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  Given the tenuous state of business and consumer confidence, I consider it critical at this juncture that this Committee not be perceived as falling behind the curve, being unwilling to act, or being out of touch with the mounting concerns we see in the markets and on Main Street.  The data show a considerable slowing of the economy during the summer, and the near-term outlook has been marked down appreciably.  With respect to language, I think paragraph 1 of alternative B best captures the recent economic deceleration. I strongly favor reinvesting the runoff in our agency portfolio.  The anticipated runoff over the next two years in our agency portfolio due to prepayments has been revised up very significantly since our last meeting.  So a continuation of our practice of redeeming agency debt and MBS now entails a much more substantial removal of policy accommodation.  Such an acceleration in the extent of passive policy tightening is unwarranted in our current circumstances.  At the present time, MBS–Treasury spreads are quite narrow, so I can support rollovers into Treasuries.  But I would not want to preclude future rollovers into MBS under different market conditions.I think we should also be considering the options available for further accommodation, and I would be strongly inclined in that direction if the forecast is downgraded to the point where we project that unemployment will be edging up rather than down.  Our quiver has fewer arrows than I’d like.  I’m not certain just how effective the remaining arrows will be, but a renewal of asset purchases, either Treasuries or potentially MBS, is the most potent arrow remaining.  We can all imagine scenarios of a double-dip recession or grinding deflation in which we may have to start expanding our balance sheet partly by buying more Treasuries or MBS.  An advantage of ceasing redemptions now is that it signals our openness to moving in this direction, while at the same time indicating that we need not take this step if the outlook improves. On other aspects of alternative B, I support the inclusion of the bracketed language in paragraph two.  This statement is consistent with the June FOMC forecasts, and it’s a powerful signal about our unwillingness to tolerate continued downward-drifting inflation. I thought quite a bit about the proposed language in the original version of B1, paragraph 3, and in alternative B relating to “extended period.”  Given the time pressures at this meeting, I think it’s wise to table action on this matter for today.  Market participants don’t expect such a change, and they’ve already pushed out their expectations considerably concerning the length of time that we will hold the funds rate target near zero, as the outlook has been weakened.  It might be desirable to reinforce and possibly strengthen these market expectations.  My concern, though, is that the language we would logically use in such a statement to condition the length of “extended period” and to describe the triggers for ending it depends importantly on the particular monetary policy strategy and forecast this Committee uses.  The differences in timing and triggers across various policy rules, for example, and forecasts turn out to be very large.  These are matters on which the Committee has not yet found consensus, and I think we need to analyzethis further.  There are other options available to strengthen our forward-looking language, and I very much appreciated the thoughtful staff memos describing possible options to enhance forward-looking guidance.  I think these deserve serious consideration going forward.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear disagreement or contention. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing their support for alternative B and providing their reasoning and considerations for various aspects of the decision.


Passage number 149.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me reiterate the thanks to the staff.  I think we all appreciated that input.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing gratitude and agreement with the input received from the staff. The mention of President Lacker does not introduce any disagreement either.


Passage number 150.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t think economic growth prospects have deteriorated enough to warrant a change in our plans.  We have always thought this recovery would be slow by historical standards, and the data have borne that out.  The corollary of a slow recovery is that unanticipated fluctuations around a low mean growth rate will at times generate fairly sluggish numbers.  When those fluctuations are large enough, a policy response is appropriate, but I don’t think we’ve crossed that threshold yet.  The Tealbook has been pegging 2010 economic growth at 3 percent for quite a while.  Relative to that expectation, 2½ percent growth in the second half isn’t bad enough in my mind to suggest we need a change in course.  So I came into this meeting favoring B2 over B1, which, I guess, means that I oppose the current version of B, and I favor what I’ll call “B classic.”  [Laughter]  That is, alternative B without paragraph 4. I talked a little bit earlier about why I think the fall in interest rates represents an easing in policy in a very real sense.  The theory of the case has always been that our quantitative easing program—I think we’re calling it that now—is affecting the economy by removing duration from the market.  The fall in interest rates is a rise in the price of duration.  So what are we going to do.  We’re going to make duration scarcer.  I suggest that, by keeping our policy stance unchanged, we’d accommodate the increase in the demand for duration by selling assets rather than removing them.Another way to think about this is to consider the question:  What would it look like if we kept quantitative easing in place for too long.  To answer this, I’ll reference the discussions we had last fall, when some of us were saying that we should cap the asset-purchase program, because it was in danger of going too far, that is, of buying too many assets.  Well, what would it look like if we went too far.  Banks would want to shed reserves at existing interest rates.  They’d be unable to do so, because we’d be forcing them to hold these reserves.  Some fall in interest rates would be required to induce them to hold those reserves voluntarily. Last year, the response was, “Well, if this were happening, we’d see an increase in bank lending.”  Well, we’re not seeing an increase in bank lending.  We’re seeing banks buy assets—somebody is selling them to them—and somebody is lending money by buying corporate debt.  So we’re seeing lending going up.  We’re seeing private sector borrowing going up.  That suggests to me that we could be seeing something like the effects of quantitative easing in place for longer than we intend. I’ll give you an anecdote.  I talked about shifting demand curves for money.  One institution in my District was scolded for quarter-end window dressing; that is, within the quarter, they did $70 billion worth of arbitrage between the agency RP market and interest on reserves.  Now that this is shut down, their holdings of reserve balances have effectively been reduced by $70 billion –for some reason having to do with SEC enforcement.  Picture four years ago, with a $70 billion increase in excess reserves sloshing around in the system, and ask yourself what that would do. That’s just one example.  Now, there may have been other offsetting increases in the demand for reserves somewhere, but I sort of suspect not.  That’s the kind of thing that we have to be aware of as we proceed.  Some dramatic pullback of banks from willingness to hold all thereserves we have out there at existing interest rates is going to shift the demand curve for money, that is, make policy more stimulative, and it could take us off course. Let me mention one final thing, and that’s the pace of sales of assets when we exit.  We discussed that earlier this year.  There was a great hesitance to consider a pace of sales greater than a certain amount.  If we’re still going to be unwilling to sell assets at greater than some certain pace because of the fear of disrupting the market, then we’re taking an action here that could affect us for five, six, seven years.  All the way out, it’s going to increase the path of reserves.  That makes me really hesitant to take a step like this.  So, as I said, I favor B classic, that is, alternative B without a paragraph 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and preferences, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 151.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just for clarity, we’re talking about keeping the current level of reserves constant, not adding to the current level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing clarification about the topic being discussed, specifically about keeping the current level of reserves constant without any addition.


Passage number 152.
 MR. LACKER.  I know, but the path of reserves is higher all the way out compared with the case in which there is a constraint on the maximum pace of sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is making a statement regarding the path of reserves in a specific scenario. There is no mention of disagreement or contention in this particular sentence.


Passage number 153.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 154.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply expresses gratitude to President Plosser.


Passage number 155.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 156.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards President Bullard.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 157.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I just want to say that we do have a policy tool—one that has theoretical support, and one that we’re all talking about—and that tool is shifts in the promise to stay low for longer.  We can promise to stay low for a year or for 18 months or for two years, and, at least in the theoretical world, that’s supposed to work just fine as a policy tool. My view is that we should not continue to react to negative shocks solely by promising to delay the date of policy rate normalization.  My argument is that such a policy, as useful as it might be, also has some severe drawbacks, which I outlined in my paper.  I advocate augmenting the near-zero rate policy with an enhanced quantitative easing policy, and I see alternative B as away to signal our intentions to defend our implicit inflation target on the low side and to avoid getting too close to a Japanese-type outcome here in the U.S.  I think we need to send that signal at this juncture.  We may not need to do more—I actually think the most likely outcome is that this turns out to be a rough patch in the recovery and that we do get better levels of economic activity going forward.  But that remains to be seen. I support paragraph 4 with the longer-term Treasuries provision.  I think going with the MBS reinvestments would not be very effective at this point.  Buying longer-dated Treasuries is likely to keep inflation and inflation expectations closer to target, even if the Committee is unlucky enough to face a new round of negative shocks.  Also, a decision to go with Treasuries moves us closer to our longer-run goal of having a Treasuries-only portfolio.  I think paragraph 4 indicates that we are willing to use balance sheet policy in a more state-contingent way, something that I have advocated repeatedly at these meetings.  Also, if the recovery proceeds at a stronger pace than we currently anticipate, I think the reinvestment policy can simply be changed back to one that allows runoff or even outright asset sales, should inflation and inflation expectations pick up appreciably. In paragraph 2, regarding the clause “at levels lower than are desirable in the long run,” I appreciate Governor Kohn’s explanation, but I actually read this a little differently.  I would not include this.  I think our action today has the potential, I hope, to move inflation and inflation expectations closer to target.  This wording sort of suggests that our policy won’t be effective in doing that, so it’s a little counterproductive, possibly.  But maybe I’m reading too much into it.  I don’t have really strong feelings on this. Let me make one last point, and then I’ll finish.  Let me stress that I do not advocate a shock-and-awe policy, that is, a large purchase of Treasury securities all at once.  That’s the kindof thing that you should only do in a crisis environment, because a large purchase strategy is very risky—it can fall flat and end up damaging our credibility.  My view is that the crisis atmosphere for that type of move has passed.  Instead, I would advocate adopting a firm and determined asset purchase response, commensurate with risk levels as we judge them around the table, and then we can adjust our policy as appropriate going forward, both on the positive and the negative side.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in this passage. The speaker supports alternative B, which includes an enhanced quantitative easing policy, while also criticizing the use of only promising to delay the date of policy rate normalization in response to negative shocks. The speaker also supports buying longer-dated Treasuries instead of MBS reinvestments, and disagrees with including a clause in paragraph 2 that suggests the policy won't be effective in moving inflation and inflation expectations closer to target.


Passage number 158.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple expression of gratitude from President Kocherlakota. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 159.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B without paragraph 4.  I’m opposed to paragraph 4 of alternative B, because it recommends additional purchases of Treasuries.  Why do people want to do these extra purchases.  I think there are two reasons.  One is that they’re hoping to combat deflation or disinflation by doing this, and I don’t think that this will be effective.  I think the situation we’re in right now with our monetary base is akin to something like the following.  We’ve got a child and some cake.  I think everyone around the table would be happy if the child ate one slice of cake, maybe even two slices of cake.  But those of us who are worried about inflation are worried about the child eating a whole cake, and, actually, there are a dozen cakes in front of this child.  This is the situation with reserves right now.  We’re talking about adding a 13th cake.  It’s not going to add much.  I’m not worried about extra inflation risks from this 13th cake, but, at the same time I don’t think it’s going to have much effect on disinflation.  The only thing I will say about this is that it’s moving in the wrong direction.  The right direction in terms of controlling inflation risk, making sure that, as President Lacker was saying, we’re able to follow the right kinds of policies to ensure that we don’t have undue amounts of inflation, is to shrink the balance sheet.The other reason I think people are interested in doing this is that they hope it’s a way to stimulate the economy.  We are in a very poor situation in terms of the real economy—9½ percent unemployment and very high persistence in that rate.  This is not a good situation.  Unfortunately, while I agree that our purchase of nearly $2 trillion of agency securities and Treasury debt drove down the term premium and served to stimulate the economy in late 2008 and early 2009, I don’t think that further purchases now would be able to drive down the term premium.  We were able to influence the term premium in that period because liquidity problems in the underlying markets made cross-market arbitrages difficult.  Markets are not illiquid in 2010, so our ability to influence the term premium is going to be slight or nonexistent during this period. I’ll give you one teeny piece of evidence along these lines from the very recent past.  As the Board staff’s work acknowledges very clearly, the evidence we do have is largely based on the earlier period, when markets were impaired.  On August 2, 2010, the difference between the 10-year yield and the 2-year yield was 243 basis points.  On August 3, 2010, The Wall Street Journal online had an article on predictions about what we were going to do, and it essentially predicted that we might well engage in these kinds of purchases.  On August 3, the difference between the 10-year yield and two-year yield fell from 243 to 241—two basis points.  The next day it went back up to 242 basis points.  So that release of information, in itself, which was a surprise to me—I can’t say how much of a surprise it was to others—did not seem to have much of an effect on markets. I think there’s useful analogy to be drawn.  I’d say we all agree that we cannot stimulate the economy effectively in 2010 by restarting the TAF or the CPFF.  Those programs worked by improving impaired market function in 2008 and 2009, and those markets are not impaired in2010.  It’s for exactly the same reasons that we should not be thinking we can stimulate effectively now by buying more Treasuries.  Governor Kohn raised a great point about expectational effects, and I do agree that we should be able to have a stimulative impact by influencing people’s forecasts of future short rates.  But I would much prefer to do that through language as opposed to actual purchases of Treasuries. What I hear around the table is a great deal of unhappiness with the state of the American economy, and I share that absolutely.  But I think what we should be resisting is the view that the Federal Reserve is the right vehicle to fight this situation.  We’re not.  If this is going to be fought, it’s going to have to be done by somebody else—we’re not the ones who have those choices to make.  But there are tools available.  There’s work going on at the Minneapolis Fed about how we can mimic negative nominal interest rates through cutting consumption taxes that would stimulate consumption demand—that would be one way to proceed.  But that’s not our job.  The right way to try to get around the fact that we’re at the zero lower bound is through the use of other policy tools, not through monetary policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker is opposed to paragraph 4 of alternative B, which recommends additional purchases of Treasuries, and provides reasons why he believes this will not be effective in combating deflation or stimulating the economy. The speaker also argues that the Federal Reserve is not the right vehicle to fight the poor state of the economy and suggests that other policy tools should be used instead.


Passage number 160.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 161.
 MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I obviously would prefer something closer to option C.  I don’t see it on the table, so I won’t wordsmith it.  I would just say that the economy is improving—we keep saying that.  I believe that if we allow ourselves to think far enough ahead, we can follow my proposal and explain to the public that we’re leaving policy highly accommodative but away from zero; that is, it would be 1 percent over a period, then a pause while we see how the economy is doing, and so on.  I think we can do it without shocking the economy or the public.  To ease policy in an improving economy, as we are proposing here, is, I think, unwise.And I do not support rolling over principal payments into Treasuries or anything else.  We have an opportunity to allow our extraordinary easing policy from an earlier period to decline gradually on its own, without major disruptions to the market, and we’re passing that opportunity up with the view that we’re taking out an insurance policy.  But I think of it more as planting the seeds of a briar patch that we will have to deal with not a year from now, but three or four years from now, as we have in the past.  So I very much oppose this policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Hoenig, expresses his preference for an option that is not on the table and disagrees with the proposed policy of easing in an improving economy. He opposes rolling over principal payments and argues that the current policy is planting the seeds of future problems.


Passage number 162.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only includes a thank you message and the mention of President Fisher without any conflicting or contradictory statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 163.
 MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, in thinking of all the things I’ve heard around this table today—in addition to what I call “good news for Lutherans,” which is the economic growth that you’re experiencing here in the D.C. area and the low unemployment rate in Minnesota—let me just mention two that are of concern to me. One is the constant reference to the Japanese deflationary trap.  For what it’s worth, I have some familiarity with Japan, as I co-chaired on behalf of Prime Minister Hashimoto and President Clinton what was called the “U.S.–Japan Enhanced Initiative on Competition and Deregulation.”  To be sure, there were monetary factors involved in the deflation trap, but there were also gross fiscal errors made by the Japanese government.  One was raising the sales tax in 1997, and another was the inability to reform the banking system, because of what is known as “amakudari,” which means basically that the Bank of Japan and Ministry of Finance officials went back to the banks and influenced the authorities not to bring about the kind of reforms that we just brought about.  I think the cumulative effect of those fiscal initiatives, as well as the monetary initiatives, was a consumer shift to perpetual thrift.  So one point I want to raise a cautionary flag about is that we should be careful that we don’t constantly refer to the United States falling into the Japanese deflationary trap.  Our conditions are totally different.  Yet, to besure, none of us do want to have deflation.  And, to be sure, all of us want to see higher employment and lesser unemployment, more jobs for the American people.  That’s part of our mandate. The other thing is that I heard the following statements made around the table:  from Brian, “I don’t think capital markets are imposing a constraint”; from Larry, “financial conditions appear slightly more supportive of economic growth than in June”; from Governor Duke, “loan growth does not seem to be constrained by capital, liquidity, or funding,” or whatever the third descriptor was; from Governor Warsh, “credit has turned in the United States”; from President Lacker, “we have effectively eased.”  And then, of course, as was pointed out just now by President Kocherlakota—that we cannot depend on the Fed to solve all our problems.  He also gave us a good discourse on the Beveridge curve, and that it was unlikely that monetary policy might shift unemployment because there had been a shift in the Beveridge curve.  And then, lastly, from President Rosengren, “fiscal policy is a more effective tool.” I’m very worried, Mr. Chairman, that we are at risk of pushing on a string.  We have done an awful lot.  We have earned an enormous amount of credibility.  I think we have been quite effective in what we have done.  But I am worried about what signals we send when there is a question as to how much return we’re going to get from the kind of policy that’s advocated in alternative B.  Will it be only 20 basis points, or 10 basis points, and at a time when there is, as we have seen through the testimony of people around this table, a significant amount of access to liquidity.  Not only have rates come down in response to declines in the Treasury rates, but, very importantly, the spreads have narrowed, so that the issuance calendar for publicly traded corporations is quite high, and access to capital for those private companies is at least increasing, not decreasing.I’m not a voter this time around.  However, I would caution against adopting alternative B, with paragraph 4 in particular—I know this is a little bit cheeky, but  it will make Bill Gross happy—and I don’t think it is going to do much in terms of its effectiveness.  In fact, it might do damage to our credibility, particularly if it comes to be viewed as our accommodating the fiscal authorities, who have to get it right.  I think we’re relying far too much on the Federal Reserve in this case.  If anything, we’re taking the pressure off the fiscal authorities to get their stimulative policies and their regulatory regime correct.  Whether or not my reports from the private sector are sour grapes in terms of random refereeing, the fact is that we do have an inefficient fiscal response.  If we’re going to turn to the Japanese as an example, that’s one of the causes of the situation they found themselves in.  And I would be very hesitant to be an accomplice to not adopting the most efficient policy possible.  And I do not believe that the course of action recommended in alternative B is the most effective course of action.  But, having said that, I don’t have a vote, and I just wanted to offer those views.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Fisher, expresses his concern and disagreement with the idea of adopting alternative B, particularly paragraph 4. He argues that it may not be effective and could damage their credibility. He also criticizes the reliance on the Federal Reserve and the lack of efficient fiscal response.


Passage number 164.
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply contains a statement of gratitude towards President Lockhart.


Passage number 165.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I approached this policy round, I thought in terms of three goals—first, recognition of the situation that’s as accurate as possible; second, obviously, commitment to maintenance of a policy that is supportive of recovery; and, third, signaling readiness to act. I have to confess to some ambivalence.  I think some strong arguments pro and con have been made around the table related to alternative B with paragraph 4.  I support alternative B.  I think the weakening certainly does not justify C, and I’m concerned that alternative A—and there have been a couple of voices of support for alternative A—may be so preemptive that it could actually be alarming, and, therefore, be somewhat self-fulfilling.  I base my policyrecommendation on my previous forecasts.  The way the situation is playing out is not far from those forecasts—there may be some quarter-to-quarter intertemporal changes occurring, but it’s pretty close to what I expected. Coming into the meeting, I actually appreciated the choice between the status quo, B2, and B1, and I thought that was worthy of some discussion.  I think we have to strike a balance between overreacting to the recent slowdown and deceleration of recovery and appearing to be clueless and, as Governor Kohn said, “not on the job”—that is, failing to acknowledge that there’s some weakening going on and perhaps more downside risk. So, with a little apprehension, I can support the policy action in paragraph 4.  I have a preference for Treasuries.  I actually view it as a signaling device.  I think there’s a lot of uncertainty regarding its effect, and I’m not sure its effect is the point.  It’s a signaling device, and, to me, it signals that, as Governor Kohn said, we’re on the job, we’re capable of acting.  I also think it actually can, in some small ways, preserve the credibility that we developed during the 2008 and 2009 period.  It would be confidence-supporting in that sense, and, by taking some small action, we may avoid a situation where the public—recognizing, perhaps, some of the constraints on the fiscal side—thinks that we’re in an utterly helpless situation.  I don’t think we want that kind of atmosphere to develop.  So I view it as tactically preemptive.  I think we can reverse the policy if the circumstances change.  It’s the opposite of a tap on the brakes—it’s a slight tap, in my mind, on the pedal.  And I don’t think we should overreact to the suggestion of a small change in policy, so I support alternative B.  I think the “extended period” language remains appropriate, and I would hold that guidance. I have a couple of small comments on the language.  The first is more rhetorical, because I’m not pushing strongly, necessarily, for a change.  I noted this time that there was morecomment on household deleveraging than I had heard in previous meetings. I wonder if, to be absolutely accurate in describing our view of the situation in paragraph 1, the list of constraints to household spending might not include reference to the continuing balance sheet adjustment and household deleveraging.  I don’t think it’s necessarily recognized. The second is about business spending on equipment and software.  Comments have been made about some of the reasons that it’s rising, that is, replacement as opposed to growth, and about the caution that’s being applied to that kind of investment.  So I wonder if a qualifier isn’t required for the word “rising,” for example, “rising somewhat” or “rising in the context of emphasis on replacement,” or something that doesn’t make it sound as positive as it appears to be in this paragraph.  Those are my comments, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The speaker acknowledges that there have been arguments for and against alternative B with paragraph 4, but ultimately states support for alternative B. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


Passage number 166.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is expressing gratitude and showing respect to President Pianalto.


Passage number 167.
 MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  As I mentioned earlier, my outlook has not changed substantially over the intermeeting period.  I have been anticipating weak economic growth and very low inflation, and the risks to my outlook have been skewed to the downside.  Clearly, the economy remains far away from our long-term objectives, and I have strongly supported maintaining an accommodative monetary policy. Time is probably the most essential element for the recovery.  I think the Committee has recognized this with the use of our “extended period of time” language.  During the last several months, we have seen financial markets respond to the incoming data in ways that indicate more people are becoming more aware of just how extended an “extended period” might prove to be.  Over the last year, the Committee has generally expected the liftoff in the fed funds rate to come later than financial markets had anticipated.  But, during the past few months, financial markets have pushed out substantially their expectations of when the fed funds rate would lift off. Longer-term rates are exceptionally low, and, over time, if maintained, this should encourage an expansion of credit. Nonetheless, with my balance of risk to output and inflation to the downside, I would like to guard against any passive tightening in monetary conditions engendered by the runoff in MBS.  I realize that one feature of the policy environment is that prepayments accelerate somewhat as long-term interest rates come down, and that decline in long-term rates itself can be taken as evidence of some policy success.  However, maintaining the size of the SOMA portfolio at its current level seems to me to be an appropriate insurance measure.  So I think that we should take steps to keep the balance sheet from passively shrinking, and I think that we ought to do it in a way that results in a heavier concentration in Treasuries for all the reasons that the staff memo points out.  Maintaining the SOMA holdings at their current level seems to be a reasonable and prudent measure that could prevent a sputtering economy from stalling.  So I support the language in paragraph 4 of alternative B. I also support including the language Governor Kohn proposed in paragraph 2 for the reasons that he articulated. Because we have seen the financial markets extend their time frame for policy action from this Committee, I am persuaded that our statement language on the extended period of time is being interpreted sensibly.  As such, I don’t see a compelling reason to move away from that language.  I realize that market expectations could change in the future, and I do see some value in having the kind of language that was presented in paragraph 3 of B1 at some time in the future, if we need it to signal with more clarity than I think is necessary today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Pianalto, expresses her support for alternative B and discusses her outlook on the economy and the need for an accommodative monetary policy. She also discusses her views on maintaining the size of the SOMA portfolio and the language in the committee's statements. There is no clear disagreement or contention evident in the passage.


Passage number 168.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "Thank you. Governor Warsh" does not convey any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses gratitude towards Governor Warsh.


Passage number 169.
MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Governor Kohn knows the great affection that I have towards him, and he has done an excellent job today of making it harder for me to miss him when he’s gone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It shows appreciation and positive sentiment towards Governor Kohn.


Passage number 170.
  [Laughter] MR. KOHN.  I’ll keep trying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement expressing the speaker's determination to keep trying.


Passage number 171.
 MR. WARSH.  He rightly stated that the burden on the Federal Reserve is to “take actions because we can.”  I must say that I read into his comments the view, which is a reasonable one, that there is dignity in failure—“we should try because we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the view that the Federal Reserve should take actions because they have the ability to do so.


Passage number 172.
” MR. KOHN.  Better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a phrase, commonly attributed to Alfred Lord Tennyson, that expresses an opinion on the value of experiencing love, even if it results in loss or heartbreak.


Passage number 173.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states gratitude towards Governor Duke.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 174.
   MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am prepared to support alternative B, but I have real reservations about the actions in paragraph 4.  I don’t think I disagree at all with the comments about the outlook that have been expressed, but I think my reservation comes regarding estimates of how well the tools that are available to us will work and the threshold for using them.  I don’t think this action will alter either the outlook or the outcome in any appreciable way.  So my reservation is not a concern about keeping our powder dry, but a concern that our remaining ammunition is much less effective than we can claim when its use is only in the potential.   In thinking about this, I’m reminded of the old admonition that I heed too infrequently which is, “it is better to be silent and be thought stupid than to speak and remove all doubt.”  [Laughter]  Nevertheless, I’m going to continue.  We are currently in a “silent” position, which I think is stronger, in that we can be perceived as having tools whose effectiveness may be debatable but that, in any case, we’re reluctant to use, rather than the other position, namely, using the tools, finding that they’re not effective, and removing all doubt about that.In addition, I’m concerned about possible alternative interpretations of our actions.  The rationale section in the Tealbook said that this would lead investors to believe that policymakers are less focused on exit and more concerned about spurring growth.  I’d suggest a few interpretations that in my mind could be even more harmful to confidence than any positive result from the actions themselves.  First, the press has tied this decision to the unemployment results, so it could suggest a reaction function that creates an expectation for expanded purchases to support employment whenever the results are weak.  And I think the “to help support” language that begins paragraph 4 reinforces that.  Second, because this announcement is going to be released without any updated projections, it could suggest a concern about the future that’s even direr than our projections indicate and fuel suspicions that we now anticipate a double dip.  And, finally, as I said, if the tools that we have do turn out to be pretty weak, it will prove them to be so and could undermine confidence in our ability to fight a more serious weakening in the outlook.  We could yet face conditions that will force us to start using the remaining tools in our arsenal, but, because I read this more as a commitment to purchase $400 billion in Treasury securities by the end of 2011, the threshold for making that decision is higher than the conditions in front of us.  All that being said, I am prepared to support it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. MS. Duke expresses real reservations about the actions described in paragraph 4 and provides reasons why she disagrees with them. She also mentions concerns about possible alternative interpretations of the actions.


Passage number 175.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply expresses gratitude to Governor Tarullo, suggesting a positive sentiment and lack of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 176.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can support alternative B for a lot of the reasons that Sandy and Kevin have already mentioned.  First, it’s important, to the maximum degree possible, that we emphasize through our communication strategy that alternative B can be understood not as a change in basic policy but instead as a recalibration of policy instruments to changes that have occurred in the world, one of which is the increasing runoff, which means that maintaining neutrality requires something different from what was required before.  Second,contrary to the projections of virtually everybody around the table early in the year, except maybe Kevin and me, the current economic situation is not where it was expected to be.  Under these circumstances, it does seem to me important that we not, in fact or in perception, be tightening.  Having said that, I think that Kevin identifies some important risks associated with the action, which is why I emphasize the communication strategy. I do have a couple of additional comments.  I was quite taken with Charlie Evans’s comments, and I think he makes some powerful arguments that need to be considered seriously.  In that regard, I’m a bit concerned that we’ve got yet another one-day meeting coming up, where we may not have the opportunity to examine at length some of the options that we may—and I underscore “may”—need to be considering over the coming several meetings.  I know I’m putting words in Charlie’s mouth, so he has perfect right to say I misunderstood him, but what I heard him saying was that we have an obligation to search for tools that will achieve both parts of the dual mandate.  Now, when both parts of the dual mandate are not being achieved in the same direction, or for the same set of reasons, then the duty upon us is even greater to look for mechanisms, tools, and policy actions that will get us moving in the right direction on both parts of the dual mandate. I have spared everybody around this table a disquisition on the legal implications of the dual mandate, which are, after all, included in Title 12 of the United States Code.  But the time may be coming for that.  I don’t think it is adequate to say that we can’t think of anything right now, so that’s not something monetary policy can do.  It is an abdication of responsibility, in my view, and it is inconsistent with the law to take that position. I hope that we can develop some of the options that have been put on the table through the useful memos that Bill and Brian and their staffs have produced.  I hope that we can considersome variants on that, perhaps along the lines of things that Narayana and Jim have been saying for a while.  For example, one possibility is doing more Treasury purchases over a given period of time but accompanying that with more sales of MBS, so we’d have a net increase in the balance sheet, but we’d actually be running down the holdings of MBS.  I’m not proposing that, but there are a lot of variants that haven’t yet been taken up, whose costs and benefits we haven’t yet discussed, and I really do think it’s important for us to do that. With respect to the language itself, I have no problem with paragraph 1.  I agree with Kevin that keeping paragraph 3 the way it is makes a lot of sense.  I’d be more comfortable if paragraph 4 were phrased slightly differently, but I hope that we can trust to the Chairman’s communication to fill some of that in, and the minutes will surely do so as well.  I personally am somewhat attracted to the bracketed language in paragraph 2 “at levels lower than are desirable over the long run,” because it removes any possibility of an inference that the last clause of the current paragraph 2 is to be taken as a good thing.  But I don’t feel strongly about it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of support for alternative B, with some additional comments and suggestions for consideration.


Passage number 177.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement as it only includes polite expressions of gratitude and a formal designation.


Passage number 178.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I favor option B.  I believe the case for reinvesting the agency debt and MBS is very compelling.  After all, if we don’t reinvest, we’re basically in a perverse situation.  The weaker the economy and the lower long-term rates, the faster we allow our balance sheet to shrink as a result of the MBS prepayments, and that shrinkage of the balance sheet increases the duration we force on the private sector, limiting the scope for further declines in interest rates that would support economic activity.  I don’t see how that can be desirable in the current circumstances.  I think we fell into this regime by accident, by circumstance.  We see that there’s a flaw with the current regime.  This policyaction, in my mind, is fixing that flaw.  That flaw was sort of latent a few months ago, when the economy looked better and interest rates were higher.  But as the economy has weakened and as long-term rates have come down, the threat has gone from latent to something that’s real.  Our balance sheet will shrink quite rapidly over the next year or two at the current level of interest rates if we don’t do something to offset that. Now, regarding President Lacker’s point—namely, that market participants are moving out at the long end and bringing down long-term rates, so that’s quantitative easing being effective—I see that as a good thing, and I think the reinvestment amounts to not standing in the way of or inhibiting that.  I think we want to encourage that as long as the unemployment rate is as high as it is and as long as the inflation rate is low. Regarding Governor Warsh’s point, I think the messaging is really, really important.  I would much more favor a message that was on the side of saying that this is a small change to fix a flaw in our regime caused by the weaker the economy, the lower rates, etc., etc., rather than on the side of saying it’s a new big policy initiative, because I don’t really think things have changed that dramatically from the last meeting.  I do believe that it’s a big step to expand the balance sheet beyond where we are right now, so I think the messaging is really important.  I think we can do that in the minutes, and I think the Chairman can do that in his discussions with the press. In terms of what we should be reinvesting in, my view is it should be completely determined by what we think is going to be most efficient in terms of its effect on financial conditions; based on the Desk view, right now that’s reinvesting in the Treasuries, but, two months from now, that might be reinvesting into agency MBS.  So I’d want a decision to be based on the market as it evolves rather than a decision that’s made for all time.I’d also like to talk about how long we’re going to do this.  Is this program $400 billion or $600 billion.  I have no idea.  I think we’re making the decision at the time based on our outlook today, and our aim is that we don’t want to have a de facto tightening of monetary policy caused by weakness in the economy as our balance sheet shrinks.  One meeting from now or two meetings from now or three meetings from now, we might decide that things had improved enough that we’re going to allow the agency MBS to run off again.  I don’t think we should in any way lock ourselves in to how long this is going to last.  We should do it based on the outlook and how things evolve going forward. Regarding the language, in paragraph 2 I like Don’s final gift to the Committee, “at levels lower than are desirable over the long run” for exactly the same reason that Governor Tarullo gave.  It was always a little ambiguous before—“Inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.”  Well, “subdued inflation” is good as long as “subdued” isn’t below the levels that you view as consistent with price stability.  I think adding “at levels lower than are desirable over the long run” makes it very clear that we think inflation right now is too low, and I think that’s a useful point to add to the statement.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 179.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I will try to pull myself together here.  Thank you for the comments.  Despite the reservations and concerns I’ve heard around the table, I believe that the right step is alternative B, to reinvest in Treasuries.  Let me try to explain why. First of all, as I said, I don’t think we’re looking at monthly noise.  I think there has been a weakening in the outlook, which might be acceptable, if everything were linear in the world, but my own belief is that there are nonlinearities, including the nonlinearity of policy, and I think that raises the risk of a truly unacceptable outcome, one that would have long-term consequencesfor our labor force and for our economy.  I think that it’s quite a serious concern and that we need to pay attention to it. Second, and this is what very much puzzles me about the discussion around the table, is that, even if you are a pure inflation targeter and don’t give a damn about unemployment, we are too tight.  All of our nominal variables are coming in below target—we are forecasting inflation that is too low.  Again, I don’t understand President Plosser’s concern about fine-tuning—I think that any inflation targeting central bank, given the forecast we have, would try to find a way to ease policy.  So that seems to me to be right from that perspective. For me, the difficulty has been rationalizing having both parts of our mandate falling short of the target on the same side.  So, again, I don’t understand that argument. Regarding the argument that President Bullard has raised, which is to try to be proactive and to try to indicate our strong commitment, I think that will be helpful for confidence and for expectations.  Let me add that I do believe that the effects of this policy will work through mechanisms over and above the 20 basis points—the estimate that keeps getting referred to.  I think there are other financial channels.  There are risk preference and term premium channels, potentially credit availability channels, confidence, expectations, and a variety of other things.  This action may not be very effective, but I suspect that it will have some effect—we’ll have to see. Some people argue that we shouldn’t do the reinvestment because it won’t be effective, and some seem to be arguing that we shouldn’t do it because it will be too effective.  So I honestly am a little puzzled on that.  It seems to me, as I said, that we are on the wrong side of our objectives, that we are to blame if we don’t make whatever effort we can.  Now, it may not work, but, if the economy is in near deflation six months from now, I would rather say that theFed did what it could to prevent it rather than saying the Fed stood around and let things happen.  So there are errors in both directions and concerns in both directions, but I think we ought to try to do what we can do even if it isn’t necessarily going to be fully effective or solve the problem. That ties to the other question about the Fed not being in some sense the optimal agency to solve the problem.  Clearly, we’d like to have better fiscal policy.  Clearly, we’d like to have better regulatory policy.  There are many things that we would like to see done better.  Sure, the Fed cannot solve the problem.  But it is, I think, incumbent upon us to do what we can do and, in particular, we are responsible for the inflation rate, and the inflation rate is evidently too low. In sum, I guess I’m still not persuaded by the arguments I’ve heard, although I recognize that this is not without its risks, and, in particular, how it would be interpreted.  I think Governor Warsh and President Fisher were correct that there were some expectational issues related to our earlier purchases of Treasuries.  I think there are some risks there.  On the other hand, to some extent we want to increase inflation expectations, so it’s a tricky act, I have to admit.  Therefore, having heard what people around the table said, again, my preference would be alternative B with Treasuries. There was a lot of discussion about what this signals.  I am becoming a Bullard acolyte in the following sense:  The next time we do anything, I don’t think we should go out and say, “Well, we’re going $400 billion of Treasuries.”  I think we ought to have a framework that says, “Here’s our objective.”  And then we say that we’re trying to achieve an inflation rate, or a price level target or a nominal GDP target or something, and that we are going to calibrate our purchases or sales in a way that tries to reach that target.  That would create some structure, and that would take away this perception that periodically we’re going to go out and do a shock-and- awe action.  Having said that, I think that we really need to see how this works and what benefitit has, if any.  So barring some major change in the outlook—and I do want us to think about our tools, I do want us to think about our framework—I don’t anticipate bringing another large step back to the Committee. On the language in the statement, President Lockhart made a couple of suggestions, although, President Lockhart, you didn’t really have specific language suggestions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the reservations and concerns raised by others around the table, particularly regarding the choice of alternative B to reinvest in Treasuries. The speaker also expresses confusion and disagreement with President Plosser's concerns about fine-tuning and the argument that the policy may be too effective. Overall, the passage shows disagreement and differing opinions among the participants in the discussion.


Passage number 180.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I just put them on the table more rhetorically because they’re fine-tuning, and I don’t think you need to follow up, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement is expressing a personal opinion and does not involve any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 181.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The second language issue that got a lot of attention was Governor Kohn’s phrase at the end of paragraph 2.  I have to admit that, given all that is happening, and given the concerns people have, I’m just a tad nervous about it, because it might signal more concern about deflation than we currently have.  But I did hear a number of supporters.  Governor, do you have any thoughts about that possibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It mentions a statement made by Governor Kohn and expresses some concern about it, but there is no indication of opposing viewpoints or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 182.
  MR. KOHN.  I would defer to your judgment, Mr. Chairman.  Given that we’re adopting paragraph 4, if you’re nervous about this phrase at the end of paragraph 2, I’d rather have you comfortable than have the phrase included.  You can resurrect the phrase in October, perhaps, when you have another round of forecasts.  I think it’s an important point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage showcases a disagreement between Mr. Kohn and the Chairman. Mr. Kohn expresses his preference to remove a phrase from paragraph 2, while the Chairman is implied to be hesitant about doing so.


Passage number 183.
 MR. BULLARD.  Let me just reiterate that I think it hints that we really think inflation is going to stay pretty low, but what we’re really hoping for is that this action will move inflation and inflation expectations somewhat higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker is reiterating their belief that inflation will stay low and expressing their hope that the action they are discussing will increase inflation and inflation expectations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 184.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So you’re in favor of not doing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opposition to an unspecified action, indicating that the other person may have a different viewpoint or preference.


Passage number 185.
 MR. BULLARD.  You might create more worries about deflation than we really think is warranted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating that there might be concerns about deflation that are not necessarily justified.


Passage number 186.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s fine.  I guess that’s my concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges acceptance and expresses their concern.


Passage number 187.
MR. BULLARD.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 188.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  If Governor Kohn will withdraw his suggestion, we’ll drop that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a condition and a consequence without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 189.
 MR. KOHN.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response is a simple agreement, with the word "sure" indicating that the speaker agrees with whatever was said previously.


Passage number 190.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Otherwise, the only other change for Michelle’s benefit is to make sure to take out the “alternatively” phrase in paragraph 4.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention in the passage. The statement simply suggests making a specific change for Michelle's benefit.


Passage number 191.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It only includes the name or title of someone.


Passage number 192.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Sorry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Please provide the passage you would like me to analyze.


Passage number 193.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m sorry at this late a date to make one more suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is an apology for making a suggestion late, indicating no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 194.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 195.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It seemed that there was some notion that it would be better to think about this action as maintaining our holdings as opposed to suggesting a pattern of new purchases.  Well, one way to reflect that in the statement would be to drop the opening clause of paragraph 4, “To help support the economic recovery in the context of price stability,” and instead start with “The Committee will maintain the Federal Reserve’s holdings of securities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is simply suggesting a potential revision to the statement's wording to better reflect the intention of maintaining holdings rather than indicating new purchases.


Passage number 196.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we need some motivation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express disagreement or contention. It is a personal opinion or suggestion that indicates a desire for motivation.


Passage number 197.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  The preceding three paragraphs certainly provide a lot of motivation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the preceding three paragraphs provide a lot of motivation.


Passage number 198.
 MR. LACKER.  How about “To maintain,” as the motivation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, is suggesting the phrase "To maintain" as a possible motivation without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 199.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The speaker explicitly mentions "Yes," indicating there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 200.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don’t know.  I think it’s not a very powerful phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's lack of knowledge and opinion about the phrase being discussed.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How about “To maintain its current level of monetary policy accommodation, the Committee will hold the Federal Reserve”—no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement provides information about the Committee's intention to maintain the current level of monetary policy accommodation.


Passage number 202.
  “The Committee will”— MR. TARULLO.  “To maintain the current level of monetary policy accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It only provides a statement about the Committee's intention to maintain the current level of monetary policy accommodation.


Passage number 203.
” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  To keep.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is neutral and does not present conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 204.
 MR. WARSH.  To keep constant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Only one person, Mr. Warsh, is mentioned, and no conflicting views or opinions are presented.


Passage number 205.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  To keep constant the Federal Reserve’s level of monetary policy accommodation.  Is that better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement, rather than a debate or disagreement. It is expressing the need to maintain the Federal Reserve's level of monetary policy accommodation.


Passage number 206.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think that’s risky.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion on a matter, but it does not indicate any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 207.
 MR. FISHER.  Be careful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply advising someone to be cautious.


Passage number 208.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  It’s keeping constant the holdings.  I don’t know what it’s doing to the accommodation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about the impact of something on accommodation.


Passage number 209.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The accommodation could change depending on a whole bunch of other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is stating a possibility or potential outcome rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 210.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How about something a little bit more balanced between recovery and price stability.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. It suggests finding a middle ground between recovery and price stability.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 211.
 MR. WARSH.  Mr. Chairman, if you leave the first phrase as it is, and then, instead of “maintain,” because we’re trying to strengthen that a little bit, we might say “The Committee will keep constant the Federal Reserve’s holdings.”  I know that means “maintain,” but “keep constant” sounds a little bit more affirmative to me.  It sounds a little more like this is a discrete act about making sure we deal with this a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Warsh suggests using the phrase "keep constant" instead of "maintain" in order to make the action sound more affirmative. This implies that there is a difference of opinion or preference regarding the language used.


Passage number 212.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s okay, but you would drop the initial phrase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement that indicates agreement with a previous statement or idea. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 213.
 MR. WARSH.  I don’t know how you do that.  Again, I would say this is just a nuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a lack of knowledge or understanding on the part of Mr. Warsh. The statement "this is just a nuance" suggests that Mr. Warsh sees the situation as a minor detail or intricacy, but it does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 214.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "Okay" does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 215.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The first phrase is pretty neutral—of course we’re trying to help support the economic recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the obvious fact that the speaker's intention is to help support the economic recovery.


Passage number 216.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "all right" does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it is simply an expression used to show agreement or understanding.


Passage number 217.
 MR. FISHER.  Well, that’s what it says in the other part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating what is written in another part.


Passage number 218.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “To help support the economic recovery in a context of price stability, the Committee will keep constant the Federal Reserve’s holdings of securities”.  Is that okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply states that the Committee will maintain the Federal Reserve's holdings of securities to aid in supporting economic recovery and ensuring price stability.


Passage number 219.
 MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Fine with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kocherlakota is expressing agreement or approval.


Passage number 220.
 MR. FISHER.  By reinvesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Fisher.


Passage number 221.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did you get that Michelle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question.


Passage number 222.
 MS. SMITH.  Got it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement indicating understanding or agreement with the previous speaker.


Passage number 223.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other suggestions.  [No response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It is a neutral statement asking for additional suggestions.


Passage number 224.
] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right, recognizing that I don’t have the full support of the Committee, I’m nevertheless going to propose alternative B with the emendations already made.  Would you call the roll, please, Matt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that they may not have full support but still proceeds to propose an alternative with already made changes. The request to call the roll does not indicate disagreement either.


Passage number 225.
 MR. LUECKE.  Yes.  This vote will cover alternative B as on page 3 of this handout with the changes suggested, that is, without the last phrase in paragraph 2 and with the addition of the words “keep constant” instead of “maintain” in paragraph 4, as well the directive on page 7 of the same handout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the vote will cover alternative B with certain changes suggested, without any argument or disagreement being expressed.


