
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In my intervention here, I’ll talk about three things:
first, what has happened during the intermeeting period and how I interpret it;
March 16, 200464 of 107second, why it has happened or what the hypotheses are;
and third, the implications in this room for policy.
First, as all of you know, what has happened is that the data have been distinctly mixed, as I think David said, but somewhat on the downside or at least below expectations.
Three or four things have caught my attention.
Obviously, the labor market numbers have been somewhat weaker than we anticipated.
Importantly, though, demand for new vehicles has been a little sluggish.
Dealer inventories seem to be rising a bit.
I’m going to come back to talk about that a touch.
And housing activity, while still strong, is also somewhat below expectations.
I think someone mentioned that there are those in the private sector who put together something called a “surprise” index.
They’ve observed that, during the second half of 2003, the surprise index tended to be positive, which is to say that the data came in higher than expectations.
Since December of last year the data, generally speaking, have come in below expectations.
<START>So I think there is some warning sign there that either expectations are far out of the line or the economy, while still strong, is not quite as strong as people had thought.<END>
The staff has taken this on board by marking down their forecast.
The output gap is probably up, and the employment gap is up.
The main focus there, obviously, has been the question of job creation, which has been quite sluggish.
So why is it that, years after the formal end of the recession, we still seem to be dealing with what appears to be yet another jobless recovery?
That leads me to topic 2, which is why it has happened.
There are a number of theories and hypotheses, and I’d like to go through them quickly.
One is that the rapid increase in benefit costs has discouraged businesses from bringing on new workers.
I tend not to put a lot of weight on that since I think, by and large, benefit costs are relatively small compared with the overall costs of hiring workers.
But there probably are March 16, 200465 of 107some industries where that factor is important.
The other hypotheses that I’d like to spend a little more time on have already come up, with one exception.
One is that structural productivity growth may be higher than we had thought before.
I tend to put a little more weight on that argument.
Having looked at some other periods of increases in productivity growth, I think we’re in the middle of one of the strongest of those periods compared with the others.
Historically they have run up to twenty years or so, and this one started about nine years ago, so I suspect there may be more to come here.
One of the things we may be seeing with regard to the story on structural productivity is that it’s a little stronger than we had originally thought.
That said, obviously it will have to come off a bit for cyclical reasons in order for job creation to pick up.
So I lay that out as one option.
Tony mentioned another option, which is a bit of a mismatch in skills, and that again may lead to slower job creation.
But the third possibility
—one that hasn’t been talked about much
—is this so-called business gloom.
I find that gloom frustratingly psychologically driven, but I think there’s an analytical underpinning to it that we at least ought to take a moment to focus on.
I have a concern that one of the reasons businesses are somewhat gloomy is that they are aware that much of the increased consumption they’ve seen has been driven by stimulus and that stimulus is undoubtedly likely to wane during the course of the year.
That is certainly the case for fiscal stimulus, though it’s hard to say with respect to monetary policy at this stage.
But since the expectation is for no further decreases in interest rates, I think most people would say that the stimulus from monetary policy also will start to wane a bit.
<START>In the context of that uncertainty, I think businesses are concerned about how sustainable the growth in consumption is going to be.<END>
They have been holding down hiring and also labor income.
No one has focused on it yet, but while real labor income increased in the fourth quarter of last year by about 2 percent over the March 16, 200466 of 107previous period, that was the slowest quarterly rise in labor compensation last year.
The rate of increase has been slowing gradually during the course of 2003, and that, I think, is a bit of a problem.
<START>I believe that has played into the relatively weaker, though still strong, demand for consumer durables<END>
—both autos and housing
—that I noted earlier.
Auto inventories are starting to build, and housing activity, while still strong, is slowing somewhat.
Another point I’d make here is that the other factors that have been holding up consumption, including equity wealth and home prices, may start to soften over the forecast period.
So while consumption for households is still on a relatively strong footing, I don’t see it strengthening.
I think there’s a risk that it may weaken a bit because I suspect that all of the factors that have been supporting it are going to be weaker and not stronger going forward.
That said, it’s clearly the case that businesses continue to fix their balance sheets.
And we’ve seen an increase in capital investment, which I think is part of the productivity story.
So I don’t expect things to fall apart completely from the business side.
But I do believe there’s a bit more downside risk than perhaps others in the room feel there is, at least as I interpreted the comments I’ve heard.
Don introduced the concept of announcing how we’re lining up.
I guess I’m lining up with the Kohn–Broaddus view that there’s perhaps a little downside risk.
Now, let me go to the third topic
—the implications of all this for policy.
As I listened today, I heard two or three different themes mentioned that I’d like to discuss.
One is the issue of inflation and pricing pressure.
I heard a number of stories about bottlenecks, speed effects, and so forth.
It struck me that primarily what we’re hearing about are a few minor imbalances in supply and demand in a small number of industries that may not have the ability to change their output as quickly as others.
But I’m not sure, in the context of a widening output gap, that those problems are likely to feed into inflationary pressures that we really have to worry about.
I’m March 16, 200467 of 107not denying that pricing pressures may be picking up in some areas or that there are important markets where supply and demand imbalances may be leading to price increases.
But I’m not sure at this stage, in the context of a squishy
—that’s a technical term I sometimes use
—[laughter] labor market, that we’re likely to see a big pickup in inflation.
A second theme involves the question of whether or not we are at risk of overstaying our welcome at these very low interest rate levels.
Don obviously has done a superb job in going through the technical elements of that, which I will not in any way attempt to mirror.
I would associate myself with those comments because Don, after all, is a great former member of the staff and now a distinguished Governor.
But having said that, I would point out something that hasn’t come up yet
—that, in the staff’s most recent assessment, the real equilibrium interest rate has come down somewhat.
So while rates are at historical lows, monetary policy may not be as accommodative as we had thought.
As I noted, some imbalances may be building up with interest rates this low, so we shouldn’t be complacent about it.
But we should recognize that monetary policy may not be as accommodative as we thought.
The third theme relates to communication.
The point I’d make is that markets are expecting very few changes.
Given how fragile the markets are and given my view that perhaps there’s more downside than upside risk, I would again caution that we be very careful about making any significant changes in our statement.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bernanke.
MR.
BERNANKE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will align myself with the Kohn axis
— MR. KOHN.
As long as it’s not an axis of evil!
MR.
BERNANKE.
—which proposes that monetary policy patience is appropriate for current macroeconomic conditions.
<START>However, the issue has been raised by Vice Chairman March 16, 200468 of 107Geithner and others that our current policy stance may contribute to potential financial imbalances down the road.<END>
The history of using the monetary policy instrument rate for correcting financial imbalances is a very checkered one, to say the least.
So I think the question arises as to whether there is some other tool or instrument that we might use to approach the question of potential financial imbalances, and that’s what I’d like to talk about in my few minutes.
<START>Many of the questions and comments we receive as FOMC members have to do with perceived and actual risks to financial stability.<END>
Just to take a few examples, we have all on occasion been asked whether there’s a bubble in the market for residential housing;
<START>whether the narrowing of risk spreads on corporate bonds is justified by reduced default risk or is instead the result of investors reaching for yield;<END>
whether household and firm balance sheets will remain strong when interest rates rise;
what risks to the financial system are posed by the activities of the government-sponsored enterprises;
and how Basel II and other regulatory developments are likely to affect the structure and profitability of the domestic banking system.
There are, of course, many others.
Such questions are obviously important but are extremely difficult for each of us as individual FOMC members to respond to, and certainly not in detail.
One’s inclination is to answer by painting a benign picture so as not to cause unnecessary public concern.
On the other hand, financial conditions do change, and it’s our collective responsibility both to monitor those changes and to communicate truthfully to the public what we see.
The central banks of most industrialized countries have responded to this challenge by issuing regular reports known as financial stability reports, usually on a semiannual or quarterly basis.
Financial stability reports give central banks and related institutions a means to provide systematic and objective information about financial conditions over a range of sectors.
I asked March 16, 200469 of 107the staff to provide me with examples of such reports, and they quickly came up with copies of reports from thirteen different institutions.
For the record, here is the list of major institutions whose financial stability reports were provided to me by the staff:
The Bank for International Settlements, the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, and the Central Banks of Australia, Austria, Canada, United Kingdom, Finland, France, Germany, Norway, Spain, and Sweden.
All of these reports are on the Web, and I would be happy to provide URLs to anyone who is interested.
These reports are fascinating reading, and I commend them to you highly.
Indeed, most of them discuss the situation in the United States as well as in their own countries.
The material covered by the various reports is diverse, as you may imagine, as is the amount of analytical detail.
Typically, however, the reports begin with a general macroeconomic background and then present both data and qualitative information on the financial conditions of banks and other intermediaries, households, and firms.
Other sections of the reports discuss developments in security markets, international finance, and aspects of the financial infrastructure including regulatory developments.
Much of the material in these reports is in the public domain, but the reports draw the data together and provide an analytic overview.
In addition, boxes, research notes, and even full-length articles on special topics are included.
These reports allow central banks to present their assessments of financial conditions in a way that is both objective and responsive to the concerns and questions of the public.
<START>By calling attention to emerging financial problems, as well as by focusing policymakers’ attention on them, these reports may even help diffuse potential risks of financial instability.<END>
It seems to me that we might want to consider the possibility of providing the public with some type of regular financial stability report, perhaps as part of the Monetary Policy Report to March 16, 200470 of 107the Congress or in some other existing venue or perhaps as a stand-alone document.
I suspect that much of the material in the report would be easily obtainable as a byproduct of regular briefings in the Greenbook cycle.
<START>However, as I think under no circumstances should we impose an unfunded mandate on the staff, an assessment of the marginal cost of providing such reports should be a key part of any investigation of the possibility.<END>
If there is any interest in the group in pursuing this idea either now or at some future time, I would personally be more than happy to work with the staff to develop a more detailed proposal for the FOMC to consider.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to start by also acknowledging the range of forecasts the staff has provided.
I think it really will help us be more aware of how variable the outlook can be.
<START>As someone who spends a lot of time worrying about Basel II and advising bankers that they need to understand the variability of outcomes, I’m glad to see we’re walking our talk and putting it in our own FOMC materials.<END>
So, thank you.
Since the last meeting, as many of you have said, the data have been mixed.
On net, our forecast is a little weaker in terms of GDP and employment, with inflation about unchanged.
Overall the pace of the recovery, while still strong, is slowing.
In looking at this, I tried to focus a bit on the different sectors of the economy, and I ended up spending most of my time looking at the corporate sector.
As we’ve been noticing since the second half of last year, corporate profit levels are rising quickly, and corporate cash flow is very strong.
In fact, internally generated cash flow has been greater than capital expenditures for several quarters now.
Why is it then that businesses have increased their investment in equipment and software but still haven’t picked up their spending in some other areas?
I think that this gap in spending on different facets of their operations may come from a couple of interesting aspects of their March 16, 200471 of 107finances.
Throughout this whole period, corporations have been paying down equity on net.
Overall their balance sheets have strengthened in leverage, but they are generating more profits than they can use and, therefore, are retiring stock.
Another observation is that corporate net issuance of debt has been quite large until very recently.
In fact, the numbers in the last couple of quarters are amazing to me.
While a lot of debt has been issued, we’ve also seen, as Governor Olson noted, a paydown in bank loans and commercial paper.
So companies have been lengthening their liabilities
—taking advantage of the long period of low interest rates to help strengthen their financials.
In the last two months’ data, however, we’re seeing some changes.
We’re beginning to see for the first time in a while commercial loan growth in the banking system and commercial paper growth in the financial markets.
There has actually been a net expansion of debt so far this quarter.
Part of this may be due to the start of inventory building, but again, this has been very, very modest.
Corporations in effect are trying to maintain their high profit margins.
In fact, from the data in the Greenbook we can see that the Street expects double-digit earnings growth for corporations out into the next couple of years.
To the extent that companies have very lean, top-line revenue growth
—and particularly with a limited ability to raise prices to get that revenue growth
—they are struggling to maintain the bottom line.
One of the odd things in corporate finance is that the wider your profit margin, the harder you have to work on keeping costs down in order to generate earnings growth.
I think that’s in part what is happening now.
Firms are showing wide operating margins to the Street, the Street is extrapolating them into earnings growth, and these firms find that they have to scramble harder on the expense side.
<START>What really makes me uncomfortable is that, of the government sector, the household sector, and the business sector, we have net saving today in only one sector, and that’s March 16, 200472 of 107the corporate sector.<END>
<START>Until the corporate sector turns from a net saver to a net investor, I’m pessimistic about getting very rapid growth going forward.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much.
We’ll turn to Vincent Reinhart.
MR.
REINHART.3 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll be referring to the material that was just handed out.
This is another meeting about words, not action.
Your discussion about policy would seem likely to center on how to characterize the economic situation and risks to the outlook so as to retain your flexibility going forward.
As is evident in the current readings on federal funds futures plotted in the top left panel of the first exhibit, over the intermeeting period market participants moved closer to the staff’s assumption that the funds rate will hold at 1 percent for the remainder of the year.
Indeed, futures quotes are now consistent, as shown in the top right panel, with the onset of tightening being pushed back about three months
—to sometime near year-end.
This message is similar to what primary dealer respondents reported to the Domestic Desk in a survey last week (the middle left panel).
All twenty-three dealers anticipate that the stance of policy will remain unchanged at this meeting, and about one-third expect no action until 2005.
The dealers apparently do not anticipate any significant change in the language of your announcement, either.
It is also worth noting, as in the middle right panel, that market participants are fairly confident about the near-term path of short-term rates, at least as judged by the low level of volatility implied by options on Eurodollar futures.
This strongly held sense in markets that policy will be on hold for some time, along with the phrasing of the last announcement
—and the sense of quietude in many of the telegrams on the discount rate sent in by the boards of directors of the Reserve Banks in the past few days
—explains the lack of policy alternatives in the Bluebook, a document with the official title “Monetary Policy Alternatives.” To provide some perspective, the bars in the bottom panel parse the reaction in markets at your meetings over the past five years into that owing to the surprise on the policy rate and the residual, which presumably is due to the words of your statement.
The message to take from the chart is that words seem to figure importantly as to how markets react to your decision.
You might think that we’ve taken that principle to an extreme in the centerpiece of the most recent Bluebook, the table I’ve included on the next page.
The three columns of the table present variations on the wording of the announcement according to your view of the economic outlook.
Alternative B, given in the middle column and explained in more detail on the next page in exhibit 2, suggests only the most minor variation of the wording that would be required to square the statement with economic developments over the intermeeting period.
To be sure, readings on the economy of late have been disappointing, as is shown in the top left panel by the staff’s estimate of the cumulative effect on the two-year Treasury yield of surprises in key economic data releases, similar to indexes of market “surprises” that Governor 3 The materials used by Mr. Reinhart are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).
March 16, 200473 of 107Ferguson mentioned.
<START>But the market reaction to such disappointments, on net, also produced, as shown in the top right panel, a significant decline in investment-grade corporate yields that worked to offset a decline in share prices and an appreciation of the dollar.<END>
Thus, financial conditions, on net, probably do not differ much from those prevailing at the time of the January meeting.
<START>While encouraging the expectation of more-accommodative policy would support spending going forward, the lags in monetary policy might lead you to believe such effects would mostly be felt when the economy was in less need of support.<END>
As shown in the middle left panel, the period when any action taken today would have its maximum leverage on the economy is next year, when the staff anticipates that real GDP will be growing at 4 percent, following this year’s projected 5 percent expansion.
<START>With inflation tame, the Committee might feel that preserving current financial conditions would best foster the achievement of its objectives.<END>
Such an attitude is consistent with the assurance made in the last sentence of the January announcement, at the right, that the “Committee can be patient in removing its policy accommodation,” an assurance that market participants evidently took to heart in shaping their near-term expectations.
If that is the case, as in the bottom panel, you could stress that spending is continuing to expand at a significant pace.
I’d note that the description of the labor market in the second bullet is a little different from that in table 1 of the Bluebook.
The feedback I got since distributing the Bluebook made me think that the Committee would be more comfortable relating that “although job losses have slowed, new hiring has lagged.” Such an announcement would likely sink quickly among the waves of economic news and be associated with little market reaction.
Touching any other element of the January announcement would probably prompt a more sizable response, which is discussed first for an easier alternative in exhibit 3.
As is plotted in the top left panel, the simple summary of the Greenbook is that the staff now believes that the output gap will run about ½ percentage point deeper than previously expected.
That implies that about ¾ percent of the nation’s resources are expected to go unused at the end of 2005.
The fitful performance of the labor market, seen by the shallow bars in the middle left panel, pose a threat that outcomes could be even worse than that.
might If households begin to doubt their income prospects in the context of a poorly performing job market, spending may not fare as well as in the staff forecast.
The Committee might put some weight on an assessment of such adverse alternatives.
If the Committee’s characterization of the economy leads market participants to expect a tighter stance of policy and adverse outcomes for aggregate demand materialize
—such as a compression of household spending
—the cost in terms of lost output might well be higher than if the Committee seems to be inclined to ease and the economy snaps back quickly.
While investors do not expect action at this meeting, to be sure, as shown in the middle right panel, the distribution of possibilities for later this year implied by options on Eurodollar futures rates has a noticeable portion of its mass below 1 percent
—and more so than at the January meeting.
<START>If you thought that you likely would be keeping policy on the easy side longer than currently priced into financial markets, the Committee might want to March 16, 200474 of 107highlight, as in the bottom panel, the darker shades to recent economic releases.<END>
<START>In particular, it could point out, as in the second bullet, that “resource utilization generally appears likely to remain somewhat below levels consistent with the economy operating at its productive potential for some time” and could even tilt the balance between inflation and disinflation more clearly into the negative zone.<END>
While such a shift seems consistent with the last few weeks of data, the Committee might have more in mind the longer sweep of your policymaking history.
As shown at the top of your last exhibit, the real federal funds rate has been negative for the past ten quarters.
<START>Although a few staff models would suggest that the equilibrium short rate may well be negative<END>
—that is the lower bound of the blue region
—you may well find it disquieting to be in an area traveled rarely by central bankers who are favorably remembered.
[Laughter] Moreover, the estimate of the equilibrium real short rate derived from financial markets
—the thin line plotting the far-ahead real forward rate derived from quotes on indexed debt
—is now, and has been for a while, well above the actual real short rate.
<START>A sense that the staff has a more benign view of the threat of a pickup in inflation than other forecasters can be gotten from the latest Blue Chip survey of forecasters.<END>
<START>Twice a year, the folks in Arizona ask about expectations over the next five to ten years for several variables, including real GDP growth (plotted in the middle left panel) and CPI inflation (plotted in the middle right panel).<END>
As to the first panel, such far-ahead projections of output growth would seem to reveal private-sector economists’ notion of potential output growth.
If so, forecasts of potential output growth, with a median of just above 3 percent and spanning a confidence range from 2¾ to nearly 3½ percent, might be read as suggesting that pressures on resources could emerge more quickly than in the staff forecast.
<START>As to the second panel, and as President Parry noted, despite the good performance of inflation over the past few years, longer-term inflation expectations may remain above your longer-run target and, judging by the dispersion of the responses, may be less anchored than you’d like.<END>
Words to express such cautionary notes are given in the bottom panel, with the important changes contained in the paragraph assessing the risks to the outlook.
<START>In particular, if you think that you may be more likely to tighten than seems built into market prices, you might want, as in the fourth bullet, to tip the balance of inflation risk to neutral, from its current slight tilt toward disinflation, and qualify your “patience.” The latter could be done, as in the last bullet, by noting that “the Committee recognizes that the stance of monetary policy has been quite accommodative for some time.” That would likely be taken in markets as a marker that your patience was wearing thin.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Questions for Vincent?
I don’t have terribly much to say because as others have indicated, most has been said.
Just let me point out a few issues.
The rate of productivity growth is beginning to slow;
and over the last several months, the high-March 16, 200475 of 107frequency data show a marked deceleration from the elevated pace we saw earlier.
Thus far, however, that slowing has not been accompanied by much growth in employment.
So the issue is not whether the growth of productivity is falling;
it is already significantly lower.
<START>The interesting question relates to employment and whether its recent weakness reflects statistical noise or whether there’s something going on that we did not anticipate.<END>
I must add that an assortment of recent labor market data suggests that there was a significant pickup in February and March.
If that is indeed the case, it may be that the weakness in January and possibly in February was due to weather-related problems.
Committee members have increasingly discussed the possibility that the persistence of low market interest rates is fostering increased efforts to reach for higher yields in financial markets.
In my view, this is probably one of the most important issues confronting us because, clearly, the longer we maintain very low interest rates, if indeed there is significant reaching for better yields, the more the liability side of business balance sheets is going to be peppered with securities that may not be all that viable in a rising interest rate environment.
I’m not sure how we can evaluate that risk, but it is an obvious issue that should be concerning us.
And I think that, more than any other issue, is probably what is going to move us eventually toward tightening.
The difficulty that I have with tightening any time soon is that the economy may not yet have reached the point where we can confidently say that this recovery is fairly solid and robust going forward, even though the current data clearly are exhibiting considerable strength.
Ordinarily, I would have hoped to move toward adjusting our risk assessment of inflation to full balance in our press statement for this meeting.
The reason is that, if we are beginning to contemplate a tightening action, we should gradually de-emphasize our reference to patience.
A March 16, 200476 of 107move in that direction today would be consistent with continuing to adjust our statements meeting by meeting and fostering a momentum that might enable us at the appropriate time to tighten with a minimum effect on rates.
My own judgment is that it would be desirable when we move to have been so transparent about our intention to do so that financial markets will not respond all that much.
<START>This means that we have a very interesting but difficult job to do in trying to alter the general attitudes in financial markets.<END>
<START>Ideally, the day we move everybody should have a sense that our action is consistent with our previous statements about the outlook.<END>
This raises an interesting question about whether we ought to be moving toward a balanced risks statement on inflation or stay where we are.
Before the data began to turn somewhat negative, I was hopeful that we could definitely move in the direction of balance.
Now I’m a little concerned about doing so.
The reason is that, if we move today toward balanced inflation, we will essentially have created a sequence of doing something
—not tightening, but moving in that direction
—at every recent meeting.
That would then create a problem for us at our next meeting if we don’t want to move at that time.
So, I am marginally inclined not to change our inflation statement at this point.
But I must say it is a very close call.
The sole reason I would argue for not moving is to avoid creating momentum toward a policy action if, indeed, the economic expansion is slowing down.
So I come out in favor of leaving the inflation risks sentence unchanged.
<START>But if there is considerable interest in changing it, I would certainly want to consider the arguments for doing so.<END>
I do think we would be taking a risk that I don’t believe we need to take at this point.
In my view we are in a position where we can sit with patience for a considerable period!
[Laughter] I March 16, 200477 of 107recommend that we change the language in the first operative paragraph of our statement along the lines that Vincent has indicated but that we not change the balance of risks sentences.
What we have in the draft statement and what I’d like to put on the table for discussion is a first sentence in the operative paragraph that talks about underlying productivity as providing important ongoing support to the expansion.
That is not a change.
The second and third sentences incorporate some updating.
They read:
“The evidence accumulated over the intermeeting period indicates that output is continuing to expand at a solid pace.
Although job losses have slowed, new hiring has lagged.” The fourth sentence is unchanged and reads:
“Increases in core consumer prices are muted and expected to remain low.” That’s all I have to say at the moment.
Comments anybody?
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation for minimal change.
I would, however, move to balance on the inflation statement, and I’ll tell you why.
In my view, that is certainly an accurate reflection of the probability distribution.
<START>In fact, while I believe that the risks are close to balanced, my own judgment is that the probability of a ½ point surprise on the upside is a bit higher than that of a ½ point surprise on the downside.<END>
I also think, though, that the effect of that change in our statement is going to be totally dominated by the next employment report.
We saw how large the reaction was in the bond market to the February report.
If we have another weak jobs report
—or whichever way the number goes
—I think it’s going to overwhelm the effect of that minor change in our inflation assessment.
<START>In short, to me balance is an accurate reflection of the risks with regard to inflation, and I think the impact on the markets of our stating that is likely to be quite transitory.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
March 16, 200478 of 107MR. GRAMLICH.
I support your suggestion, Mr. Chairman.
I’m actually not altogether averse to going to balance on the inflation assessment.
But given that we’re coming off a period of downgrading our forecast of economic activity, I think I’d rather leave the statement alone for another month.
I’m not entirely averse to that minor change, however, if that’s all we do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I just want to clarify that I was not advocating that we move rates at this meeting or even at the next meeting.
But I do think there are developments that we ought to keep in the back of our minds as we consider the stance of policy.
Clearly, there continues to be an output gap.
And clearly, the incoming information suggests that economic activity has been less strong than it was earlier, though it continues to be strong.
And like everybody else, I don’t know why the pace of hiring has been as slow as it has been or whether it will get slower or speed up more quickly than we expect.
<START>I could go along with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, but I fall more into President Poole’s camp, and to some extent I agree with what Ned just said.<END>
I’d rather say that the probability of a rise in inflation is about equal to that of an unwelcome decline
—use the phrasing in alternative C
—because to me that more closely describes what the markets and others are seeing.
I think it also conveys a very slight edging up in our concern
—not a promise of a move the next time or the time after that or even the time after that
—about how long interest rates have been as low as they are.
So, on the margin, I would come down with President Poole on this one.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Mr. Chairman, I think it’s a close call on whether to balance our inflation concerns.
But after hearing your comments, with which I tend to agree completely, I March 16, 200479 of 107have a slight preference for staying where we are.
I think we’re in a situation today where the fewer changes in the operative paragraphs, the better.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, I certainly support your proposal.
I also think that it’s a very close call with regard to the balance on inflation.
<START>I must admit that recent developments in energy prices and the value of the dollar have led me to conclude that it probably would be better to talk in terms of balanced inflation risks.<END>
But for now, I could support your recommendation.
I think a change in our statement about the inflation risks is imminent;
it’s just a matter of exactly when it will be made.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, too, would have at least a mild preference for going to balance on the inflation risks.
The reason is that, as I listened to the discussion today, it struck me that we heard more anecdotes that seemed consistent with the possibility of building inflationary pressures.
So on that basis, as well as other factors, balance seems genuinely appropriate to me.
That’s where I would come out on the issue.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
<START>Mr. Chairman, I could support your recommendation, but I share the view of President Stern and others in that the discussion around the table today sounded, at least to my ear, as if we do see the inflation risks as balanced.<END>
In fact, I think we may have stayed with the phrase “unwelcome decline in inflation” too long.
Those words in the statement don’t seem to be reflective of the discussion we had this morning.
<START>So I would have a preference for a balanced risks statement on inflation.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kohn.
March 16, 200480 of 107MR. KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It will come as a surprise to no one that I have at least a mild preference for staying with the inflation risk toward the downside.
In my mind, we haven’t yet actually seen evidence
—we have a lot of anecdotes but no real evidence
—that inflation has even stabilized.
It is true that core PCE has moved up, though from extremely low levels.
But the core CPI continues to decelerate even on a three-month basis.
So I’d prefer to be more certain that actual inflation has stopped falling before I can be convinced that the outlook calls for moving to balance on the inflation risks.
My second point is that I think we all expect total inflation to decline relative to last year.
At least the FOMC members projected inflation of 1 to 1¼ percent this year, which is about ½ point less than it was in 2003.
<START>Now, a lot of that reflects a projected decline in energy prices, and perhaps it’s not unwelcome, but the total is expected to fall.<END>
<START>And finally, from my perspective, in a risk-management sense, any decline in inflation from current levels<END>
—if it’s more than a tenth or so
—is more unwelcome than any increase.
I think inflation is at such a low level that a decline has more welfare costs potentially over time than a rise.
<START>I don’t expect much to happen, but in my cost–benefit analysis, the downside risks get a little more weight than the upside risks.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have just a couple of points.
<START>First, I can support your recommendation, although I had a marginal preference for the wording “about equals.” I think “about equals” is shaded somewhat to the left of “appears almost equal.” That is to say, we have lots of words in the English language, and “about equals” is an epsilon to the right of “almost equals.” My guess is that we could come up with another word if we wanted to.<END>
March 16, 200481 of 107We could do this ad infinitum on a scale between “really equal” and “sort of equal.” [Laughter] So my preference on the wording is not a strong one.
Let me take this opportunity, however, to make a comment about the Bluebook.
One of the changes this time in the structure of the Bluebook was the elimination of the three options on changes in the funds rate.
I think that made absolute sense, given where we are, but I also believe it could cause us a problem down the road.
Other things being equal, I would prefer to have the three options presented, and we can dismiss them if we don’t find them relevant.
<START>I say that because I can see a world sometime in the future, perhaps with a different Chairman, where there’s a minority view for either increasing or decreasing rates and the opportunity to support such a move is made difficult if it’s not in the Bluebook.<END>
This is not to take away from the obvious decision we’re making this time.
But as a general matter, I think that it makes some sense to leave that structure in the Bluebook and spend the extra page on it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Mr. Chairman, I also can support your recommendation on the language, given your comment that, if we make a change, the markets are going to view that as the first step in a sequence and will expect changes at our subsequent meetings.
But I do have to admit that I also have a mild preference for going to a balance of risks on inflation.
Again, though, I can support your recommendation on the language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I’d prefer that we move to a balanced statement on the inflation risks because I think the risks in fact are relatively balanced now.
But I would not choose to disagree with the stronger preferences that might be held by others around this table March 16, 200482 of 107who believe that we really should not be making a change at this time.
That’s the more important decision at this point, I think.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>While I am sympathetic to the concerns that others have expressed, my view is that we shouldn’t make any changes, and I’d keep this slight shading in the balance of risks language as it is.<END>
I have that view for a couple of reasons.
One is that the market seems to be expecting very little change and I see no reason to surprise the market by doing something else at this stage.
Last time we made what to everyone in this room was a relatively small change
—moving to the “patience” language
—to give us some flexibility.
The market reacted quite strongly.
I’m not quite sure why we have to do anything like that this time around.
For reasons that you pointed out, Mr. Chairman, we’re not exactly starting on a new path just yet.
Second, I would find it hard to explain, in the context of data that have been weaker than expected, why the Committee would alter its view of the inflation picture in the opposite direction.
That seems inconsistent with some of the other language changes we want to make.
Third, a point I made earlier, I think one’s assessment depends to some degree on one’s view of where we’re starting in terms of the inflation dynamics.
<START>As I said, I’m sympathetic to the concerns expressed about rising inflation;<END>
we’ve heard a lot of stories and anecdotes about markets where prices seem to be picking up.
But I’m not sure we need to start signaling a greater worry about inflation at a point when our own forecast is for output growth to slow and for the output gap to widen.
Again, that seems internally inconsistent.
Therefore, I would leave the wording in the statement as it is, at least at this stage, and wait to see if the incoming data tell us how the forecast might change.
If we wait until May to make this language change, I don’t March 16, 200483 of 107believe people will think that we are behind the curve.
So, for those three reasons, I would support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
First, Mr. Chairman, let me associate myself with Tony’s comments about the Bluebook.
I also felt that it was very well thought out this time, but I would be comforted, Vincent, by your putting in all three options, which would indicate that we’re expected to have action alternatives most of the time going forward.
On policy, Mr. Chairman, I may be an outlier even in the Kohn camp.
In fact, after I finish my comments here, I might be kicked out of the Kohn camp!
I guess I have an extreme view, but let me just express it because I think it needs to be said.
As I look at the economic situation, it seems to me that the evidence we have on the labor market to date suggests that the slack in that market is not diminishing but increasing.
To me, that is fundamental.
I’ve been thinking about what is going to happen to the inflation rate and where the risks lie on inflation going forward.
In my view Don made a very good point that there is limited evidence, at best, that disinflation actually has ceased and some evidence that it may be continuing.
<START>I was also impressed by Roger’s comment in the economic discussion that, with the kinds of imbalances we seem to have, there is a likelihood of increases in some relative prices.<END>
<START>I don’t discount those price increases entirely, but in this environment the risk that they will generate a quick acceleration of inflation still seems to me to be less than it would be otherwise.<END>
So, I don’t think we’re giving enough weight to the disinflation risk.
After long reflection, I have concluded that we ought to give it greater weight, so I’m basically in an alternative A mode.
<START>I realize I’m defining the extreme of the range of views here, but I wouldn’t be satisfied even with the language in alternative A as far as the assessment of risks is concerned.<END>
<START>March 16, 200484 of 107The statement there is that the probability, though minor, of an unwelcome fall in inflation has diminished in recent months.<END>
I don’t know whether I agree with that.
I’m not at all sure that’s the case.
Therefore, my own preference
—and, again, I realize this is an extreme view
—is, first of all, to get the possibility of an easing in policy in the statement, or at least to recognize that possibility.
That has been off the table now for a long time, and I think it’s time to consider putting it back on.
So the way I would write the two sentences, if it were my call, would be something like this:
“The probability of an unwelcome further fall in inflation has risen modestly in recent weeks and once again appears to be somewhat greater than the risk of a rise in inflation.
Consequently, while policy eventually will need to become less accommodative as the economy improves, somewhat greater accommodation may be appropriate in the interim.” MR. FERGUSON.
Thereby making the Chairman’s recommendation seem terribly moderate!
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bernanke.
MR.
BERNANKE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I appreciate the anecdotes regarding price pressures, but I’m somewhat wary of them.<END>
I think many of them reflect the salience of the commodity and energy price changes we’ve seen.
But first, we know that those are a small part of total costs.
Second, there may be some confusion between high costs and rising costs, and of course, only rising costs contribute to inflation.
Also, I want to associate myself with Governor Ferguson’s point that the news since our last meeting has been primarily of a weakening in the expansion, particularly in terms of the employment statistics, and of a strengthening in the dollar.
The latter has not been talked about a great deal, but the downward trend in the dollar has been arrested.
<START>So, Mr. Chairman, I would March 16, 200485 of 107like to support the statement you have proposed, with the bias downward, understanding that we may well want to come to a balanced assessment on inflation sometime soon.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I agree with your recommendation for no change in policy.
I would prefer balanced risks on inflation.
I think most of the weakness we’ve seen recently has been on the real side rather than the inflation side.
It’s just too much of a Phillips curve type of analysis for me to view the two as a tradeoff in that way.
I would even suggest changing the word “patience” this time.
I agree with Tony that there are a lot of words we can use, and I fear that if we start using that one time after time, we'll get in the same bind we did with the “considerable period” phrase.
So, I would be happier if you had found a word that was equally as strong as “patience”;
I think it would be helpful just to change that word so we don't get locked in.
Back when I played tennis, if you were about to receive a serve, you didn’t stand flatfooted.
You would keep moving your feet so you’d be able to go either way.
And I think the word “patience” leaves us flatfooted.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Mr. Chairman, I’m comfortable with your recommendation both on policy and on the statement.
<START>I think it’s true that the anecdotal information on prices is worse since our last meeting.<END>
But the numbers haven’t moved.
And our statement already reads that the risks on inflation are quite close to balance.
“Almost equal” is quite close.
[Laughter] On that basis, I’m comfortable with the suggestions you proposed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation, and I would prefer to keep the slight bias emphasizing that there is a possibility of disinflation.
One of the things that makes March 16, 200486 of 107me uncomfortable about making a change
—going back to my comment that I like the fan charts
—is that inflation is “fanning” around 1 percent, and I personally think 1 percent is a low number.
Also, there are economic consequences of what is going on.
How companies manage their earnings statements and how financial institutions operate at extremely low interest rates have implications for the economy.
That, plus the fact that we haven’t seen in the data actual evidence of a stabilization in inflation, leads me to prefer to retain the bias toward weakness.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
Mr. Chairman, if it is a close call as to whether or not we would bring the inflation risks into balance
—and I think it is a close call
—then I have a strong preference for changing the statement as little as possible.
<START>It seems to me that, in the past when we have made significant changes in the statement, the market has overread their significance and has been confused about what we were trying to communicate.<END>
The changes that have been proposed for the statement today in my view reflect the minimal change in the outlook that has taken place in the intermeeting seven-week period.
And I think we ought to go with a statement that suggests that the outlook has changed only minimally.
So I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
This is a very close decision actually
—not so much in the numbers but in the fact that all of us, as best I can judge, go either way if we had to.
could It’s just too close to call.
I think Governor Olson probably correctly summarized where we stand.
And there’s a lot to be said for President Poole’s argument that it’s really not going to matter all that much because what will matter is what the data show.
So in a way I think it’s probably best for us to do nothing and let the market essentially move the expectations on the federal funds rate.
Therefore, let’s have a statement read that essentially involves no change.
March 16, 200487 of 107MR. BERNARD.
I’ll begin with the directive wording, which is at the bottom of page 11 in the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 1 percent.” Moving on to the risk assessment, which is part of the formal vote, that would be the language under “B” on page 12:<END>
<START>“The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters are roughly equal.<END>
<START>The probability of an unwelcome fall in inflation has diminished in recent months and now appears almost equal to that of a rise in inflation.<END>
<START>With inflation quite low and resource use slack, the Committee believes that it can be patient in removing its policy accommodation.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Since we will be approving the statement as well, could you distribute the draft statement, please, just to be sure?
It’s in effect what Vincent had indicated, so I trust there are no surprises.
[Pause] If there are no comments, please call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman Geithner Yes Governor Bernanke Yes Governor Bies Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Hoenig Yes Governor Kohn Yes President Minehan Yes Governor Olson Yes President Pianalto Yes President Poole Yes March 16, 200488 of 107CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We now have to go back to the agenda item we deferred at the beginning, which was a discussion of the minutes of the previous meeting.
There were important issues raised.
Vincent, do you want to comment?
MR.
REINHART.
In retaliation for the hard questions President Parry has asked the staff over the years, I will be delaying the start of his lunch!
[Laughter] In doing so, I’ll be referring to the memo I circulated last night.
Commenting on the January draft minutes, one policymaker suggested trimming the first four paragraphs covering the Committee’s discussion of its communications policy.
Four others recommended that only paragraph 3, which reviewed issues related to expediting the minutes, be shortened.
I’ve included the full set of comments beginning on the second page of the memo, showing potential additions in bold and potential deletions as bracketed material in italics.
Not to sound defensive, I started drafting the minutes on the assumption that you intended to be transparent about your discussion of transparency.
<START>Providing a full and accurate record of the meeting seemed to require describing the different aspects of your discussion about the risk assessments, the minutes, and economic forecasts.<END>
To my mind, the contribution of paragraph 3 was to lay out the pros and cons of expediting the release of the minutes
—in particular, the arguments against elevating the role of the minutes, including feedback on the Committee’s deliberations
—which have not previously been well articulated in the public domain.
That said, two changes do seem appropriate.
For one, the last sentence of the first paragraph
—that’s lines 7 through 9
—concerns the working group, which was directed solely to arrive at formulaic language for the risk assessments.
<START>That sentence would seem to be positioned better in the second paragraph, which is centered on the risk assessments, so that people do not read too much into the working group’s formation and dissolution.<END>
For another, the last sentence of the third paragraph
—lines 38 through 40
—suggests that it was premature to expedite the minutes, seeming to imply that at some point the minutes would be expedited.
On further reflection, the one-sided nature of that statement appears presumptuous about your future decisions, suggesting that a more neutral description would indicate that you have not reached a decision.
I believe that covers four out of five of the objections on that part of the minutes.
The rest of the possible changes have policy import, which is why I’m coming back to the Committee.
In particular, do you want to shorten the description of your discussions about the formulas for the risk assessment, the minutes, and the economic projections?
You might favor such a cut on the grounds that it’s not worthwhile to talk about procedural issues in public.
But the main points have mostly already made it into the press, and this offers you the opportunity to frame the main issues in a balanced way.
I would also add that reducing the discussion to its bare bones would offer more than a few commentators the opportunity for irony about the Committee’s March 16, 200489 of 107views on transparency, something I certainly wouldn’t pass up!
If you do, I take that as direction on preparing the next set of minutes.
That is, I should downplay today’s discussion of your prior discussion of transparency.
[Laughter] Let me close with this observation.
Given your decision to experiment with accelerating the production of the minutes, you will not have the luxury of an extended discussion of the minutes for this meeting and those for the remainder of the year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Let me first follow up on your transparency assessment.
I think Cathy Minehan has raised an interesting point.
I would say this:
<START>We run the risk, by laying out the pros and cons of a particular argument, of inducing people to join in on the debate, and in this regard it is possible to lose control of a process that only we fully understand.<END>
We have a ratchet in here where, if we were to move forward, we can’t go back.
So the concept of transparency is a very important concept but one that should be approached with a recognition that we cannot move back and forth on it.
I’m a little concerned here that by raising certain issues we may not be able to backtrack.
I hadn’t thought about it when I originally read the draft minutes, but in seeing the concerns that other people had, I think there’s something here that we have to consider.
I do not recall so many people raising questions about the minutes before because I think most of us read the minutes passively.
<START>That suggests to me that, if there were really a strong focus on them, we’d find a greater degree of disagreement among us about their content.<END>
Now, I don’t know whether what I just said is true.
I suspect it is just on the basis of my experience.
What it
was—four or five people who commented?
MR.
REINHART.
Five.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I was not one of them, so I would make the count six.
<START>It would be useful to discuss this even at the expense of delaying our tribute to our guest of honor<END>
—is that what we’re calling you today?
MR.
PARRY.
The old guy!
March 16, 200490 of 107CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Does anybody have any thoughts on this?
I must admit that I didn’t think about some of these issues until I saw the comments others made, but I’m a little concerned about other people getting into the debate when they know far less than we do.
I don’t know what Michelle has to say on this but my impression is that, if we go in that direction, we may find ourselves coming to a conclusion that is not based on our best judgment.
She’s nodding in agreement.
MR.
BERNANKE.
Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Yes.
MR.
BERNANKE.
I do have a concern about paragraph 3.
<START>It’s not just a question of hiding or reducing the information available;<END>
I think that paragraph actually misrepresents the substance of the conversation in that it seems to suggest that the reason for not releasing the minutes earlier is purely logistical, which is certainly not correct.
<START>There were arguments of substance on both sides, and to suggest that the arguments against are purely logistical risks giving the impression that our convenience is more important than revealing information to the market.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
May I make a suggestion?
This could get to be a very long discussion, and we don’t need that.
Do you have time to make changes?
MR.
REINHART.
I have all the time you want.
The Committee, however, will have to vote on the minutes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Oh, I understand that.
Let me make the following suggestion:
Those who haven’t commented should provide comments to Vincent.
<START>The reason I say that is that we may very well find that those who didn’t comment actually strongly support the minutes as written, and it’s important to know that.<END>
We could then do
—we’ve done this on March 16, 200491 of 107numerous occasions on other matters
—a notation vote.
If there is a problem in trying to find out who is where or what the issues are, Vincent can get on the phone and talk to each of you and make a judgment.
In my view, that’s the best way to resolve this, and I think it’s worthy of being resolved.
It’s an important issue.
MR.
REINHART.
For the Reserve Bank members, this will be the first experiment with notation voting electronically.
You’ll have to do that kind of vote in two weeks anyway for the minutes of this meeting, which we will be circulating at that time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay.
Any comments relevant to this?
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I have a question.
We log in our preferences to Vincent.
Then what does he write down as the final word, the majority vote?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
He will try to infer from your comments, and I think we all trust him in this respect, a way to rewrite the minutes that he thinks will gain a majority vote.
Then we will find out whether he is accurate.
[Laughter] MR. GUYNN.
<START>A quick question prompted by Vincent’s last comment that we won’t have the luxury to have this type of discussion in the future.<END>
A couple of meetings back, when we were talking about expediting the minutes, you suggested that one way to deal with resolving comments to the Secretary was to have a subset of the Committee to help with the editing.
Are we going to talk some more about that?
As we go through this experiment, are we going to use that kind of process, or are we simply going to leave it entirely to Vincent?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
No, at this time the only thing Vincent will be involved with is finalizing the minutes for the previous meeting.
That has nothing to do with how we proceed going forward on this.
March 16, 200492 of 107MR. REINHART.
President Guynn, in the experiment with expediting the minutes, we’re going to post drafts of the minutes every evening so you’ll be able to see how the comments evolve.
Then we’ll deal bilaterally with Committee members if people have specific comments.
When we talked about the possibility of forming a subgroup of the Committee, we ran into the legal issue that the FOMC cannot delegate matters of monetary policy.
If the minutes are viewed as a part of monetary policy, you can’t
— MR. GUYNN.
Will we see each other’s comments?
This is the first time I think we’ve ever had the luxury of seeing who made what kinds of comments.
Will we see each other’s comments, and by attribution, in the future?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Now, wait a second.
May I ask a question?
If we have a subcommittee that is putting out a draft of the minutes to be voted on, none of us is in any way forgoing our legal commitments.
It’s the delegation of the vote that’s the legal issue.
A subcommittee to facilitate that process is, in my judgment
—I don’t know what the General Counsel has to say on it
— MR. GUYNN.
I thought that’s what you suggested in earlier conversations.
The idea was to have some group look at the comments on the staff’s draft and make some shared judgment about whether the suggested changes should be made.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
It doesn’t matter how it’s done because the ultimate decision is made finally by a notation vote.
On this one, I think it’s probably not necessary to appoint such a group, but that doesn’t change the previous discussion.
MR.
GUYNN.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Any further comments?
If not, the next meeting is May 4.
END OF MEETING March 16, 200493 of 107
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 59
