
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I apologize that I have no handout, [laughter] but I’ll try to make up for it by being brief.
The incoming data that we’ve been reviewing all morning really need no repetition and I would only add that on balance they seem benign and favorable to a truly remarkable degree.
It may be a midsummer night’s dream but I think the recent 65data could contain the seeds of a near-utopian extension of our recent superb era.
If a modest downturn does set in for an extended period, productivity improvements could continue to hold unit labor costs flat.
And if we have the good fortune to avoid the potential negative shocks from both known and unforeseen sources, the stage would be set:
<START>We would experience sustainable growth, higher real incomes, slower but continuing job creation, and steady, perhaps at some point receding, inflation.<END>
The only other thing one could ask for is major league baseball in Washington!
[Laughter] That is an enticing but quite plausible prospect to be sure, but it would be folly to adopt it as a locked-in scenario and I would not suggest that we do so.
<START>The real world is still a difficult and challenging place.<END>
<START>Inflation is creeping up, the current account deficit does continue to grow, the stock market and consumer debt are dangerously high, and household savings are dangerously low.<END>
Hot spots, both economic and political, do glow threateningly around the world.
And the favorable outcome relies almost entirely on a continuation of productivity increases unprecedented in recent decades.
If all this were not so serious and important, and if this Committee were not so squarely in the middle of the vortex, it would all be great theatre.
At any rate, to wait and to watch intensively seems the best posture for today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
Shall we adjourn for coffee, which I think we’ve all earned?
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mr. Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As many of you have remarked, incoming data since your last meeting have tended to reinforce the sense that the growth rates of final demand and the economy’s ability to meet that demand are much more closely aligned and are likely to stay that way, at least for a while.
On the demand side, consumption is growing at a slower pace and 66homebuilding is declining, even before the full effects have been felt of earlier tightening in financial conditions, including the leveling out of broad measures of equity prices this year.
On the supply side of the economy, a higher estimated growth rate of potential means that demand need not decelerate as much to achieve that alignment.
<START>From this evidence, it would appear that the cumulative effects of your prior actions may well have tightened financial conditions enough to keep the unemployment rate from falling further, even taking account of the partial erosion of restraint from the recent rally in domestic financial markets.<END>
At the same time, the new information on prices and costs, on balance, has not indicated any further intensification of underlying inflation pressures.
<START>While these data may make you a little more comfortable with the determination that unemployment rates near 4 percent can persist for a while longer without serious adverse consequences, they have not helped greatly in knowing whether such rates are sustainable over the longer run.<END>
Labor compensation has run to the strong side of expectations, but so too has productivity, so that faster increases in real compensation have not put added pressure on unit costs and prices.
Price data have tended to confirm that core inflation rates are a little higher than a year ago, though by less than anticipated by the staff, at least in the case of the PCE chain price index.
Moreover, the pickup in core inflation is small enough to leave ambiguous the judgment as to whether it is attributable to the indirect effects of energy price increases or labor market disequilibrium.
And long-run inflation expectations continue to be stable, or, on market-based measures, have even declined a bit.
With inflation and inflation expectations not worsening, and growth in demand near that of potential supply, the Committee might see little potential cost to keeping policy unchanged at this meeting.
And waiting would yield benefits, as new information accrued to help assess the underlying forces, especially those working on the course of prices.
Such a decision would still leave open the question of the risks going forward to be characterized in your press release.
Most market commentators expect you to stay with the bias toward inflation risks.
But that may be partly because they are assuming you would want to avoid the attention and market reaction that a shift might bring.
The flat yield curve and pattern of futures rates imply that the buyers and sellers of securities see at least as much chance that your next policy action will be an easing in rates as a tightening.
<START>With inflation compensation in the real-nominal Treasury yield spread below current increases in the CPI--even below those in core CPI prices--investors would not seem to be anticipating that keeping policy on hold would pose an inflation risk.<END>
<START>And, high levels of equity prices and expected earnings growth and a low implied equity premium would suggest that investors do not anticipate that a much softer economy and appreciable rise in the unemployment rate will be necessary to achieve that outcome.<END>
<START>67 If the Committee, like the markets, saw the recent data as supporting judgments that the current unemployment rate might well be sustainable--and was now likely to persist without further policy tightening--it might want to consider shifting to a statement indicating that the risks to satisfactory economic performance were now balanced.<END>
The staff forecast suggests economic expansion is likely to proceed a bit below the now-higher growth of the economy’s potential for some time even with the federal funds rate at its present level over the rest of the year.
And the Committee might see the recent information on labor costs as consistent with little pressure on inflation “in the foreseeable future,” especially if energy prices retrace a portion of their runup and the dollar remains strong as investments in the United States retain their attractiveness in an environment of strengthening productivity.
<START>But you may also want to consider that a statement that the risks were balanced would certainly surprise the commentators and likely boost prices in capital markets, at least a little.<END>
Although no policy firmings are built into those prices, a statement of balanced risks still would be taken as reducing the probability of further increases in interest rates.
With demand still quite strong in a number of sectors, the Committee might not want to take the chance that its announcement would further fuel the recent runup in stock and bond prices.
Moreover, there are a number of reasons to believe that the risks going forward still point toward higher inflation.
In the staff forecast, of course, taken as a whole, they do.
Inflation picks up a little next year in that forecast by some measures;
and even with an additional 75 basis points of tightening, conditions at the end of the period point to still further acceleration of prices.
Even if the Committee did not agree with the staff assessment that unemployment rates needed to rise appreciably, its actions this year to slow the growth of demand indicate that it sees unemployment rates in the low 4s as near the lower end of possible equilibrium levels, and the risks of rising inflation as especially unbalanced at the prevailing degree of labor resource utilization.
In addition, the current rate of core consumer inflation may now be closer to the upper end of what the Committee considers to be compatible with its price stability objective.
In that case, the Committee might be inclined to consider the cost of any further increase to be particularly high.
To be sure, the standard balance of risks statement addresses the direction of future inflation, not its level.
But a higher level might suggest more weight on any possibility of further increases, even if such a possibility were relatively small.
As Dave Stockton explained, in the staff forecast the trajectory of price acceleration has been marked down, largely based on a reassessment of productivity growth.
However, the nature of the change may imply that the risks to inflation around this revision are not symmetric.
<START>On the supply side, the further pickup in productivity damps price increases through the forecast period by offsetting much of the effects on business costs of worker efforts to catch up to previous productivity increases and pressures from tight labor markets.<END>
<START>On 68 the demand side, though, households and businesses are assumed to have already built the productivity acceleration into expected growth of earnings and income.<END>
<START>As a consequence, they have also incorporated the associated rise in the equilibrium real interest rate into bond yields, and the Federal Reserve has validated that increase with its monetary policy.<END>
Hence, in the forecast the feedthrough of higher potential output to demand is less than it otherwise would have been.
The drop in real interest rates and relatively small size of the rebound in equity prices since mid-May supports the notion that it is the economists, not the markets, that are getting positive surprises on productivity.
Of late, earnings warnings from firms have contributed to lower profit projections by analysts for the balance of this year and 2001, though to be sure, their long-term forecasts continue to edge higher.
Thus, the new staff assessment embodies two risks that both point in the direction of the possibility of higher inflation than in the forecast.
First, if additional productivity growth gains are not forthcoming, cost pressures from the catch-up in real wages and tight labor markets would raise costs faster and squeeze profits.
<START>Second, if not all of the higher productivity growth rate is currently built into market interest rates and earnings expectations, then more increases in equity prices may be in store, working to strengthen demand and tighten labor markets.<END>
<START>There are other upside risks as well, even apart from the level of the NAIRU and the effects of productivity gains.<END>
For example, a stubbornly high price of oil could begin to affect inflation expectations.
The new press statement language is about longer-term risks to meeting the FOMC’s objectives.
The former language involving asymmetries concerned the probabilities of near-term action--over the intermeeting period and at the next meeting or so.
Even if the Committee were of the view that it was unlikely to get enough new information about inflation prospects to justify a policy action in the next few months, it should still adopt the biased statement language if it believes that over time rising inflation poses a greater peril to economic performance than weakness in economic activity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Questions for Don?
MR.
JORDAN.
A couple of questions, if I might.
<START>I read in the Bluebook someplace, though I can’t find it now--and I thought I heard you say it again in your briefing--a reference to the declines in real rates as reflecting a reduced probability of the Fed tightening and raising the funds rate.<END>
So, I look at the data and I say:
Okay, 10-year yields have come down and other yields have too, but 3-month rates went up.
Well, the fed funds rate is a one-day rate.
So I ask myself:
Can I 69 square those?
If we attribute to the market an expectation that whatever inflationary impulse is in the pipeline is very short term but not longer term, is that how we reconcile those?
MR.
KOHN.
The 3-month rates that went up were 3-month Treasury bill rates.
Three-month commercial paper and CD rates went down.
And I think the Treasury bill market, with a reduced supply, is subject these days to very idiosyncratic changes.
Much of the specific reaction relates to likely or possible changes in supply, as liquidity has been impaired.
And in fact this increase reverses a decrease that was difficult to understand and explain over the previous intermeeting period.
So I wouldn’t put any weight on a change in the 3-month Treasury bill rate given the state of that market right now.
I think every other interest rate that we look at, private interest rates and even longer-term government interest rates, suggests that expectations about Fed tightening have certainly come down, and that is probably partly some decline in real rates and partly some reduction in inflation expectations.
MR.
JORDAN.
Okay.
That leads me to another question.
Some of your remarks about the markets and what we can read into the markets and maybe learn from them, I interpret as saying that there is increasing credibility in the marketplace attached to our commitment to avoiding a sustained acceleration of inflation.
A year or more ago, before our first rate increase in this series at midyear last year, we heard a lot of commentary to the effect that inflation can no longer be a problem because of the new economy--that the silicon chip prevents inflation.
And that went along with stories about the success of IPOs and equity prices and price/earnings ratios and so on.
Now it seems that if people are comfortable that inflation is not a problem, it is because the Fed is on the job.
<START>To me there does seem to be, compared to a year ago, a big swing as to the reason given for why inflation is not a problem.<END>
If that’s right and if that is built into what we’re seeing in the markets’ financial indicators, then what weight would you give to increased credibility of the FOMC?
<START>The 70 reason I’m asking is because there is this phenomenon, at least theoretically, of the Friedman surge effect or the Parker’s paradox effect--that with an increase in credibility of the commitment to fight inflation, the demand to hold money balances relative to wealth or permanent income would be higher.<END>
<START>So the same money growth would be less expansionary than compared to a lower credibility environment.<END>
<START>And if there has been a shift over the last year toward more credibility attached to our commitment to resist inflation, what weight would you give that in assessing the thrust of policy actions?<END>
MR.
KOHN.
I think the markets are looking at both their assessment of the underlying supply and demand for goods and services and the Fed’s reaction.
I personally don’t sense a sea change in our credibility.
I think our credibility has been building gradually for the last 20 years, sometimes faster, sometimes slower.
Over repeated episodes of the Committee keeping its eye on the longer-run price stability goal and acting successfully and preemptively to achieve that, we have built credibility.
I would think that some more credibility has accrued to the Committee over the last year because of its actions.
But I also believe that the markets don’t see the underlying inflation risk.
<START>If there were increased credibility but they saw an inflation risk or a strong growth risk, they might assume that inflation would be low but that the Committee would be tightening interest rates a lot in order to achieve that low inflation.<END>
But in fact they don’t have a tightening of interest rates--real interest rates--built in at all.
So it’s not just that they see inflation low;
they see it low without any FOMC action.
<START>Drawing on the recent experience of the last several years in which there hasn’t been any rise in inflation at very low unemployment rates, and where productivity growth has continued to hold down costs, they’ve basically projected a continuation of that experience out ahead.<END>
They don’t see a need to tighten policy.
So I don’t think it’s just credibility.
Between the Greenbook and the markets--in fact, between many economists and the markets--the underlying analysis is different.
The 71 markets are putting a lot of weight on their experience of the last few years, whereas the economists are trying to sort through the shocks that might have produced that experience and are seeing some risks that the markets don’t see.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions for Don?
If not, let me get started.
I think there is a fairly general consensus that we are observing a marked slowdown in the growth of consumer demand after a very strong performance earlier this year.
Motor vehicle sales clearly are down, although the data for August, seasonally adjusted, were little changed from the July numbers.
Chain store sales have been quite weak recently, and the data that came out this morning show significant weakness in mid-August.
And in general we are seeing significant softness in all the housing-related consumer goods markets.
<START>One of the elements in our models on which we have very considerable difficulty getting a good fix is the inventories of consumer goods held by households.<END>
Because those inventories tend to behave very much like the inventories of steel, aluminum, and textiles in individual business establishments, we would expect retail demand to soften in the event of a backup in inventories of household goods.
But, there just is no evidence of any satiation of consumer demand, especially taking account of the fact that we as consumers spend an increasing proportion of our money on impalpable services.
Clearly, we can clog up our closets with clothes and our driveways with motor vehicles, and our stock of appliances can simply get out of hand, which I can assure you is my current situation.
[Laughter] Nonetheless, I find new things on which to spend money all the time.
Even so, it remains true that to the extent we are still dealing to a significant degree with a goods-related economy, the excess inventories in households are an important factor that is sometimes overlooked when we evaluate the economic outlook.
72 To be sure, our model does have an inventory adjustment process, and indeed we are seeing that the stock of consumer goods--mainly, of course, durable goods--has been rising at a faster pace per capita or per household than in the past.
While that is not to say that consumer demand has reached a point of saturation, history does suggest the existence of a cyclical adjustment process as inventories go up.
And as they go up at an excessively rapid pace, as they indeed have been doing for the last number of years, there is a tendency for the rate of accumulation to slow.
When that slowdown occurs, it works its way back into the type of environment we currently are observing in the consumer area.
Clearly, the wealth effect is interrelated with this process.
It is difficult to judge the extent to which the sharp rise in energy prices has effectively removed purchasing power from the marketplace.
What we see at the end of the day is a softened consumer sector whose growth rate is well below what it was earlier, but growth continues nonetheless.
There is no evidence of which I am aware that suggests the consumer is pulling back to an extent that is potentially destabilizing for the economic outlook.
As consumer and indeed housing expenditures soften, there is a feedback into the intermediate products industries and the slowing reported by an increasing number of such industries, which Mike Moskow mentioned earlier today, is generally what one would expect under those conditions.
In complete contrast to developments in the consumer and housing sectors is what is going on in the capital goods markets.
Here what we are observing, as we have discussed on many occasions previously, is a continuing increase in prospective rates of return on new capital equipment, especially high-tech.
There really is no low-tech equipment anymore.
There is no old-fashioned type of capital equipment worth its name.
As a consequence we are beginning to see a spillover from the SIC classifications, which is how we often designate high technology.
In any event, overall capital investment continues to boom, an indication obviously that the expected rates of return, which had 73 previously been presumed to be on the rise, actually have materialized.
We can see that in two ways.
One is that plant managers are continuously ordering an ever-increasing menu of these types of equipment, which means they are seeing that it works.
We obviously are seeing the same phenomenon in the productivity data, which effectively are one way to envisage the real return on capital.
And indeed we are seeing it in still increasing long-term earnings forecasts by security analysts.
As I have mentioned before, the latter may not be very knowledgeable about what is going on in the business world, but they are reasonably good reporters of what the companies that they follow are saying about their longer-term outlooks.
That invariably means that productivity in the individual companies is showing continued and irreversible increases.
At some point, perhaps not that far down the road, that is going to change.
Indeed, it invariably must change because the history of these types of technological surges or shifts in technology S-curves shows that they lose momentum after a point.
For example, once the availability and use of electricity became pervasive throughout the economy, its rate of growth slowed quite appreciably.
In fact, it slowed to such an extent that new generating plants were not built as needed, and we can observe the problems that have resulted from that.
At the moment, however, what we see is a quite extraordinary surge in capital investment whose direct impact on productivity involves a fairly straightforward relationship with a lag.
The analytical problem that exists when we have this type of productivity-driven economy is that it is by no means clear whether the increased capital investment will create a larger expansion of demand than potential supply.
There are two elements here.
One is the time lag that exists between capital expenditures and the completion of facilities and their operation at full potential.
The other is the coefficient that relates increases in capital stock to increases in capacity.
As Larry Meyer pointed out, the evidence 74 to date suggests that the overall impact of accelerating capital investment has been to increase demand more than potential supply.
The result, as we all have perceived, is that we have seen a significant decline in the unemployment rate and a tightening of the labor markets.
If this process were to persist, it strikes me as pretty much inevitable that we would have to be continuously tightening.
This is because the excess of demand over supply of goods and services would reflect itself in an excess of long-term credit demands versus long-term savings.
Were that the case, real long-term interest rates would be continuing to rise, but they are not.
And the reason they are not is that personal consumption expenditures and spending on housing have moderated, and that slowing has helped to offset the very strong growth in capital expenditures.
We don't know the eventual extent of the slowdown.
Most of you have indicated that even though consumer demand has indeed slowed in your Districts, there is no evidence of any cumulative deterioration.
Consumer confidence clearly has not deteriorated.
So what we are looking at may well be a pattern of slower growth in household spending that could continue for a while yet.
And so long as it continues, the pressure will be off the markets.
The acceleration of price inflation is essentially still a forecast.
Ned Gramlich's table showed that the year-over-year PCE core is up only 0.3 percent.
The July-over-July number is up a little more, but most interestingly the rate of increase of core PCE inflation for the last three months is, as I recall, only slightly higher than 1/2 percent at an annual rate.
This is the lowest three-month number that I have seen in the series going back a number of years.
But as Bill Poole points out, we may be missing the boat here by looking exclusively at the core rate when clearly energy prices are moving.
The electric power shortage is a very serious problem, as those of you in the West particularly know.
<START>Because demand for electricity had slipped for a while, new power plant 75 construction came to a virtual halt, abetted by environmental controls or regulations and a number of other obstacles that essentially dissuaded utility companies from building new power plants.<END>
So, we have ended up with what is a really serious potential crisis.
The crude oil markets are also tightening up.
There is not all that much excess crude production capacity in the Gulf states, which is where almost all of it exists.
Saudi Arabia has perhaps 3 million barrels a day of additional capacity.
Kuwait has some.
Iraq has some.
<START>But it is by no means clear what the inclination may be to produce and bring those crude supplies to market.<END>
As a consequence, the steady underlying growth in crude demand is having an impact on prices.
<START>OPEC production is lagging because it is very difficult for a country like Saudi Arabia, which has very significant fiscal problems, to increase its oil output knowing its aggregate revenues could very well fall as a consequence.<END>
Accordingly, as the Greenbook indicates, it is not clear that energy prices will automatically come down.
It is true that the exploration and development budgets of the major oil companies have gone up very materially, and experience suggests that newer technologies have enabled the takeout from existing wells to improve markedly.
<START>As a result, additional sources of non-OPEC crude will become available, but not to a substantial extent before another year or two.<END>
It is hard to know what is going to happen before then.
Natural gas is a disaster waiting to happen.
Here again, the earlier slowdown in demand for power left natural gas prices at relatively modest levels.
As a consequence drilling declined fairly materially.
And we are now in a position where the natural gas inventories in storage are about as low as I remember them.
In sum, we have a situation where all three major sources of power are strained and interacting on the prices of energy.
In the circumstances, the notion of looking solely at core prices may still be comforting but only up to a very limited point.
The reason is that rising prices that 76 ordinarily bring added supply forward clearly are working less than adequately to produce that result in the energy sector currently.
As a consequence, while inflation has not worsened materially in the sense of a spillover of higher energy prices into core prices, that outcome is inevitable unless energy prices start to come down.
Energy remains a very fundamental part of the cost structure even though admittedly very significantly less so than it used to be.
But it is still significant enough to create a problem if we suddenly get a major acceleration in energy prices, especially in crude oil prices.
Where all this leaves us, obviously, is with a slowing economy but clearly one that has remarkably good characteristics of stability.
The major excesses that we were all concerned about for the last couple of years seem to be diminishing.
The gap between aggregate supply and demand is beginning to close.
And indeed, the Greenbook forecast implies that that gap will narrow considerably more over the next year and a half.
We obviously have a significant amount of monetary policy tightening still in the pipeline stemming from the policy moves that have been implemented since June of last year, including several moves earlier this year.
Clearly, by any measure those policy actions could not yet have worked their way fully through the system.
So we are in a situation where a lot of things could be fairly significantly worse, but they are not.
I conclude from all of this that we ought to stay where we are.
There is no need to move at this particular point.
At the same time, it would be highly risky in my judgment to depart from the bias that we used to call “asymmetric toward tightening.” I still have not learned the language we are now using to describe our policy bias!
In any event, my cost-benefit analysis of where we are at this stage and where we want to be leads me at least for now to a no change directive and retention of the statement that the risks are toward higher inflation.
I would like to put that out on the table for discussion.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
<START>I want to talk a bit about the balance of risks sentence we have been using in the press statement as 77 opposed to the asymmetry language we previously had in the directive, and how much we have benefited from that change.<END>
I think what we mainly have accomplished is to convince the marketplace--and slowly the economists in the marketplace--that we are in fact looking over the longer run and not from meeting to meeting.
They are now convinced that the Federal Reserve is looking at monetary policy as it affects the economy over a longer period of time.
<START>Therefore, the balance of risks statement toward either inflation on one side or toward too weak an economy on the other, I believe, has had a very considerable positive effect on our ability to carry out policy.<END>
It certainly does not change the need for us to take action when action is appropriate.
There is, I think, a lingering debate within the Committee about what we need in order to have high credibility.
<START>Basically, what I think we need is the reputation of having good judgment and courage--the judgment to evaluate the risks in a reasonable way and to decide what is the right course of action and then the courage to take the action.<END>
It is easy to make the right decision if it is perfectly obvious what it is.
That is never the case with us.
We are always looking through a dark glass, thinking about what is the best thing to do and then acting courageously to do it.
In my view the Committee has a very, very high reputation in that regard and it is something that is of immense importance to us.
Today I think we clearly have to look at the economy in the way you have suggested.
<START>I agree that maintaining the present stance of policy is appropriate and, certainly, we should continue to reflect our view that the balance of risks is toward rising inflation.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
I would say that policy right now is tight and the issue is whether it ought to be tighter.
We certainly can wait to see whether that is the case.
One comment on the bias:
As a suggestion, I wonder if we should not consider 78 taking out the lone reference to tight labor markets as the reason for our bias.
I don't know that there is a one-to-one mapping into inflation over the time horizon we have been talking about.
Given your comments, as well as those of others here today, it seems to me that we see other risks that are just as important right now in leading us to this bias.
I think they also ought to be considered, or certainly that tight labor markets should not be given more consideration in our statement than these other risks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I can’t speak for everybody.
I think we are moving in that direction but I don't think we are there yet.
I believe the labor market still is the overwhelming problem but clearly less so proportionally than it was, certainly at the last meeting.
MR.
HOENIG.
In my view it is something we ought to consider as we go forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think that is a valid issue to raise at the next meeting.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, when I went to the airport yesterday morning in Bozeman, Montana to fly back to this meeting I was a little concerned about whether the flights would be running on time.
I asked the clerk whether I would be able to get back to Washington for this meeting.
I’m sure he did not know who I am but he said:
“Tell Alan Greenspan to leave the economy alone.” [Laughter] Apparently you agree and I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I’m comfortable with and support your recommendation.
<START>Absent some big surprise, I think we have the luxury of letting this play out.<END>
I would just underscore Bill McDonough's comments about not doing anything to detract from the notion that we are on watch and are prepared to move when we need to.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
79 MR. SANTOMERO.
<START>I support your proposal not to change the fed funds rate and to retain the statement that the balance of risks is on the side of higher inflation.<END>
I think we need more time to see what is happening with the real economy.
Nonetheless, the balance of risks appears to remain on the side of higher inflation over the horizon.
<START>If the indicators of inflation point consistently toward higher inflation, then we should respond, and I think we should remind the markets of our resolve in that regard.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendation.
I think this would be a good time to leave the funds rate unchanged so that we can see how things unfold before considering another tightening action.
I also believe it is important to retain the statement adopted in June that the balance of risks continues to be toward higher inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
<START>Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for no change in the funds rate and to maintain the assessment that the risks are still unbalanced toward higher inflation.<END>
I just want to give a perspective on the unbalanced risks issue.
Whenever we have an acceleration of productivity growth, we have the following choices:
We can take it for a while in temporarily higher output or we can take it in potentially permanently lower inflation.
I think so far what we have done is to take it all in the form of higher output.
Core CPI inflation today is exactly the same as it was at the end of 1995 on a methodologically consistent basis.
That is fine.
But I would argue that we have to be particularly vigilant about an upward creep in inflation going forward because once this productivity acceleration effect dissipates, inflation will rise.
<START>And it is better if that rise takes place from a level closer to our long-run inflation objective than from a level that has already drifted above it.<END>
<START>80 The second reason is that an acceleration of productivity is the classic opportunity for opportunistic disinflation.<END>
<START>So, it does seem a little strange to allow an extraordinary experience of an acceleration of productivity to be accompanied by an upward creep in inflation.<END>
For both those reasons, I think we need to stay with the statement on unbalanced risks.
<START>I think they are unbalanced and even though inflation performance remains very favorable, I believe we have to be very vigilant about rising inflation going forward.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation, especially your recommendation to keep the tilt in place.
I think it would be premature to remove it.
Also, Tom Hoenig’s suggestion resonates with me and I hope we will look at that again in the near future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
<START>I, too, support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, including the bias toward concerns about heightened inflation going forward.<END>
As I indicated earlier, I do think we have some additional time to assess that situation, and given current real interest rates I believe we are not too far from where we need to be even over the longer run.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Mr. Chairman, I support both parts of your recommendation.
I think Larry Meyer made a useful cautioning remark that given the productivity shock, we are benefiting from a little good luck, if you will, on inflation.
It is different from the good luck we had in 1998 but it is good luck.
And we should keep that in mind and be alert.
I have always argued for being as alert as we can possibly be.
But luck comes in all shapes.
<START>I don't want to overdo the nostalgia bit, but I can remember times when oil prices went up about as much as they have in the last couple of years and the inflation situation was far worse than it is now.<END>
<START>I can remember investment booms like we 81 are having now and the inflation situation was far worse.<END>
<START>So, if we really take this situation apart, we might see that we also have some forces working in the direction of high inflation that we may be under appreciating.<END>
I don't want to push that theme too hard and I think we should remain vigilant.
But when we talk about luck, it is easy to count the things on one side of the fence and not the things on the other side of the fence.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I am also in agreement with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
I think we should wait to see more data on how the economy is shaping up--slowing perhaps--and how productivity trends seem to be developing in the latter part of the year.
I, too, think that the balance of risks statement is vitally important.
In my view we would send a very difficult message for the markets to deal with if we did not retain the existing balance of risks statement.
I believe the risks are on the up side.
<START>I like the way Governor Meyer put the analysis in terms of questioning why we aren't seeing inflation moving down with such a productivity surprise and why we aren't seeing that when we look ahead with such a productivity surprise.<END>
And that is worrisome to me.
I would not like us to be associated with fiddling while Rome burns, but I don't think we are.
I think this is a time when we can afford to wait and see.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree with both parts of your recommendation.
I think this is a time to pause and take stock.
We have seen slowdowns before that were just temporary and the expansion picked up again quite rapidly.
<START>And there is the question of whether a slowing in growth that is more sustainable would be enough to cap inflation or whether the economy really has to grow at rates below trend in order to relieve some of the pressure that has been built up.<END>
Obviously this is an open question.
<START>If the inflation data deteriorate due to energy as you 82 discussed, or for other reasons, or if demand expands further beyond potential output, then I think we have to be prepared to act very quickly.<END>
But for now I believe it is appropriate to follow your advice.
And I certainly agree that the balance of risks clearly is tilted toward higher inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
Thank you.
I agree that leaving the funds rate unchanged at this point is the right thing to do.
<START>I am also sensitive to the communications issues involved;<END>
<START>it would not be desirable to communicate the expectation that we are not going to raise the funds rate in the foreseeable future or to imply that the next change might be down rather than up.<END>
But it is a challenge as to how to avoid communicating that.
<START>Regarding the language on the balance of risks, part of me would like to say that the statement should always be that an unavoidable, permanent feature of a fiat money system is a balance of risks toward higher inflation.<END>
[Laughter] If it ain’t going down it’s going up!
But since I am not likely to win that one, I think we do have to spend a little more time here on what it is that leads us to believe that the balance of risks is toward higher inflation.
I say that because in some of the discussion today and in previous meetings it sounded to me as if we worry that higher productivity through various avenues--through demand increases, wealth effects, higher real interest rates, and liquidity injected by the central bank--causes higher inflation.
And as Governor Meyer suggested, we worry that lower productivity causes higher inflation.
<START>So, until we sort out a little better whether higher productivity causes inflation or lower productivity raises the risk of inflation, we are not quite ready to explain why we think the risks are toward higher inflation.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
83 MR. FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support both parts of your recommendation.
I feel a bit drawn into the discussion about the communication of the balance of risks, having spent nine months working with a number of you in trying to sort this out.
I probably shouldn't act on that feeling, but I will.
First, I certainly commend and have always listened to the wise counsel of our Vice Chair, and I agree that we actually have succeeded to some extent in communicating something here.
I am quite sympathetic to what Jerry Jordan just said, though.
And what Tom Hoenig said is also relevant:
In my view there are a number of things that are leading us to communicate that we think the risks over the foreseeable future are toward greater inflation.
Some of the reasons have to do with the labor markets, and one can say that without necessarily being a firm believer in a particular number with respect to the NAIRU.
So, I am comfortable with keeping in that reference to the labor market.
But like Tom Hoenig, I do think that what I am hearing is a broader range of concerns having to do with other elements of the real economy--and in my case, maybe not for others, having a bit to do with some financial conditions.
I don't at all sense that we should change our communication tool at this meeting.
But in my view Jerry quite appropriately reminded us that we worked hard to get to this language--not because we thought it was an easy out from a difficult problem but because we thought it was going to help the public in its analysis of our policymaking.
<START>So, as we go forward during the course of the year--regardless of what we do with interest rates--I think we have to be clear about what is driving our assessment of the risks.<END>
I say that because doing so will give the market a chance to look at the same things we are looking at.
<START>And if we're looking past the unemployment numbers to other factors, we at least ought to signal that to the market as best we can.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I support your recommendation.
84 CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>Would the Secretary read the appropriate language for the directive and the statement that the balance of risks is toward inflation?<END>
MR.
BERNARD.
I’ll be reading the wording from page 11 in the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 6-1/2 percent.” And the statement in the press release would read:
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll please.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes President Broaddus Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Guynn Yes President Jordan Yes Governor Kelley Yes Governor Meyer Yes President Parry Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Lynn Fox, would you hand out the version of the press release that hopefully captures the substance of the Committee’s discussion?
[Pause] Is this statement satisfactory to all concerned?
SPEAKER(?).
Amen!
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Could I just raise one point?
I think the statement is fine.
I don’t want to talk about that.
My point is that increasingly on TV programs we are seeing comparisons of what 85 we said at the last meeting and what we are saying today.
I wonder if it’s possible, since some of us don’t remember exactly what the press statement said after the last meeting, if we could have a little reminder of the changes made in the statement?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Obviously we can give you the whole statement, but what we can do, if you prefer, is to give you the operative paragraphs.
There are only really two operative paragraphs in this.
SEVERAL.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The rest is boilerplate.
We could do that readily so that you would be able to compare them fairly quickly.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I don’t know if anyone else feels this way, but if market observers are going to start looking at exactly how we change a comma from last time, I guess I want to know about it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I will say that when we draft this, we do it with precisely that in mind.
But we may not do it to your satisfaction.
<START>[Laughter] It may not be a bad idea to have the comparison in front of us.<END>
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I may just not remember.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Nobody remembers these things!
In any event Lynn, let’s do that next time.
The next meeting will be on October 3rd and we will now adjourn for lunch.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 54
