
Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee February 1-2, 2000 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 1, 2000, at 2:30 p.m.
and continued on Wednesday, February 2, 2000, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman Mr.
Broaddus Mr. Ferguson Mr. Gramlich Mr. Guynn Mr. Jordan Mr. Kelley Mr. Meyer Mr. Parry Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Minehan, Messrs. Moskow and Poole, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary Ms. Fox, Assistant Secretary Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Ms. Johnson, Economist Mr. Prell, Economist Mr.
Beebe, Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Eisenbeis, Goodfriend, Howard, Lindsey, Reinhart, Simpson, Sniderman, and Stockton, Associate Economists Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account 2 Mr. Winn, 1/ Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Messrs. Madigan and Slifman, Associate Directors, Divisions of Monetary Affairs and Research and Statistics respectively, Board of Governors Messrs. Oliner and Whitesell, Assistant Directors, Divisions of Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs respectively, Board of Governors Mr.
Small, 2/ Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Messrs. Brayton, 2/ Morton, 3/ and Rosine, 3/ Senior Economists, Divisions of Research and Statistics, International Finance, and Research and Statistics respectively, Board of Governors Ms. Garrett and Mr. Hooker, 3/ Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms.
Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ms. Browne, Messrs. Hakkio and Hunter, Ms. Krieger, Messrs. Lang, Rasche, Rolnick, and Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Kansas City, Chicago, New York, Philadelphia, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Dallas respectively __________________________ 1/ Attended Tuesday’s session only.
2/ Attended portion of meeting relating to the staff presentation of policy alternatives.
3/ Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's review of the economic outlook and consideration of its money and debt ranges for 2000.
3Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of February 1-2, 2000 February 1, 2000
—Afternoon Session CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Happy New Year everybody!
Happy Millennium!
MS.
MINEHAN.
Happy post-Y2K!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
With those insightful remarks, I will turn the floor over to Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you very much.
The first order of business today is to elect a Chairman who will serve until the first scheduled meeting in the year of 2001.
So, let me open the floor for nominations.
Are there any nominations?
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
Thank you.
After long and careful consideration, it is my honor to place in nomination the names of Alan Greenspan for Chairman and William McDonough for Vice Chairman.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Is there a second?
SPEAKER(?).
Second.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you.
I’m glad someone seconded it!
Are there any objections to those two nominations?
Hearing no objections, I will declare the vote unanimous.
Let me congratulate the two of you!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I always appreciate the democratic process!
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
And I support that view of democracy and the procedures that elected us, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
The next item on the agenda is to elect staff officers, and I will ask Norm Bernard to read the list.
4MR. BERNARD.
The proposed slate of staff officers is as follows:
Secretary and Economist, Donald Kohn;
Deputy Secretary, Normand Bernard;
Assistant Secretaries, Lynn Fox and Gary Gillum;
General Counsel, Virgil Mattingly;
Deputy General Counsel, Thomas Baxter;
Economists, Karen Johnson and Michael Prell;
Associate Economists from the Board:
David Howard, David Lindsey, Vincent Reinhart, Thomas Simpson, and David Stockton;
Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:
Jack Beebe, proposed by President Parry;
Christine Cumming, proposed by President McDonough;
Robert Eisenbeis, proposed by President Guynn;
Marvin Goodfriend, proposed by President Broaddus;
and Mark Sniderman, proposed by President Jordan.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Are there any objections to anyone on that list?
If not, would somebody like to move the slate?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
I move the slate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is there a second?
SPEAKER(?).
Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Without objection.
Thank you very much.
The next item on the agenda, as you know, is the selection of a Federal Reserve Bank to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account.
Would somebody like to propose a bank?
MR.
FERGUSON.
I move that we select the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is there a second?
MR.
KELLEY.
Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Objections?
Without objection, so ordered.
The next item on the agenda is the selection of a Manager of the System Open Market Account.
Are there nominations?
5VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
I nominate Peter Fisher, Mr. Chairman, as Manager of the System Open Market Account.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is there a second?
MR.
FERGUSON.
I second it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Without objection, so ordered.
I wish to state, however, that the directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York are required under our rules to confirm that choice.
I trust you are sufficiently nervous!
[Laughter] MR. FISHER.
Yes, sir.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We have proposed changes to the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations.
Peter, would you review them very briefly for us?
MR.
FISHER.
Members of the Committee will recall, as Norm Bernard’s memo spelled out, that the authority to sell options on RPs, which the Committee granted the Desk on a temporary basis last August, will expire at the end of this month.
The authority to do reverse RPs and the liberalization of the “Guidelines for the Conduct of System Operations in Federal Agency Issues” put in place at the same time will run through the end of April, however.
The latter two authorizations will be on the agenda for the Committee to discuss at its March meeting.
MR.
BERNARD.
There is also the added paragraph relating to the Chairman’s latitude to make intermeeting adjustments to policy in exceptional circumstances.
The suggested wording is that set forth in Governor Ferguson’s memorandum of December 17, 1999, which was discussed at the December FOMC meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Comments?
Would somebody like to move the proposal?
6VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Move approval.
SPEAKER(?).
Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Without objection.
The next item is the review of the foreign currency instruments, which I presume is a wholly routine item.
Is that correct?
MR.
FISHER.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Unless somebody has any objection, would somebody move renewal of those instruments?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
So move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Second?
MR.
FERGUSON.
Second.
MR.
KOHN.
Mr. Chairman, I think President Broaddus-- MR. BROADDUS.
I am going to vote in opposition of their renewal for the same reasons I have in the past.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The Secretary will please register that President Broaddus voted in opposition.
The next item on the agenda is the Program for Security of FOMC Information.
Does anyone have any comment on the memorandum we received on this?
If not, would somebody like to move approval?
MR.
FERGUSON.
I move that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Second?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Without objection.
7MR.
BERNARD.
Mr. Chairman, I presume that what is being approved would include the revisions that were noted in the memo that was just circulated.
Perhaps all members have not seen that.
Except for item number 6 in that memo, the others will be implemented.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The next item on the agenda is the approval of the proposed changes in the Federal Open Market Committee’s Rules and Procedures.
It is a routine matter involving the inclusion of communication by “electronic means” as an acceptable form for communication between the Secretary and the members of the Committee, and I presume that no one has any comments.
If you do, speak up.
If not, would somebody like to move that?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Move approval.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Second?
MR.
FERGUSON.
Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Without objection.
We will now move to the regular formal meeting agenda.
I ask for approval of the minutes of our December meeting.
MR.
FERGUSON.
So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Without objection.
Peter Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will be referring to the package of charts with the peach Class II cover on it, beginning as usual with the chart on forward deposit rates.
1 The top panel depicts U.S.
forward rates and current 3-month rates.
As you can see there, forward rates backed up from the time of your December meeting through early January and then flattened out a bit, even as the current 3-month deposit rate--the black line--remained quite steady.
Then, with the noticeable exception of the spike in the 6-month forward rate, the solid red line--that spike being a true data point--these rates generally moved sideways from the time of the Chairman’s speech on January 13 at the Economic Club of New York through last Friday.
The movements in these 1 A copy of the charts used by Mr. Fisher is appended to this transcript.
(Appendix 1) 8rates seemed to reflect noise rather than any specific developments we could point to.
By the time we reached mid-January, the markets had already pretty much priced in an expectation of about 50 basis points of tightening sometime during the first quarter of this year.
Now, the release of the GDP and ECI data on Friday did affect the forward rates a bit, as the 9-month forward rate shown at the very top right of the chart backed up almost 20 basis points.
However, the April fed funds futures contract backed up only about 9 basis points from a rate of 5.97 to 6.06 percent.
The fed funds futures isn’t shown here, but to give you the flavor, I’d say that the market had pretty much built in its expectations of a first-quarter tightening by the middle of January.
My point is that the data releases on Friday changed the outlook beyond the first quarter somewhat, but did not change very profoundly the sense of the Committee’s likely actions during the first quarter.
In contrast a bit, while European forward rates also drifted up, as shown in the middle panel in blue, once we got to January these rates leveled out to a considerable extent and remained that way until the 27th when the euro closed below dollar parity for the first time.
You can see the uptick at that time in all the rates.
Particularly noticeable is how much the current 3-month deposit rate, the black line, moved in the expectation that the ECB might need to respond in some way.
In the bottom panel, you can see that Japanese rates also rose a bit from late December through early January, and then began to drift off after mid- January.
There had been a fair amount of talk in Tokyo in late December and early January about the need for the Bank of Japan to develop an exit strategy from its zero interest rate policy.
But around mid-January Bank of Japan officials, both in reports and in comments, began to express more anxiety regarding the fact that the self-sustaining recovery was not in sight.
This seemed to be confirmed by the very weak consumption data that came out last Friday.
But from the middle of January onward, as you can see, the forward rates in Japan began to fall back to their low levels.
Turning to the next page, there was rather more excitement in the Treasury bond market.
In the top panel you can see 2-, 5-, 10-, and 30-year Treasury yields as they have traded since October 1st.
The bottom panel depicts various spreads within the yield curve--the 2- to 5-year in green, the 5- to 10-year in blue, and the 10- to 30-year in red.
Treasury yields were rising from late November and continued to rise after your last meeting, but they too began to move sideways roughly from January 13th forward.
<START>In this case, in addition to the Chairman’s speech on 9that day, Secretary Summers announced the final plans for the buyback program to repurchase outstanding Treasury debt.<END>
In his remarks and the press release he suggested they would be buying as much as $30 billion in the year 2000, most of that probably at the long end.
That should be seen against the backdrop of expectations already in the market, before the buybacks came into play, that the Treasury’s net paydown of securities in the first half of this year would be something on the order of $150 to $200 billion.
With that shift in the bond supply outlook being emphasized in the market, you can see in the bottom panel how quickly the 10- and 30-year spread began to invert after the January 13th announcement.
The drama came last Friday with the release of the GDP and ECI data.
Prior to that date, there really had been two contending camps in the market.
One saw the inversion of the yield curve as a temporary phenomenon, expecting the curve to steepen again once this Committee began to tighten over the course of the first quarter.
They were thus taking short positions in the long end.
A different camp expected the inversion of the yield curve to continue.
They expected it to flatten when this Committee began its widely expected tightening.
They anticipated a reduction in Treasury supply at the long end but an increasing agency and corporate supply in the short end.
And it was also their sense that a late cycle firming by the central bank should slow activity and foster a rally in the bond market.
Thus, they took long positions in the long end of the bond market.
Last Friday, the initial reaction seemed to favor the first camp as the yield curve backed up, and some in that camp seem to have been tempted to double up their positions.
<START>But then the yield curve began to go down rather quickly again, and they were caught scrambling to cover their shorts, which caused a fair bit of see-sawing in the yield curve all day on Friday.<END>
Bid-ask spreads in the market on Friday were not as wide as the widest we saw in October 1998, but during the course of the day they were comparable to the averages of October 1998.
So, bid-ask spreads widened out quite a bit.
You can see in the bottom panel the profound impact that last Friday’s new data had on the 5- to 10-year and the 10- to 30-year spread.
The only upward slope left in the coupon curve is in the 2- to 5-year sector.
As this position adjustment washes through the market, I think we are increasingly going to see a flat Treasury curve, with conversations in the market increasingly turning to whether this is just a Treasury supply story or a fundamental story in some way.
The next page depicts some domestic yield curve comparisons.
In the upper left is the Treasury yield curve from last October 5th, showing the closing rates after the Committee’s October meeting and those as of yesterday.
10In the upper right is the interest rate swap curve.
The lower left panel has Fannie Mae yields and the lower right those on Ford Motor Company debt.
While they are all at different levels, the spreads to Treasuries are really very little changed from October.
Only the 30-year swap spread is discernibly wider than in October.
All other domestic spreads to Treasuries have narrowed slightly or are unchanged from October 5th.
The short ends of each of these other domestic curves are noticeably steep, but they are less steep than they were in October.
And they are all quite flat now from 5 to 30 years and from 10 to 30 years.
My own sense is that the Treasury yield curve has a very powerful influence on these other curves, the habit of trading at certain spreads.
So, while I don’t want to overstate the importance of the Treasury supply story, I would not want to understate it either.
However, none of these yield curves suggests to me that the rest of the domestic interest rate market is expecting a sudden outbreak of inflation.
I don’t think they would be trading at such a flat long-end spread even in thin markets.
A rather different picture emerges on the next page where our yield curve is compared to other national government yield curves.
As you can see in the top two panels, U.S.
and Canadian yield curves are really quite similar, with Canadians yields just a bit below U. S. Treasury yields, as they have been since the fall.
But in the bottom two panels you can see the rather dramatic differences between our yield curve and those of the United Kingdom and Germany.
The United Kingdom is everyone’s poster child for the impact on a government bond market of a firm to tightening central bank policy and a shrinking government issuance of long-term debt.
Those who are wondering how long a rally we can get in our bond market have in the back of their minds this picture of the U.K.
yield curve.
In contrast is the rather steep continental curve, the German yield curve;
relative to last October it provides a striking contrast to the U.K.
and U.S.
yield curves.
I don’t think the difference between their yield curve and ours is a first-order cause of the weakness of the euro over the last few days, but it is certainly a contributing one, given that the differentials have continued to widen in the dollar’s favor since last October.
<START>The chart on the next page depicts from the beginning of October to date the percent change in selected currencies against the dollar.<END>
This highlights how much of an outlier the euro is.
As you can see, the Brazilian real and the Canadian dollar have been firming against the dollar, the Japanese yen and the Mexican peso have been trading around zero, and the euro has weakened profoundly over the last few days.
11One of the most anticipated events of January 2000, I would guess after all the hoop-la about the Y2K bug, was the expected rally in the euro.
It was so widely anticipated that there was no one left to make it happen!
<START>Institutional investors have been buying euro assets and running them on an unhedged basis mostly in the currency market, hoping for the euro rally to give them a greater kick in their investments.<END>
<START>In the last few days, as we came to the end of January, these investors ran out of patience and began hedging those exposures in rather vast amounts, rushing to hedge the unhedged.<END>
I was given some advice once by someone in the market that the history of exchange rate volatility is the history of successive new classes of actors learning how to hedge and how not to hedge.
Turning to the next page and our open market operations, you can see that the movements in the three key reserve factors since December 15th required us to add a total of $70 billion in reserves from that point forward.
You can also see how, after the turn of the year, the Treasury balance and currency in circulation began to drop off very quickly, causing the whole position of reserve factors to reverse.
On the next page is a bar graph showing how our operations at the turn of the year were structured to help us meet this buildup and then to pull back rather quickly.
The dark blue portions of the bars represent the RPs that we already had in place as of the 15th of December;
the green-dashed portions are those that we put on starting on the 15th.
The yellow portions indicate the forward RPs we executed in our effort to put in some additional reserves around the year-end.
The red negative parts are the matched sales that we conducted during the first half of January as we tried to get our position back in balance.
But overall, the rather large amount of RPs that we had put on the book and rolled off rather quickly in January worked rather well.
I included the charts on the next page to show you the interest rate behavior at the short end of the money market that we saw around year-end.
The top panel has comparable data for last year’s turn from December 1998 to January 1999.
The effective fed funds rate is the green line, the Treasury RP rate the blue line, the target fed funds rate the black line, and the morning fed funds rate at the time we operate the red line.
You can see at the bottom how we did this year.
We had a much softer market several days before the year-end and then rather less volatility in January once we got through the turn of the year.
What led to the rather profound softness those days before the year-end is in part a mystery, but as best we can judge we think that the scarcity of Treasury collateral was a major factor that pulled repo rates down and had some influence on the funds rate.
In addition, however, there was a widespread perception in the market that we were flooding the market with liquidity.
<START>Market participants had data on our 12gross operations but not our net operations.<END>
They were not able to see the information depicted in the first chart I showed you on the factors that were draining reserves.
The next page shows the behavior of the funds rate and reserves in the two maintenance periods that surrounded the year-end.
In the top two panels on the funds rate, the blue line depicts the trading range, the red horizontal line is the daily effective rate, and the red vertical line represents one standard deviation.
In the bottom panels on the key reserve factors, the blue bar shows the actual free reserves on the day and each black dot represents our intended level of free reserves on the day.
The red bar is the borrowing that occurred on each day, both discount window and SLF borrowing.
Interesting from my perspective is how soft the funds rate became, as you can see in the top left panel, on December 24, 27, 28, and 29.
That happened even though, as you can see below, we actually were leaving in rather normal, if modest--some might even say skimpy--levels of free reserves on each day.
The amounts were quite typical, or if anything skimpy, for the end of a maintenance period.
Nonetheless, the funds market got quite soft on those days.
<START>And, as I say, that occurred I think significantly on the perception that we were flooding the markets, since they only saw our gross operations and not the impact of our net operations.<END>
Clearly, at the start of the next period that covered the year-end, we did flood the market for the reserves in that new maintenance period on the 30th and 31st.
But as you can see, we had a negative miss on the 31st itself of more than $2 billion.
So we did not even get in as many reserves as we were shooting for.
Again, though, we subsequently were able to get the funds rate to trade around the target level relatively quickly by draining reserves.
We got down to an historic low operating balance in the banking system of $8-1/2 billion on January 6th and still kept the funds rate reasonably well behaved.
Another way of viewing our operations during the fourth quarter of last year through the period until this meeting is shown on the next page.
You may recall that I have used this chart before as a measure of our performance.
Each dot is a day.
The horizontal axis is the deviation from the target rate-- that is, the effective deviation, zero being the target and plus or minus either side.
The vertical axis is each day’s daily standard deviation in basis point terms.
As you can see, over the fourth quarter of last year and January of this year the funds rate was reasonably well contained.
As indicated by the median values in the table in the upper right, the deviation of the effective rate from the target in absolute terms was only 8 basis points and the standard deviation was just 9 basis points.
13The next page shows comparable data for the previous year, October 1998 to January 1999, also covering the period of market turmoil typical of the fourth quarter.
As is apparent, we had a rather more volatile market in 1998 than we had this year.
The final page gives one more way of comparing volatility;
it plots the same data against a norm established from the two previous years.
That is, the brown box and the green box are based on data from October 1996 through January 1997 and from October 1997 to January 1998.
Fifty percent of the observations in those two 4-month periods fell within the brown line and 25 percent within the green line;
that provides a sort of base case.
You can see that in October 1998 to January 1999 we succeeded in getting only 11 percent of the days to fall within that tight range and only 24 percent within the 50 percent range, whereas this year the comparable figures were 31 percent and 51 percent.
So I guess we can say we at least lived up to our own standard for managing the funds rate for the two year-end periods prior to 1998.
I would like to thank the Committee for giving us the tools to help us to do this.
It made a great deal of difference.
I should note that the funds rate has been firm thus far over the last two days.
Those days encompassed a month-end and a first day of the month, normally firm days in the market.
But there is also a widespread expectation of a firming in rates by the Committee, and there is not much chance of getting the funds rate to behave in a “normal” way in these last couple of days.
Finally, we distributed to the Committee copies of the Desk’s annual report via our secure Web site.
I hope you all had access to that as well as to the other reports that we now make available there.
Mr. Chairman, we will need to ratify the Domestic Desk’s operations since the last meeting.
I would be happy to answer any questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>I would just like to say that I thought the Desk handled this very turbulent period extremely well and I found your report most informative.<END>
<START>I am glad that we were able to unwind ourselves from this period without any undue casualties--or at least none of which I am aware.<END>
MR.
FISHER.
Thank you very much!
MR.
BOEHNE.
I would second that.
I think you earned an A+ for the way you performed through this period;
you and your staff deserve congratulations.
I have a question, 14even though you did so very well!
[Laughter] Did you learn anything through this process that would lead you to want to do something differently if we had a similar episode to go through in the future?
MR.
FISHER.
Well, we will be bringing forward as many of those issues as we can think of to be discussed formally at the March meeting.
<START>I will say that what was very frustrating for us, and I am partly responsible, was the asymmetry of the information we provided.<END>
That is, we gave the market very detailed information about our gross operations and then they got a once-a-week snapshot of the System’s balance sheet.
They thought that page represented our operations--that it was our base.
They saw our only our gross operations.
<START>There were days when there were rumors that the Desk was flooding the market with reserves, and in fact we were leaving them barely enough to get by.<END>
So that was very frustrating.
If I had to go through a period like that again--and maybe always, but certainly in similar circumstances--I think I would want to be more balanced and give out information on our net operations as well as our gross operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
I would like to make a comment also to applaud the conduct of the Desk.
<START>But since I got to drop in and watch them on occasion, I want to note that one would have thought that this was the most relaxing period that any group of very young people was going through.<END>
And they are very young.
Peter Fisher and Sandy Krieger are ancient compared to the average age of the staff involved!
It was commendable that they behaved as if going through this firestorm was the most normal thing in the world.
MR.
FISHER.
If I could--I should have mentioned it in my briefing--I would like to thank the staff from all the other Reserve Districts, particularly those in the cash offices, that 15provided us with a much higher level of information than usual and made some of this forecasting a lot easier.
<START>There was a tremendous effort on the part of every Bank’s cash operations staff, and we may be coming back to you to find out whether we shouldn’t make some permanent improvements in the flow of information in that regard.<END>
But I want to thank staff from the whole System for their efforts during this period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions for Peter?
If not, I assume there is no problem ratifying the actions the Desk took during the period.
Would someone like to move approval?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Move approval.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Without objection.
Mike Prell, Karen Johnson, and Dave Stockton.
MR.
PRELL.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I almost hesitate to refer you to this rather tame set of charts after the abundance of color you have just seen.
But this is what we have!
2 Chart 1 summarizes our forecast.
But, before I get into the numbers here, I should take note of some late-breaking news.
First was the upside surprise in the BEA’s advance estimate of fourth-quarter GDP, published on Friday.
The 5.8 percent real output increase exceeded our guess by about a half point.
However, we decided not to redo the forecast and to go with the Greenbook numbers for this presentation.
This wasn’t simply for the sake of convenience.
To be sure, BEA knew more about the fine detail of the fourth-quarter data than we did, but the key differences between their estimate and ours related mainly to assumptions about missing numbers.
And we were reasonably content to stick with ours for the time being.
<START>We would have said that if BEA’s estimates proved closer to the mark, it would have tended to argue for weaker GDP growth in the near term than we forecast, with lesser contributions from defense purchases and inventory investment.<END>
This morning’s release on construction put in place in December has reinforced that argument:
Construction spending now 2 A copy of the charts used by Mr. Prell, Ms. Johnson, and Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript.
(Appendix 2).
16appears to have been stronger than either BEA or we anticipated, especially in the state and local sector, where good weather may have given a temporary boost to building.
<START>All things considered, however, our basic assessment still would be that the economy is running strong enough that--absent a considerable further tightening of financial conditions--pressures on resources will intensify over the projection period.<END>
We’ve assumed, though, an increase in the fed funds rate of about a point and a quarter by this fall, and on that basis we’re projecting that real GDP will grow in the vicinity of 4 percent this year and next.
As you can see in the upper panels, we are anticipating that domestic spending will decelerate appreciably;
<START>however, that is largely offset by a lessening of the negative contribution to GDP growth from the trade sector.<END>
<START>With potential output rising at about the same pace as actual GDP, we expect that the unemployment rate--in the middle panel--will remain near the recent level, in the vicinity of 4 percent.<END>
<START>The tightness of the labor market and other factors suggest that inflation will generally be tending to move higher, but we’re projecting that the price of crude oil will decline and damp the rise in overall consumer inflation this year and next.<END>
As you can see in the bottom panels--most easily in the table--we have PCE prices rising 2 percent, the same as in 1999, while the CPI rise slows a bit from last year’s pace.
I have also included in the chart, as the red line, a plot of the “current-methods” version of the CPI, for those who might wish to make historical comparisons for that series on a more consistent basis.
With that overview, let’s turn to the guts of the forecast.
Chart 2 explores the financial backdrop.
The top left panel shows the P/E for the S&P 500, but with the index broken into two components:
the top 50 by market cap in each period, and the remaining 450.
This may be a dubious analytical device in some respects;
however, it does illustrate that, while investors’ craving for big-cap growth stocks--especially “tech” stocks--has lifted the favored few to very high P/Es, even the rest of the index has enjoyed a considerable valuation boost.
<START>The result is that, at this aggregative level, nothing looks especially cheap by historical standards--even when the P/Es are measured, as they are here, in terms of the rosy earnings forecasts of security analysts.<END>
We don’t have the earnings forecasts for the full set of NASDAQ stocks, but I’m confident that, if we did, the P/E rise for them would be only a little less startling than that shown on the basis of trailing 12-month earnings in the right panel.
<START>17I won’t belabor the point, but we continue to believe that the valuations are unrealistic and that this creates the risk of a large downward adjustment.<END>
However, we also recognize that it is impossible to predict when the bubble--if that’s what it is--will stop expanding, let alone burst.
Therefore, once again, we’ve taken a sort of middle position, anticipating that stock prices simply will fluctuate around their January average as the Fed tightens and earnings growth disappoints.
That would leave price-earnings multiples not far below their recent peaks;
<START>by that measure, equity capital would remain relatively cheap, but it probably wouldn’t be an environment in which the new issue market was quite so receptive.<END>
In the credit markets, the alternative measures in the middle left panel both show that real 10-year Treasury yields have moved up considerably in the past year or so.
And the prevailing real rate levels are not low by the standards of the past decade and a half.
But, if you buy our analysis of productivity trends, you might suspect that the equilibrium real rate has risen in the latter half of the 1990s.
In our forecast, we have nominal bond yields rising--to around 7 percent for longer-term Treasuries.
This implies some flattening of the yield curve, shown at the right;
if, however, market participants should sense that the Fed is not in the process of reining in the emerging step-up in core inflation, such a flattening is less likely.
We have, in effect, assumed that longer-term inflation expectations will ratchet up only a little during the projection period.
Looking beyond the Treasury sector, the bottom panels suggest that there has been some diminution in the froth in private credit markets since the Russian and LTCM shocks of 1998.
However, with Y2K concerns removed, junk bond spreads have reversed a portion of their late-1998 widening--even as default rates have continued to rise.
And banks, though not reversing all of the tightening of business lending standards they did in the wake of the 1998 turmoil, have not been firming aggressively since then;
by most reports, banks and other institutions continue to be actively seeking lending opportunities.
<START>And we anticipate only a mild tightening of credit availability over coming quarters because we don’t see an especially scary deterioration in business or household debt repayment performance, given the continuing high level of economic activity.<END>
<START>In sum, we’re anticipating that financing conditions will become less accommodative of demand growth but not harshly so.<END>
The most important element of restraint, as we see it, is the loss of impetus to consumer spending from the stock market.
As shown in the top left panel of Chart 3, consumer sentiment according to the Michigan SRC 18index has been trending upward since 1994.
This has been a period of strong growth in employment and income, and people have become increasingly confident that the good times will continue to roll.
The stock market has both reflected and reinforced that sentiment.
But, as indicated at the right, our flat stock market path implies that the household wealth-income ratio will be falling.
<START>The wealth effect on consumption will gradually move from positive to negative, and as may be seen at the middle left, this (along with the dynamics of the accelerator effect for durables) is expected to push PCE growth below that of disposable income by 2001.<END>
Soaring consumer confidence and wealth also have played a role in the housing market.
As you can see at the right, perceptions of homebuying conditions, as reported in the SRC survey, have deteriorated as mortgage rates have risen since the end of 1998.
And, as shown at the lower left, the combination of higher rates and rising house prices has raised the ratio of the fixed-rate mortgage payment on a new home to personal income over this time span.
<START>Some buyers have moderated the immediate cash-flow hit by opting for adjustable rate loans, but this avenue will become less attractive under our monetary policy assumption.<END>
With builders whittling down their sizable backlogs of orders, we expect that housing starts--especially singles--will be trending lower through 2001.
However, with home purchase still relatively affordable and people remaining quite wealthy, we’re looking for only a mild contraction in residential construction.
Chart 4 examines the outlook for business investment.
We’re projecting that real spending on equipment and software will continue growing rapidly, while the decline in outlays for nonresidential structures seems likely to bottom out at some point in the next two years.
At the right, you can see that the net result is total BFI growth of around 10 percent, up from 1999, but in line with the trend of recent years.
As we indicated in the Greenbook, this might seem a remarkably strong forecast, given the normal pattern of accelerator effects:
that is, with output growing at a pretty steady pace for several years, one might have looked for investment to weaken.
<START>However, that effect is overridden in our projection by the ongoing decline in the relative price of equipment--especially the sharp drop in computer prices shown in the middle left panel--and by the increased contribution of replacement investment.<END>
As reflected in the right panel, the increasing importance of investment in computers and other short-lived items has caused the ratio of depreciation to the size of the capital stock to rise rapidly in this decade, implying that more and more gross investment is needed each year simply to replace old equipment and software.
The contribution of replacement investment to spending has risen 19by several percentage points and is projected to account for more than half of the increase in gross E&S outlays this year and next.
<START>As for inventories, in the bottom panels, we’re expecting that the aggregate ratio of stocks to sales will drift lower as a consequence of improved supply-chain management--and with some inducement from high real interest rates.<END>
<START>Nonfarm inventories are projected to grow a little more than 4 percent per year--a shade faster than GDP on average, but a bit slower than business sales.<END>
Turning to the final segment of domestic demand, Chart 5 offers some perspectives on the outlook for the government sector.
For the federal government, the question is whether any of the ex ante on-budget surplus will survive.
As you can see from the lower black line in the upper left panel, we have the on-budget surplus rising to nearly $50 billion in fiscal 2001.
Our assumption--depicted at the upper right--is that discretionary spending will be held at the higher real level reached in the current fiscal year.
In part, we made this assumption on the thought that Congress and the Administration would be constrained by less optimistic official surplus projections, such as that of the CBO shown at the left as the red line.
But the risk is that, before a deal has been inked, the budget outlook will shift in our direction and there will be an irresistible temptation to add more spending or cut taxes.
If so, the fiscal impetus, which we see as essentially zero next year on our assumption, will turn out to be positive, continuing the pattern of 1999 and 2000.
In the state and local sector, large budget surpluses also may prove a temptation for more expansive fiscal postures.
We are anticipating that the aggregate surplus will be reduced somewhat by another year of cuts in state income and sales taxes, shown at the right, and by a continuation of relatively rapid growth in purchases.
Karen will now examine the influence of the external sector on the outlook for the economy.
MS.
JOHNSON.
Economic activity in the rest of the world continues to expand, and prospects for this year and next are favorable for most regions.
Moderate to vigorous real output growth around the globe poses risks that inflationary pressures could emerge in world commodity markets, and eventually product markets more generally, and that we could be underestimating the upward momentum generated by the interaction of simultaneous expansion.
A possible offset to these risks is the extent to which other countries, particularly other industrial countries, may be beginning to experience the kind of acceleration of productivity that we 20have seen in the past few years in the United States.
As yet, the data provide no compelling evidence that this is happening.
Your next chart presents developments in foreign exchange markets and recent short-term interest rates for selected foreign countries.
<START>In the top left panel, the decline in recent months in the value of the dollar relative to the yen (the green line) is in sharp contrast to its rise relative to the euro (the blue line).<END>
The pound (in red) has changed little against the dollar over the past year.
The net effect of these divergent moves is that the index for the dollar relative to our major industrial country trading partners (the black line) has declined since your meeting last June but is up on balance from a year ago.
As can be seen in the panel on the right, three-month interest rates have moved up for each of these regions with the exception of Japan.
These rate increases reflect a full retracing of the official rate reduction in 1999 by the ECB and a partial retracing by the Bank of England of declines implemented from late 1998 through mid-1999.
In contrast, the Bank of Japan has maintained its zero interest rate policy since March of last year.
Despite the absence of recent or prospective tightening by the Bank of Japan in the near future, the yen has appreciated strongly against the dollar and the euro.
The middle left panel shows that in terms of the dollar, the exchange rates of Thailand and Korea have stabilized on balance since the end of 1998.
The Hong Kong dollar and the Chinese renminbi have sustained their rates at a constant value in terms of the dollar over the entire interval shown.
In contrast to the experience of industrial countries, short-term market interest rates, reported in the panel on the right, have generally not been rising in emerging Asia over the past six months.
The exception is Korea, line 1, where economic recovery has been particularly strong.
Moreover, spreads of dollar rates paid by these countries over U.S.
Treasury rates have been narrowing.
In the bottom left panel, the continued stability of the Argentine peso and the relative stability of the Mexican peso over the past several months contrast somewhat with the fluctuations of the Brazilian real.
On balance over the past six months the real is little changed as it has regained since October some of its loss against the dollar earlier in the year.
Short-term domestic interest rates have moved down in these countries, and Brady bond spreads of dollar rates compared with U.S.
Treasury rates have narrowed significantly.
The next chart reports stock market developments in these countries.
<START>In most, stock market prices have risen recently, often to levels well above 21those at the start of 1997, before the global financial crisis.<END>
In the industrial countries, the upper left panel, European stock prices can be seen to have risen as much or more than U.S.
prices.
The exception is Japan, where equity prices have risen sharply since late 1998 but are only now about back to their early 1997 level.
Stock prices in Mexico and Brazil, on the right, are also up sharply, especially recently.
<START>In Argentina, where recession has been deep and prolonged, equity values have only partially recovered from their losses since their peak in mid-1997.<END>
Equity markets in Asia, bottom left, have also rebounded sharply, putting indexes in Hong Kong and Korea above pre-crisis levels.
Chinese stock market prices have shot up recently.
Those in Thailand are recovering, but remain below previous highs.
<START>When expressed in dollars, the performance of stock prices in these developing countries is not quite so impressive, but they are still up significantly.<END>
The lower right panels compare equity pricing in Germany with that in the United States.
The black lines are the respective real yields on 10-year bonds in the two countries, using moving weighted averages of consumer price changes to proxy for expected inflation.
The red lines are measures of the earnings yield, the inverse of the price/earnings ratio, constructed from twelve-month ahead forecasts of earnings.
In both countries, the real interest rate has moved up over the past year.
With unchanged projected earnings and a constant equity premium, a higher real interest rate implies a larger discount factor for the earnings stream, a lower stock price, and therefore a higher earnings yield;
the red and black lines would in this circumstance move together.
Instead the two lines tend to move in opposite directions, with the most recent decline in the German earnings yield even larger than that for the United States.
Stock prices are rising relative to near-term expected earnings despite the apparently higher discount factor.
<START>Such a development suggests that the equity risk premium that investors require has narrowed and/or that expectations of longer-term earnings growth have been revised upward.<END>
Taken together, the financial variables on these two charts suggest a favorable climate for real economic activity around the globe.
<START>High and rising stock prices suggest significant optimism toward earnings by firms as well as a declining cost of capital for equity financing of new investment.<END>
Consumption is likely to be buoyed by the increased wealth implied by the high stock valuations.
Short-term interest rates and risk spreads are generally falling in those regions most troubled during the crisis years of 1997 and 1998.
Investors appear to have regained some confidence in opportunities in those countries, and the price of risk has moderated.
Of course, investor optimism about earnings in one or more regions might prove to be excessive, and equity risk could be underpriced.
A market correction in a major country would likely trigger similar moves elsewhere.
<START>22Mindful that there are both upside and downside risks, the staff has constructed in the Greenbook an outlook for growth abroad that is quite positive and that reflects the generally supportive global financial conditions just reviewed.<END>
The upper left panel of your next chart compares our outlook for the United States with that of an average for our foreign trading partners.
The rebound of activity in several regions from earlier depressed levels resulted in average growth of more than 4 percent at an annual rate in the first half of last year.
We estimate that during the second half, foreign growth moderated just a bit, and we look for it to be sustained at an average annual rate of about 3-3/4 percent through the end of the forecast period--a bit less than the Greenbook projection for U.S.
growth.
By region, as you can see on the table at the right, we expect moderate to strong growth in most areas, with the notable exception of Japan, line 1.
<START>We remain somewhat pessimistic about the Japanese outlook as fiscal stimulus flags, exports are restrained by the strong yen, and domestic demand grows only slowly.<END>
The middle panels show industrial production in industrial countries on the left and in selected developing countries on the right.
Of these industrial countries, Canada has shown the greatest increase in production, but there has been a clear acceleration in the index in the euro area and in the United Kingdom in 1999.
Japan has shown some signs of a recovery in production, but output has been erratic and remains below its level in early 1998.
The rebound in business confidence in the major foreign industrial countries is evident in the lower left panel.
This change in attitude should help to foster stronger growth in domestic demand in these countries.
Among the developing countries, the recovery in Korea (the black line in the middle right panel) has been so rapid that capturing it on the scale would mask significant growth in Mexico and recovery in Brazil.
Korean industrial production has increased about 40 percent since January 1998.
The need for external adjustment was a driving force in the macro policy choices made in the emerging market countries during the crisis.
<START>As can be seen in the lower right, the developing countries in Asia (line 1) were able to achieve a substantial aggregate external surplus in 1998, which diminished slightly in 1999 as growth resumed and imports recovered.<END>
We expect that continued moderate growth should lead to some further erosion of their aggregate surplus.
For the Latin American countries (line 4), the pressures of financing an external deficit remain acute, and macro policies will need to take this into account.
Some improvement did occur last year, and we expect a bit more this year.
Nevertheless, these Latin American countries remain vulnerable, with their policy options more limited, as a result of their external position.
23On balance our outlook is for buoyant activity in the rest of the world on average over the next two years.
We should continue to see a reduction in economic slack in Asia, Europe, and Latin America.
These prospects have implications for prices that are the subject of your next chart.
One place to look for a signal of global price pressures is in the futures markets for traded commodities, such as agricultural products and metals.
The top left panel shows soybean prices and the futures quotes at the time of your last chart show and last Friday.
Although global demand has recovered significantly since mid-1999, actual and futures prices for soybeans have only partially recovered from recent declines.
There is some variance in how futures prices have moved for other grains, but for the most part supply conditions have kept prices for these commodities from moving rapidly.
In contrast, copper prices, shown on the right, are now substantially higher than six months or one year ago.
Other metals and related commodities show similar increases.
Futures prices going forward continue to show a much slower rate of increase, however, than that recorded last year.
In light of these market developments, we are projecting that our index of non-oil commodity prices, shown in the middle left, which rebounded sharply at the end of 1999, will rise at about an annual rate of 4 percent this year and a bit less next year.
This contrasts with the commodity price deflation that occurred from mid-1997 to mid-1999.
Spot oil prices, shown on the right, spiked up in 1999 as world demand recovered and as oil producers were successful in restraining supply.
<START>As explained in the Greenbook, we anticipate that some extension of the current agreement among OPEC and other producers will be put in place at the end of March, but that over time additional increases in supply will emerge, putting downward pressure on prices.<END>
We project that the U.S.
oil import price will move back down to about $17 per barrel by the end of next year.
<START>Some pickup in inflation abroad and the move from dollar appreciation to a constant and then slightly depreciating dollar should impart some additional upward pressure on U.S.<END>
prices from imports.
Foreign prices expressed in dollars are shown in the lower left panel.
The non-industrial countries, in particular, had been a source of downward pressure in 1997 and 1998.
That has now reversed, and both groups of countries have been imparting upward pressure for the past year.
As can be seen on the right, we expect core import prices, the red line, to rise moderately throughout the forecast period, largely as a result of the contribution of foreign prices expressed in dollars.
Your next chart summarizes the implications of the foreign outlook for the U.S.
external sector.
As can be seen in the top left panel, real imports, when measured in chained 1996 dollars, substantially exceed real exports.
24The dots indicate the slight discrepancy between the fourth quarter numbers released by the BEA on Friday and our Greenbook projection.
<START>Going forward, we expect that annual real import growth over 2000 and 2001 will exceed that of real exports by about 1-1/2 percentage points despite the strong recovery of foreign growth and some help from the dollar.<END>
The key relationships between relative growth rates and prices and our trade balance are centered on core exports and imports, shown on the right.
Foreign GDP growth boosted core exports in 1999 (line 2) and should continue to support moderate growth this year and next.
<START>Reflecting our projected path for the dollar, relative prices (line 3) switch from retarding exports to stimulating them.<END>
should GDP growth is projected to provide a significantly larger boost to core imports (line 5) than the analogous line for exports, owing to the historical tendency for U.S.
However, U.S.
imports to be more sensitive to income growth than are exports.
<START>Even with some slowing imparted by relative prices (line 6), core import growth remains above that of core exports.<END>
The middle left panel translates this projection for exports and imports into contributions to real GDP growth.
The positive contribution from exports should slowly rise, on balance, through the end of 2001 while the negative contribution of imports diminishes.
The panel on the right shows the implications of these trade projections for the nominal current account balance (the black line) and its ratio to GDP (the red line).
We expect that the balance will exceed $400 billion in the first quarter of this year and will reach nearly $500 billion by the end of next year.
At about 4-1/2 percent of GDP, the deficit will significantly exceed the previous low point reached in 1987.
In order to evaluate the longer-term implications of our current estimates of the underlying trade relationships and the stronger outlook for U.S.
trend growth, we used our somewhat more aggregated long-term model for the U.S.
external sector to simulate the current account as a ratio of GDP out to 2015.
The results are shown in the bottom panels.
The baseline path (the black line) follows the Greenbook for this year and next and then assumes that U.S.
and foreign real GDP return to potential levels in the medium-term and then grow at potential rates over the remainder of the simulation.
To provide some scope for adjustment, we put into the baseline an ongoing 1 percent rate of depreciation of the dollar in real terms, starting in 2002.
In the baseline, the ratio of the deficit to GDP stabilizes for a time as U.S.
growth is assumed to slow below potential and foreign output accelerates.
Once that adjustment is complete and domestic and foreign 25output grow at trend, the ratio again deteriorates, reaching 10 percent in 2011, and would continue to do so.
<START>In the left panel, we show the simulation results of a one-time 25 percent drop in the value of the dollar phased in over 2002 followed by a return to the baseline assumptions.<END>
<START>Such a sharp drop in the exchange rate has a pronounced effect initially, and the current account deficit recovers to 3 percent of GDP.<END>
<START>The benefit of that depreciation subsequently erodes, however, and the rate of worsening in the current account ratio returns toward the baseline outcome.<END>
The right hand panel gives the results for a simulation of a steady depreciation of the dollar in real terms of 5 percent per year.
Although such a depreciation does not eliminate the continuous worsening of the external balance, it slows it substantially.
Under these assumptions, the current account deficit reaches 5-1/2 percent of GDP by 2010.
These simulations suggest that quite sizable declines in the value of the dollar would be needed for that channel alone to provide external adjustment such that the current account stabilizes as a share of GDP.
Dave Stockton will now continue our presentation.
MR.
STOCKTON.
The upper panel of the next chart displays our inflation projection.
As depicted by the black line, consumer prices, measured by the PCE chain-weight index, accelerated a percentage point last year to 2 percent--a pace we expect to hold this year and next.
That relative stability masks what we anticipate will be some deterioration in the underlying inflation picture.
After remaining nearly unchanged at about a 1-1/2 percent pace since 1996, core PCE inflation--the red line--is projected to drift up gradually to a bit above 2 percent over the next two years.
Food prices, the middle left panel, are not expected to exert much influence on headline inflation.
<START>Improving export demand and rising labor costs result in an increase in these prices that is just a bit faster than core.<END>
By contrast, retail energy prices--the right panel--were the principal reason for last year’s acceleration of overall PCE prices and their deceleration this year and next contributes to the relative stability of overall PCE prices going forward.
<START>The slowdown of energy prices provides an offset to a variety of influences on inflation that already have begun to turn less favorable.<END>
Core non-oil import prices--the lower left panel--moved up last year following three years of decline.
And we anticipate continued--albeit modest--upward pressure on import prices over the projection period.
Prices of domestically manufactured intermediate materials--the black line in the lower right panel--also picked up last year.
The rebound has been 26driven by the strengthening of industrial activity that has accompanied the recovery abroad, as well as by the indirect effects of higher oil prices.
This morning’s reading from the purchasing managers’ survey for January on prices paid--the red line--suggests that upward pressures have continued early this year.
Developments in labor markets, the subject of your next chart, also are expected to provide some impetus to inflation over the next two years.
As shown in the upper left panel, employer costs for health insurance continued to accelerate last year after a period of virtual stability in the mid-1990s.
<START>Our forecast is roughly consistent with the available private surveys, which suggest these pressures have not yet diminished and may well be intensifying.<END>
We also are anticipating the enactment of a one dollar increase in the minimum wage, split evenly between October of this year and October 2001.
As shown in the panel to the right, we expect these increases to exert a relatively small effect on compensation costs over the next two years and to be an even smaller influence on prices.
The middle two panels highlight what we believe are likely to be the more fundamental influences on inflation over the next two years--the tightness of labor markets and some deterioration of inflation expectations.
As indicated in the left panel, households perceive a very strong job market.
The gap between households reporting that jobs are plentiful and those reporting that jobs are hard to get is now extremely large.
<START>With regard to inflation expectations, the right panel, both direct survey readings and econometric proxies for the influence of price inflation on wage setting have become less helpful over the past year.<END>
Median one-year-ahead inflation expectations in the Michigan survey--the black line--have moved up about 1/2 percentage point over the past year.
And, distributed lags of past consumer prices, constructed using either PCE prices or the CPI, turned up last year and are poised to increase further in coming quarters.
The bottom line is that we are anticipating some resumption of the uptrend in labor costs.
As we have noted in recent Greenbooks, there are serious flaws in both major measures of compensation change.
The employment cost index--the red line--excludes many types of hiring and retention bonuses, misses the use of promotions as a means of raising wages, and excludes stock options.
Given the increasing prevalence of these and other alternative forms of compensation, the ECI likely has underestimated compensation costs in recent years.
The nonfarm business compensation measure--the black line--does capture “promotion creep” and includes stock options.
<START>However, it measures stock options at their value when exercised rather than the grant value when issued, and thus may 27overstate the cost and distort the timing of firms’ payments for labor services.<END>
<START>Moreover, the nonfarm business measure is estimated with information on benefits that is less timely than that in the ECI.<END>
<START>These uncertainties have made it more difficult to interpret formal models of price determination that rely on wage data.<END>
As a consequence, we have found ourselves leaning more heavily on models that do not involve an explicit link to labor costs.
One such model is shown in the upper panel of chart 13.
This simple reduced-form model makes core PCE a function of its own lags;
food, energy, and import prices;
and the unemployment rate.
The model forecasts a step-up in core PCE inflation over the next two years, reflecting both the tightness of labor markets and the upturn in import and energy prices last year.
The Greenbook projection also calls for some acceleration, but not so much as projected by this model.
In part, we have shaded down our forecast on the thought that, with capacity utilization rates still below historical averages, price pressures may remain more subdued than suggested by the unemployment rate.
<START>As a reminder that science--such as it is--only gets us so far in narrowing the range of possible outcomes, I have included a 70 percent confidence interval for the forecast of this model--the blue shaded area.<END>
It’s constructed from stochastic simulations that account for the uncertainty surrounding the estimates of all of the parameters of this model.
As can be seen, that interval ranges between an outcome with no acceleration in core PCE to an acceleration that breaches 3 percent by 2001.
<START>And, even this exercise understates the uncertainty you face by failing to account for the uncertainty surrounding the model’s basic specification of the inflation process.<END>
The lower panels dispense with an analytical framework--save, perhaps, for a crude version of supply and demand--and simply resort to counting the frequency with which a very broad measure of prices--the GDP price index--has accelerated on a year-over-year basis in various ranges of resource utilization.
For example, as shown in the middle left panel, when the unemployment rate has been in the range of 6 to 7 percent, GDP prices have accelerated 43 percent of the time.
As the unemployment rate declines, the frequency of price acceleration generally increases.
The bar at the far left shows that prices have accelerated every year in the sample when the unemployment rate was less than or equal to 4 percent.
With our projection anticipating the unemployment rate to hover near 4 percent over the next two years, we have clearly entered a danger zone when judged by the historical performance of inflation.
But even this story is a bit murky.
We’re expecting capacity utilization to move up over the next two years, but to remain in the 80 to 82 28percent interval.
As indicated by the corresponding bar in the lower left panel, that range has been associated more often than not with a pickup in GDP prices.
But the frequency of acceleration in that range--about two-thirds of the time--is not nearly so high as that suggested by our forecast of the unemployment rate.
Of course, as the warning goes, past performance is no guarantee of future outcomes.
Indeed, in the second half of the 1990s--at least through 1998--we beat the odds suggested by both the models and this simple summary of historical behavior.
By our reckoning, one of the key factors behind the favorable performance of recent years has been the pickup in potential output and productivity growth--the subject of your next chart.
As shown on line 1 in the upper panel--we are expecting an acceleration of potential output to a 4 percent rate over 2000 and 2001, reflecting a larger contribution from capital deepening--line 4.
Given our investment projection, the growth of capital services--the middle left panel--is projected to trend still higher over the projection interval.
Multifactor productivity--at the right--is expected to continue to increase near the 1 percent pace observed in the past several years.
The 3 percent annual rate increase that we are now projecting for structural productivity is nearly double the pace averaged over the 1980s and early 1990s.
<START>As has been noted around this table, it is impossible to know just how far along we are in the process of implementing new technologies and, consequently, what the scope is for even faster growth of productivity.<END>
The lower panel of the exhibit plots the acceleration of productivity--that is the change in productivity growth--measured here over two-year intervals.
As can be seen, productivity in the nonfarm business sector, measured from either the product or the income side, has been accelerating in recent years.
<START>In our projection, we expect actual productivity to remain close both to the 3 percent pace observed over the past couple of years and to our estimate of structural gains in productivity.<END>
But a further acceleration certainly cannot be ruled out.
Your next chart updates a simulation that we have presented previously to lay out the sensitivity of our projection to alternative trajectories for structural productivity.
As shown in the upper left panel, the first scenario--the red line--considers the consequences of a further acceleration of structural productivity to 4 percent by the end of 2001.
In the remaining panels, I display the economic consequences of that acceleration using a simulation of the Board staff’s large-scale econometric model.
For purposes of this exercise, I have assumed that the federal funds rate is held to the baseline path.
The growth of real GDP--the upper right panel--is much faster under the more optimistic productivity assumption.
Firms and households boost 29spending on equipment, structures, and durable goods in response to the improved future prospects.
<START>As we have noted in the past, in our model, the boost provided to aggregate demand exceeds productivity-augmented supply in the near term, and, in the simulation, the unemployment rate--the middle left panel--declines to well below 4 percent.<END>
<START>Because wages respond sluggishly to both the tighter labor markets and the improvement in productivity, compensation inflation--at the right--is only marginally higher over the next two years than in the Greenbook.<END>
<START>That sluggish behavior of wages in the face of accelerating productivity leads to an increase in the profit share--the lower left panel--which provides a boost to equity prices and feeds back to stronger aggregate demand.<END>
<START>Faster productivity growth and the competitive pressures that follow fatter profit margins also help to keep a lid on price inflation--the right panel.<END>
Core PCE price inflation is projected to level out at just under 2 percent in the faster productivity scenario.
Of course, it is possible that we have gotten carried away by the stellar performance of productivity in the past few years.
<START>Any reliable separation of structural from transient increases in productivity is difficult in the midst of an ongoing expansion.<END>
The second scenario shown in the upper left panel considers a gradual deceleration in structural productivity to about 2 percent by the end of the forecast interval, well below the pace we believe has prevailed in recent years but still more rapid than the 1974 to 1995 average.
Obviously, the economic outcome would be considerably less favorable than in the Greenbook.
<START>There would be a pronounced slowing in the growth of real GDP and a clear upturn in the unemployment rate.<END>
<START>With productivity slowing more rapidly than wage inflation, the profit share would drop.<END>
Firms would raise prices more quickly in order to restore profit margins that are squeezed by rising unit labor costs, and core PCE inflation would move up toward 2-1/2 percent.
Mike will now complete our presentation.
MR.
PRELL.
Just to wrap up quickly, the final chart summarizes the forecasts you submitted.
The central tendency for real GDP growth is 3-1/2 to 3-3/4 percent, somewhat below the Greenbook number, and you see no significant change in the unemployment rate over the course of the year, as is the case in our forecast.
Your PCE price inflation forecast is a tad lower than ours, with a central tendency of 1-3/4 to 2 percent.
We don’t yet have the Administration’s forecast, to which we customarily compare yours in the Humphrey-Hawkins report.
<START>My suspicion, however, is that the Administration will be predicting less growth of GDP, with a weaker productivity performance.<END>
That concludes our prepared remarks, Mr. Chairman.
30 CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That was very well done and I think quite informative.
Questions for our colleagues?
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Mike, you highlighted at the end of your remarks that you thought the Administration’s forecast was likely to be different from yours on the growth side, possibly because of different assumptions about productivity.
It would seem that most forecasts are different from yours on the growth side.
Whether one looks at the DRI or Blue Chip forecasts or others, almost everybody is closer to the central tendency of the Reserve Banks by this rendering of it than to the rather optimistic growth picture that you are showing in the Greenbook.
I would be interested in any thoughts or comments you have on that.
MR.
PRELL.
It may just be that we are wild and crazy guys here!
[Laughter] MS. MINEHAN.
I love it when you say that!
MR.
PRELL.
However, we tried to temper our wildness and do a little homework, and I think Dave Stockton laid out the crux of our analysis.
We’ve looked in particular at what has been--and we expect will continue to be--rapid growth in the capital stock and the flow of capital services.
That growth does seem to have been paying off.
We expect a sizable contribution from capital deepening.
We have assumed what would seem to be rather moderate improvements in multifactor productivity, given recent performance.
But there is a great deal of uncertainty.
And many forecasters are wrestling, as we are, with the question of how much of the improvement in productivity is solid and permanent and how much reflects a transient element, with businesses surprised by the strength of demand and thus pressing their available resources very hard in the short run.
If the improvement is more permanent than transient, they are going to attempt to bring their work forces up into what might be considered a more normal 31alignment with their production levels.
And they may have difficulty doing that in this labor market.
<START>But our assessment, as we look at the steadiness of the productivity gains in the last few years and the ongoing acceleration, is that one should not attribute as much to the cyclical elements of productivity performance as I think perhaps the average private forecaster has.<END>
MS.
MINEHAN.
It is also rather interesting, though, that most of those forecasts have assumed much less tightening than you do.
The average tightening in all of the forecasts is somewhere between 25 and 50 basis points with something on the order of 75 to 100 basis points less in terms of growth.
MR.
PRELL.
I don’t have enough information on all of the individual forecasts to be able to analyze these differences.
I think the productivity assumption difference is part of the story.
It is propelling permanent income growth higher.
It is affecting the stock market.
Some of the forecasts--Macro Advisors, for example, for which we have the explicit pieces--are still anticipating a decline in stock prices, which we are not.
<START>In some instances I think these forecasts do not have the same analysis of investments that we have, taking into account this large component of replacement investment.<END>
Our investment forecast, I believe, is above the consensus.
And on housing we’re stronger than the consensus.
Again, we’ve been above the consensus for a while, partly on our analysis that there was a good backlog of orders and that wealth effects might be significant.
We think those conditions are still in place.
So, on all elements of private final demand we have a little stronger picture and a somewhat stronger view of the underlying fundamentals in many instances.
Now, some other folks have rising stock prices and still have weaker demand.
So it’s very hard to--
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That’s just inconsistent.
32MR. PRELL.
One can have different coefficients or a different view of the wealth effects and so on.
One can attribute less of the strength in consumption demand to normal wealth effects and more to the spate of mortgage refinancing last year or to just erratic elements.
We recognize that we are above the crowd but we are hard pressed, given our analysis, to come to the conclusion that we should be materially lower at this point.
MR.
MEYER.
Could I just give an interpretation of why the staff has a somewhat different perspective from most of the private forecasts?
I think the main difference is that the staff here has a very strong view of the interaction of supply and demand.
This common force of productivity is affecting both demand and supply.
I think they have been proven very accurate in that.
One doesn’t see that perspective in most of the private forecasts.
So, when those forecasters revise up their productivity growth estimates, they do not get the same demand impact, and that changes the whole dynamic.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think that is exactly right.
In fact, the risks to the staff forecast may very well be on the up side.
The probability that their forecast is too low is by no means negligible.
MR.
PRELL.
I might just say, in terms of signs of strong demand, that we have received a preliminary reading on January auto sales.
And they seem to have come in at almost 18 million units--17.9 million--for light vehicles, which is well above the rate we are anticipating for the first quarter.
So that in combination with the construction data this morning means that we’ve had two pieces of much stronger spending data than we had built into the Greenbook forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
33MR. JORDAN.
Thank you.
I have a few questions on the international side and then, if I may, a question on Dave Stockton’s presentation and the simulations on Chart 15.
But first, Karen, on Chart 10:
I think these kinds of simulations are interesting, but I want to get you to say a bit more about a scenario that might at least be consistent with the exercise that you went through here.
We see a lot of references to the idea that the United States has become a debtor nation now and that our external liabilities are growing.
I’ve probably even talked that way myself on occasion.
But we know that a lot of the holdings by foreigners, the source of the capital inflows--the counterpart to this large and maybe growing current account deficit--consists of assets that from the perspective of these foreign investors are denominated in dollars.
<START>We may think of some of it as debt, but to them it is an asset.<END>
And some of their holdings are literally dollars.
I would assume, the way the accounting is done, that if last year foreigners increased their holdings of U.S.
currency by $30 billion--or whatever the number was --that it is counted as part of our debt.
So, that would be part of the financing that has been going on.
MS.
JOHNSON.
In the balance of payment statistics it is logged that way.
It is not a huge number but, yes, it is counted as debt.
MR.
JORDAN.
It is getting pretty big!
Depending on what the rest of the world does with regard to so-called dollarization, it could get quite large.
I don’t know how much the Russians alone acquired last year.
The other dollar-denominated assets that foreigners hold-- whether CDs or other types of deposits in our banks, mutual funds, debt securities, equities, or other kinds of investment vehicles--are counted as part of our debt.
The part that in a sense really is our debt is what they buy of Uncle Sam’s debt or debt instruments of other governments or corporations in the United States.
<START>That is debt, whether held by domestic or foreign investors, 34and appropriately so.<END>
And to some extent we are on the receiving end of what on the basis of anecdotal reports is an increasing volume of direct foreign investments of all kinds--acquisitions of our companies including, for example, supermarket chains and banking chains, which may increase too.
Suppose we superimpose on your simulations two extremes:
<START>(1) that all of the increase in foreign holdings of dollar-denominated assets really is Uncle Sam’s debt, or (2) the other extreme, that it is all equity investments, portfolio investments, or direct investments of any kind.<END>
Would we draw different conclusions about the implications for the exchange rate of the dollar?
MS.
JOHNSON.
You are reading in here a step that is not truly on a piece of paper.
MR.
JORDAN.
I know.
MS.
JOHNSON.
That step is the notion that as this number gets very, very large it would inevitably have some consequences on people’s willingness to hold dollars and would produce a 25 percent devaluation or a 5 percent devaluation or whatever.
The analysis that I have here, the model that I am able to rely on, only works from one side of this process.
And it says:
If the dollar does X, Y would be the implication for the current account balance.
To answer your question--not having any simulation to draw on but just reacting to where I think you are going--I would say that it is true that the capital account is an important piece of the story.
The desire of foreigners to invest in the United States and to participate in the gains from the productivity developments that have occurred in the United States does, I think, lie behind some of the developments we are seeing here.
That is most evident in the fact that through much of the time the deficit has been widening--over the past three years, let’s say--the dollar has been rising.
That means the capital account is going in this direction at the same time that the current account is going the other way.
That might lead one to take comfort in the notion that people 35find attractive the instruments they are buying in the United States.
If we believe that the asset valuations in U.S.
financial markets are sound, there is no reason to think that is going to change in any hurry.
It will over time, taken at face value, open up a gap between GDP and GNP.
That in and of itself is no big deal, although I can imagine some politicians will make a lot of noise about it.
But in principle there is nothing about the economics of having a gap between GDP and GNP that would be troublesome.
We could well imagine that the world is making a rational and appropriate allocation of global savings into a major economy where productivity is higher than it is elsewhere and where capital ought to be accumulating.
Some of that capital is owned by foreigners and some of it is owned by the residents of the United States, and there is no problem.
And that could continue for some time.
But I don’t think there is anything about the form that foreign investment takes--whether it is in portfolios or in direct investments--that necessarily assures that it will continue.
That’s because if foreigners were for any reason--political, economic, rational, or irrational--to decide that they were unhappy with their exposure to the U.S.
economy, they would avail themselves of financial instruments either to decrease that exposure or to hedge it.
<START>One can readily hedge foreign direct investment by selling financial assets short and view that as having protected oneself against certain kinds of exchange rate developments or certain kinds of economic developments.<END>
It is not the case that the form in which the capital enters the United States necessarily implies anything about future behavior.
So, while I put this forward as a warning flag--I don’t deny that--I do not think it necessarily implies that the dollar will come under pressure tomorrow or the next day or next year.
But I would also say that there is nothing automatic about how the forms of capital inflows will work out in the future there should be a change in investor sentiment toward holding claims on the United States.
36MR. JORDAN.
Okay, I accept that--and there is nothing in this simulation that suggests a change is imminent.
Let me come at my question in a slightly different way, because I’m trying to understand this better.
<START>Let’s start from the panel in the lower left where the exercise involves an assumption that the dollar is devalued by 25 percent.<END>
<START>My first reaction was to say to myself, “Okay, that's a useful exercise to go through.” Then I started thinking about the fact that if the dollar were declining by 25 percent in value over some time period, other currencies would be rising by 25 percent against the dollar.<END>
And I can’t imagine any currency for which that might actually happen.
MS.
JOHNSON.
I'll submit the euro, but I guess I'll throw that out.
[Laughter] MR. JORDAN.
You'll never convince me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The Cuban peso!
[Laughter] MS. JOHNSON.
Think about the problem that the Japanese economy is confronting.
I’m personally quite pessimistic about Japan, so I don't think anything positive is going to happen there any time soon.
But all those people who are buying Japanese equities clearly feel differently and have felt so for a while.
And the people putting upward pressure on the yen feel differently.
The Japanese economy might appear to be restructuring and recovering and might appear to offer returns down the road that will be quite attractive.
Nonetheless, the Japanese current account surplus means that exchange rates and interest rates have to be such that Japanese investors are persuaded to acquire net claims on the rest of the world each and every month--no matter what--going forward.
That, too, is a daunting thought.
One might well believe that that is going to be hard to do after a while, if the Japanese economy begins to recover.
MR.
JORDAN.
Maybe the Japanese are all Ricardians!
Let me ask Dave Stockton a question about Chart 15, if I may.
These are interesting scenarios.
This gets back, I think, to 37Governor Meyer’s comment on the simulation differences between other forecast models and the staff’s model.
<START>Under your scenario 1 in the staff’s model, wouldn’t it be the case, at least with partial analysis, that given the acceleration in productivity and the corresponding increase in real GDP growth you would have a deceleration from the inherited rate of inflation corresponding to that?<END>
To the extent that does not occur, then you would have to have--and I guess the model requires this--an acceleration in nominal spending.
<START>That says that you don’t get all of the productivity gains in a lower price level over time--a lower rate of inflation on an ongoing basis--but rather some of it produces an increase in final demand.<END>
And that increase in demand has to be financed.
So, is it implicit in this that there is an accommodative policy on our part?
Either money growth accelerates and all the credit comes along to finance the greater spending or velocity must change.
What happens to make these things come together?
MR.
STOCKTON.
In fact the underlying assumption here is that monetary policy accommodates this step-up in nominal GDP.
There would be an increase in money growth to go along with that.
Obviously, this is a short-run scenario.
I think the simulations that are presented in the Bluebook tried to give a flavor of the case where we are in the midst of an acceleration in productivity and the equilibrium real funds rate has to go up along with that.
<START>This in effect says that you could hold on for another two years and experience a period where the unemployment rate declines even further and the inflation rate basically stays where it has been.<END>
Now, at the end of that two years, you are not where you need to be ultimately.
In some sense the funds rate and the entire structure of interest rates will have to move higher over the longer term in order to sustain that low inflation.
MR.
JORDAN.
Okay.
But--and I think this is a very important point--the simulation does not allow the real interest rate to move up to the equilibrium level because you don't let the 38inflation rate come down.
That is the way the model works.
We don’t get that automatic increase in the real rate that would come along with the deceleration of inflation, and therefore the real rate has to rise out in the future to get things back into balance.
MR.
STOCKTON.
In the constant federal funds rate scenario, there is a very small increase in the real federal funds rate just because of the slightly lower inflation rate.
But your point is exactly correct.
MR.
JORDAN.
Okay, thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Karen, I have a question about Japan.
Recently the Finance Ministry indicated that it might be borrowing at 2.1 percent as opposed to issuing 10-year bonds that would cost 1.6 percent.
I have a few questions on this and I will try to sound objective in asking them.
First, is this an astute financial strategy or is it a , given all of the financing that they have to do?
Second, is this chapter 2, so to speak, of capital injection into the banking system, which would suggest that perhaps banks really have not turned the corner in Japan?
<START>I must admit that it seems really--to use a neutral term--“interesting” at a time when long-term postal savings deposits are coming due and are being renewed at .25 percent, that the Finance Ministry is going to borrow from banks, which is a narrow private group, at 2.1 percent.<END>
It seems to me that that would cause tremendous political problems.
MS.
JOHNSON.
The only information I have on this is from the New York Times article that I read.
We have talked about this among the staff and have tried to figure it out.
There are various hypotheses about how to understand what is going on, though I can't distinguish among them.
And I put into this particular stew the fact that the Bank of Japan has announced that it will be busy selling bills into the market over the short run to absorb excess 39liquidity.
The Ministry of Finance says that they are trying to mobilize funds that they view as sitting around in the banking system doing nothing.
They haven't admitted that this is some sort of approach to a credit crunch situation.
They see these funds sitting there and they are going to utilize the resources.
So they propose to borrow to provide to local governments funds that they are obligated to provide under budget provisions that already exist.
In essence they are borrowing from the banking system to finance this.
The right alternative, presumably, would have been to issue more Japanese Government Bonds (JGBs).
And one might imagine that the banks would have taken these idle funds that are being provided for them and bought JGBs at 4 basis points.
MR.
PARRY.
Right.
MS.
JOHNSON.
So, one possibility is that this is a way to give the banks a bit more income.
One might ask, as I have, whether the Ministry of Finance thinks that because this is a relatively more attractive instrument banks will provide more financing than they would have through the direct JGB route.
If so, when all is said and done, in some sense the Ministry of Finance is going to be able to expand the amount of financing it can do because it is not just a one-for-one swap that will appear on the books but in effect has no policy implication.
The Ministry of Finance might have to do actually less financing in the open market as a consequence of having issued an instrument that is particularly attractive to banks, thereby increasing the willingness of banks to hold claims on the Japanese government.
If that were the case, the Ministry could say that, yes, it paid a bit more but actually sold more into the market.
If it did more in the JGB market than it would have otherwise--if it just has to sell as much as it has to sell with nothing else going on--this is not a crazy scheme from the point of view of the Ministry of Finance, I guess.
40A couple of things about it worry me.
One is that it seems to be at odds with what the Bank of Japan is doing. .
Another concern is that all those JGBs sitting out there are going to sell for enormous capital losses when Japanese long-term rates really move.
So they end up with a banking system into which they have put a large amount of capital and barely gotten any effect.
The banking system is not fixed by any means.
<START>If the economy were to recover, as they deal with the cycle of debt they are creating, this undercuts that process by putting more capital losses on the books of Japanese banks.<END>
These instruments presumably won't be trading in the market;
they won't be marked to market and won't show capital losses.
At least they won't show them any time soon because they are going to be selling at rates that are above market for a while anyway.
This may be a way of trying to improve bank balance sheets--a way of giving them returns of 2 percent instead of 2 basis points--because they are going to need it. .
41MR. PARRY.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you.
I have a question about the simulations as well, Mike.
The Greenbook shows a baseline simulation and a flat funds rate simulation.
As I look at the analysis, it seems to imply a sacrifice ratio of about one.
In the Bluebook the sacrifice ratio is much worse.
I am trying to understand what causes the difference.
Is it different assumptions about credibility or about how expectations are formed?
I don't know what it is.
MR.
KOHN.
It is a different time period.
Our sacrifice ratio in the Bluebook is calculated over a full ten years when all the lags work out.
It might be very different in the short run than over the long run.
MR.
STERN.
Really?
But it involves a difference of .8 percentage point --a .1 difference in the unemployment rate and a .7 difference in the PCE price number.
MR.
PRELL.
In the short run the exchange rate dynamics exaggerate this response.
That’s probably an important element in getting an effect this big.
MR.
STERN.
All right.
Then let me ask about the Bluebook sacrifice ratio.
I don’t know what your credibility assumption is, but it seems really high.
MR.
KOHN.
It is a little higher than we've had in the past, but not much.
It is consistent with the model looking out over the longer run.
It is a fairly high sacrifice ratio, I think, compared to some other models, but it is not out of the bounds.
The baseline simulation over the next two years has a 1 percent plus NAIRU gap and only a very small upward creep in inflation.
That implies a pretty high sacrifice ratio.
<START>That’s great when the unemployment rate is below NAIRU because it doesn’t result in much upward creep in inflation.<END>
<START>Obviously, if you want to lower inflation, you have to be a lot above NAIRU for a long time to get inflation to 42come down.<END>
<START>So, this sacrifice ratio was intended to be consistent with the basic story in the Greenbook in terms of how fast inflation would accelerate over the next few years given the assumed output gap.<END>
It’s important to recognize that there are a lot of things going on in the Greenbook scenario that have to do with price shocks, oil prices moving, and so forth.
But this analysis tries to abstract from that and get at the underlying slope of the Phillips curve.
MR.
PRELL.
One of the things we have pointed out before repeatedly in these model simulations is that the same output path generated through a different stock market assumption versus a different monetary policy assumption will have much larger expectational effects in the monetary policy case.
<START>It is quite plausible that if the Fed were perceived to be doing nothing in the face of this decline in the unemployment rate and the acceleration in prices, people's inflation expectations would be marked up considerably.<END>
So, that change in expectations would exaggerate the effects in this kind of scenario.
But this does generate a significant decline in the dollar on exchange markets and that exacerbates the inflationary effect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
I want to go back to Chart 10.
Karen, it looks as though you have an assumed exogenous change in an endogenous variable.
That’s something I have spent 30 years trying to tell my students not to do!
MS.
JOHNSON.
But I used a partial equilibrium model, so it's okay!
[Laughter] MR. POOLE.
I'm speechless!
[Laughter] MS. JOHNSON.
There is nothing about these simulations that is intended to suggest how the dollar would react or to cause changes in the dollar.
This is simply a statement that says:
If both foreign growth and U.S.
growth were at potential, as best we know it, and if the 43dollar were to follow this path, this would be the outcome of the current recovery.
Nothing here is meant to be predictive of what drives the dollar.
MR.
POOLE.
I guess the question is:
What can one learn from such an experiment when by its very nature, if it’s partial equilibrium, it involves a whole lot of things that don't add up?
The model that you have is now internally inconsistent.
MS.
JOHNSON.
<START>What I think one can learn from this analysis is that those who believe a return to stronger, more vigorous growth abroad will solve the external balance problem of the United States are mistaken.<END>
<START>Unless the parameters that relate trade to its near-term determinants change a lot and change soon, it is not the case that a resumption of foreign growth will have the effect of closing the U.S.<END>
external gap.
MR.
PRELL.
This contradicts to some degree what I was saying earlier in my comparison of various forecasts.
But, if you look at outside forecasts, many of them have the net export balance reaching a nadir sometime this year--either flattening out or turning.
And they have had this kind of pattern for a while.
We have not been able to understand why, given our analysis of the elasticities involved.
<START>Yet people still do seem to have this notion in their minds that strength in these foreign economies will have this result or that our import elasticity isn’t as strong as it seems to be.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mike and Dave, with respect to your simulations, let me ask something that I think has been hinted at around the edges in two or three previous questions.
In the Greenbook prepared last time for our December meeting, you had an assumed increase of 75 basis points in the funds rate in the works.
In this Greenbook you have an increase of 125 basis points.
If one looks at these simulations, the analysis suggests that we are behind the curve 44unless scenario 1 occurs.
So let me ask what you think the odds are of scenario 1 materializing.
Everything else suggests that we are behind the curve.
MR.
STOCKTON.
I am not sure I would characterize scenario 1 in quite the same way you have characterized it.
In fact, one could argue--and I think this may be what President Jordan was arguing--that in scenario 1 you fall further behind the curve in the sense that even though inflation is not picking up, the unemployment rate is falling even further below its equilibrium.
Indeed, the real federal funds rate is falling even further below its long-run equilibrium.
In that scenario we are enjoying another period of sustained, strong economic growth and low inflation.
But there is still a fair amount of work to be done in scenario 1 in terms of adjusting policy at some point down the road in order to bring the funds rate back into equilibrium.
Now, you will inherit a lower rate of inflation after going through that process, which is certainly something that benefits you.
But while it is good news for this two-year period, there is still policy tightening to be done further down the road.
That, in fact, is what some of the longer-run Bluebook simulations are showing.
Now, in terms of the probabilities, if one were to judge the probability of scenario 1 by the staff forecast errors of recent years, one might say that it is not entirely implausible.
<START>[Laughter] Obviously, we think we have a relatively balanced set of risks in our forecast.<END>
But as seen in Chart 14, the most recent observation shows that productivity is still accelerating.
So, it is not entirely clear that the probabilities are split right down the middle between scenario 1 and scenario 2.
MR.
HOENIG.
That’s interesting.
Thank you.
MR.
MEYER.
Could I just follow up on that?
In judging that probability you might want to indicate what the path of investment would have to be in the model to produce the capital 45deepening required to achieve that scenario, given that the capital deepening is what has been generating most of the uptick in trend productivity.
MR.
STOCKTON.
That is true.
But in this particular scenario, that faster productivity growth is generated in part through the more rapid multifactor productivity growth that we’ve had.
And there’s some addition to that from the capital deepening.
So both of those factors are working here.
MR.
PRELL.
To underscore that point, I hope all of you saw the pre-FOMC briefing from yesterday.
Our multifactor productivity trend here pales by comparison to what has been experienced in some long periods of this country's economic history.
So that could well be a component of a better productivity performance.
MR.
MEYER.
Yes, but that’s almost pulling something out of the hat in a way.
It seems to me that the big story here is the increase in capital deepening.
If you want to play the story out, I think you need to trace through what would be needed to get so much more capital deepening to produce that acceleration in productivity.
MR.
PRELL.
<START>But if one thought that this investment was merely the prelude to putting in place more efficient operations and so on, one might say the payoff in multifactor productivity still lies ahead.<END>
If one wants to be a new wave optimist here, it is certainly possible to come up with stories in which the assumptions are more generous.
We feel that we have a reasonably balanced scenario in our baseline forecast, obviously.
We are far more optimistic than other forecasters by and large, and yet we think this is a sensible look at the prospects.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
There is an interesting interplay between what Karen was saying and what Larry has just said.
<START>The strength of the dollar in the face of this widening current account deficit is apparently the consequence of the increasing rate of return on facilities, 46which is related to capital deepening.<END>
That relationship has been fairly strong, at least up until the immediate forecast, so that there is a tie among all of these simultaneous simulations in which lots of things are occurring.
If you pull one string, the whole thing unravels.
MR.
PRELL.
Just to grab onto one more string, though, it is possible that the buoyancy of the dollar has had something to do with what some might argue was a bubble situation in the equity market.
So people may have exaggerated ideas of the prospective returns from these investments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Foreigners?
MR.
PRELL.
Domestic and foreign investors.
But foreigners are playing a role in this, investing in what they perceive to be very, very profitable U.S.
ventures.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Shall we break for coffee before it gets frozen?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
May I add one comment related to this?
Going back to Karen's Chart 10, we have been doing a great deal of work on the current account deficit as a percentage of GDP.
In a way the work we’ve done was driven by the notion that given almost any reasonable pattern one assumes for the world economy, the current account deficit as a percentage of GDP continues to worsen.
As one goes from deep concern to sheer terror about that prospect, the question arises as to what can possibly be done about it.
So one comes out with questions like “what happens if there is a 25 percent devaluation?” Just about all the analysis we have done indicates that a continuing worsening of the current account deficit is inevitable until and if--rationally or irrationally, as Karen suggested--foreigners decide that they don't want to hold these assets any more.
Go back to Peter Fisher's presentation and look at what has happened to the euro.
Everybody who thought it was wonderful to invest unhedged in euro assets all of a sudden decided that that wasn't such a very good idea.
So over a period of a 47couple of days the hedges went up.
Nobody had to sell any of their underlying assets;
they just hedged them.
That drives home the validity of the point that Karen was making.
There is very little distinction between foreign direct investment in bonds and bank deposits and anything else.
<START>Once a foreigner decides that he doesn't like dollar assets, the derivatives market gets a very deep and immediate opportunity to do something about it.<END>
Now, there is no way in the world that we can predict when it might happen.
<START>But it certainly seems to me to be a very clear and present danger.<END>
We just don't know whether it will happen eight years from now, eight days from now, tomorrow morning, or never.
The least likely prospect of all is that it will never happen.
It seems to me something that clearly has to be taken into serious consideration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
As Herb Stein said, “If things can’t continue, they won't.
" VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Right, they won't.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Let’s have coffee.
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>If there are no further questions for our colleagues, would somebody like to start the Committee's discussion?<END>
President Jordan, do you have a question or-- MR. JORDAN.
I’m just volunteering to start the discussion.
Banks in the District have reported that both commercial and consumer loan demand remained strong in nearly all the early weeks of the new year.
In the mortgage area, while refinancing activity has dried up completely, mortgage loan applications jumped sharply in the past two weeks, we are told.
<START>One banker said he thinks mortgage loan demand is being stimulated by people's belief that interest rates will be higher later.<END>
We have heard quite a few 48reports that deposit growth evaporated completely in the first few weeks of the year and, with the cost of funds rising, that interest margins are under pressure.
One large regional bank reported that they are already in the process of putting through a round of loan repricings during this quarter to offset partially the squeeze they are feeling on their interest margins.
A banker with a fairly good sized institution told us that bank stock mutual funds are experiencing very substantial runoffs, which is forcing the sale of bank stocks out of these funds.
He said there are several large blocks of bank stock currently being priced for sale on the market.
He noted, based on his own experience, that foreign interest in buying U.S.
banks is increasing.
From the perspective of foreign investors it is bottom-fishing time.
In motor vehicles, though we don’t have any solid numbers for January, we were told that auto sales were very strong during the month, along the lines of what Mike Prell reported.
Steel is looking quite good and the mood of people in that industry is the best we’ve seen in at least a couple of years.
Both domestic steel consumption and production are increasing.
Import volume declined last year and appears to be continuing to fall, so orders for domestic production have been rising.
Some steel price increases have already been implemented and further increases have been announced to go into effect April 1.
So, we will have to see whether the market can withstand those increases or not.
Let me make a couple of comments about the national economy and the global economy in terms of the context in which we’re making policy decisions.
I thought--and I'm sure everyone will agree--that the Chairman's speech on January 13th was an outstanding framework for thinking about the environment in which we find ourselves.
It provides a basis for a dialogue inside the System as well as outside the System about the broader implications of 49the challenge of monetary stability.
That overall concept includes what we call price stability but encompasses much more than that.
The challenge is to try to maintain some sort of equilibrium.
The message for the rest of the world is a hopeful one.
Other nations may be at best in the very early stages of experiencing the kind of productivity gains we have had over the past several years.
<START>And if other places around the world get into the type of reinforcing virtuous cycle that we have had, that may help them work out of some of their very deep and long-lasting problems.<END>
But the message for us is that when the acceleration of productivity occurred, we did not get the full effects passed through into a sustained drop in the price level.
So we did not get the automatic increase in the real interest rate that might otherwise have happened.
We relied on these other safety valves, as the speech I thought described very well.
Our reliance on those other safety valves is problematic because those things can change--whether on the fiscal side, the labor market side, or the immigration side.
And we have to be very aware that our own policy response may be influenced heavily by the actions of others in these areas, especially on the fiscal side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, economic activity in the Twelfth District picked up at the end of last year, widening the gap in employment growth relative to the rest of the country.
The underlying momentum is broadly based, but most notable is the strength in business services and construction.
Business services added jobs at a rapid pace both in the fourth quarter and in the year as a whole.
The fastest growing component in this sector was high-tech services.
In the state of Washington, the robust high-tech software industry registered an 11 percent increase in jobs in 1999.
In California, the high wage Internet and software service firms continue to grow rapidly.
Unpublished data indicate that in the narrow Internet service sector, average salaries are 50approaching $100,000 a year.
The intensity in the “dot-com” sector is affecting key commercial real estate markets in the District, driving office vacancy rates down and lease rates up.
In San Jose, San Francisco, and Seattle vacancy rates are in the 3 to 5 percent range.
In San Francisco, lease rates on Class A office space increased by about 25 percent last year.
The only major markets with substantial overhang of commercial office space are in Southern California.
The District's manufacturing sector reported a small increase in jobs in the fourth quarter despite downsizing in aerospace and weakness in high-tech employment.
Within high-tech manufacturing, however, there are signs of improvement, mainly in semiconductors and other electronic equipment.
In Oregon, for example, semiconductor firms are adding jobs and Intel plans to reopen a chip plant.
These developments coincide with increases in exports of electronics from such states as Oregon and California, with much of the increase in shipments going to East Asia.
Turning to the national economy, last Friday's GDP and inflation data certainly raised a red flag.
While it is too soon to tell if the fourth-quarter surge in GDP-based inflation measures will persist, Friday's numbers are a serious concern.
Our forecast assumes a 50 basis point rise in the funds rate together with a flattening of stock market values and it shows real GDP growth of 4 percent this year and 3-1/2 percent in 2001.
<START>Given that labor markets already appear to be very tight, the obvious question for policy is whether that real GDP growth can occur without a sustained rise in inflation.<END>
Rising productivity growth has been able to offset any tendency for inflation to pick up steam, at least until last quarter.
However, productivity growth rates will need to rise even higher or their beneficial effects will begin to fade before too long.
<START>While it is entirely possible that the economy has achieved a new, higher trend in productivity growth, it is not clear how long productivity can continue to accelerate.<END>
Assuming 51that productivity growth continues at the rapid pace of last year, our staff forecast shows an upward trend in core CPI from just under 2 percent last year to 2-1/4 percent this year and 2-1/2 percent next year.
Such a rise in inflation would be especially troublesome to me because I would like to see it decline further below the 2 percent rate registered last year.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As we look back on 1999 in New England, we see an economy that has recovered from the shock of the Asian crisis to its manufacturing base.
We see an economy whose construction, retail, and business and financial services sectors have experienced healthy employment increases.
And we see an economy that seems poised for a continuation of quite solid growth.
There are some darkening clouds in the picture, however.
The supply of available labor, and not just skilled labor, seems lower than ever as evidenced by anecdotes from contacts and by the long lines at most retail outlets even after the Christmas rush.
Indeed, from 1990 to 1998 New England's labor force registered an average annual increase of zero in contrast to the nation's growth of 1.2 percent per year over the same period.
These data mask some temporal variations, as the area experienced out-migration of labor early in the period and growth more recently, and variations among the states as well, with the labor force growing more rapidly in northern New England than in the southern region.
But the data do highlight a picture of very tight labor supply.
Indeed, this shortage of labor is widely considered to be a key factor in restraining regional growth.
Clearly, this would seem to be a time for wages to accelerate, and maybe they will.
But for now contacts report that planned wage increases are not much higher than in other recent years--in the range of 3 to 5 percent--though bonuses may well be substantially more than last year.
It appears that businesses have continued to cope with tight 52labor conditions by restructuring processes, improving efficiency, training existing workers, and investing in new technology.
Indeed, at a recent meeting of the Bank’s small business New England Advisory Council, one member stated that he had no choice but to continue investing in technology as it was the only feasible answer to continuing labor shortages.
These small firms all reported an upswing in business over the Internet, a development they view as having potential cost-saving or revenue-enhancing benefits.
<START>However, all viewed the problem of getting goods to Internet buyers--so-called “fulfillment”--as a difficult challenge.<END>
The other major cloud on the New England horizon, and the nation’s as well, involves health care.
The region's largest and one of the nation's most well-regarded HMOs was put into receivership in January with losses that ranged from $150 million to $300 million, depending on which news account one reads.
Two states, Vermont and Rhode Island, no longer have any local HMO coverage.
Providers of services to HMOs--the hospitals in particular--are reeling from cutbacks in Medicare due to provisions of the Balanced Budget Act, and there is real concern that if the HMO in receivership ends up being folded, it may take a hospital or two with it.
Boston's medical care costs were growing at a pace above that of the nation prior to this development.
That trend is likely to continue if not worsen.
In part this may be a regional phenomenon, given the number of teaching hospitals in the region, all of which seem to be particularly affected by changes in federal funding.
In addition, the large HMO in question appears to have been poorly managed, especially in the information technology area.
However, the underlying pattern of HMOs offering lowball premiums to customers in order to expand market share, and somehow expecting to make it up on volume in an environment of rising drug and other costs, is not unique to New England.
In that regard, I would expect the increase in benefits costs in the most recent ECI data not to be the last.
<START>53Aside from these worries, much about the New England economy is very upbeat.<END>
As I noted, manufacturers have recovered from the Asian crisis, and many companies--especially fast growth, high-tech firms--are especially upbeat.
There are pressures on input prices, especially on materials that have a petroleum base.
Some attribute these pressures not only to rising oil costs but also to greater strength in Asia.
In particular, subcontractors in the Far East are charging more or have stopped offering quantity discounts because their capacity utilization is now quite high.
But here again there is a determination to hold the line.
Most of our contacts said input prices would be rising even faster if their firms were not making a considerable effort to seek out lower prices through strategic sourcing, global procurement negotiations, or longer contracts.
Contacts continue to believe that they cannot raise prices, particularly for commodity-type products or for goods they are selling to large buyers like the Big Three auto manufacturers or Wal-Mart.
Finally, real estate markets remain varied by city but are extremely tight in Boston.
Rents for Class A office space in Boston remain very high, with new supply coming on line very slowly.
On the residential side, sales volume in 1999 was about the same as in 1998, but prices rose strongly in most markets.
Limited inventories of properties for sale are the likely reason for both the volume and the price data observed.
New housing construction slowed, with permits and construction contracts in the fourth quarter below year-earlier levels.
<START>But that may be as much a function of constraints in the supply of construction workers and building materials as it is a reflection of any easing of demand.<END>
On the national scene, there clearly is no easing of demand.
For some time now our own forecasts in Boston and those of the Greenbook as well have assumed that the current expansion would slow somewhat on its own.
Sooner or later consumers would decide that they 54didn't need or want another house or car and that they did need to increase their savings for the future.
<START>Consumption would slow, moderating corporate profits and slowing the rise in the trade deficit, and the stock market might even level off nicely in an atmosphere of a little less euphoria.<END>
In short, we thought reality might just bite a little.
We have been expecting something like this for three years or so but it hasn't happened, and there aren't any signs that it will happen.
<START>Instead, consumption is booming, confidence is high, the saving rate is even lower, the trade deficit is higher, and consumers are borrowing more and more.<END>
<START>And nonfarm, nonfinancial corporate debt, while certainly still affordable, is growing rapidly and hitting rather high levels--at least relative to GDP.<END>
<START>So I'm glad to see that in both our own forecast and that of the Greenbook the idea that the economy will slow on its own appears to have been abandoned.<END>
The Greenbook projects, as do we, that substantial policy tightening is necessary to bring the economy back to a reasonable balance between demand and supply.
Various aspects of supply remain in question, however, at least in our view.
The longer-term alternatives in the Greenbook and the Bluebook have the rate of growth for potential output at around 4 percent in the near term--the next two to five years--and a NAIRU of somewhere around 5-1/4 percent.
I must admit, though, that the Bluebook does confess to a fair amount of uncertainty about the latter.
<START>However, as the Bluebook's alternatives so clearly illustrate, other assumptions about potential and labor market capacity constraints are possible and perhaps reasonable.<END>
For our part, we remain somewhat agnostic about whether productivity will continue to grow over the next five years at the pace of the last two or three years.
But we think, at least for the near term, that the NAIRU might be lower than the Board staff’s estimate.
<START>So with about the same amount of tightening in 2000, we have growth slowing to about our 55estimate of potential, 3-1/2 percent or so--slower than in the Greenbook forecast--but with nearly the same results in terms of prices and unemployment.<END>
Of course, other assumptions are possible as well.
One can take a more optimistic view about both the growth in potential and the NAIRU and make a case that very little, if any, tightening is needed to bring demand and supply into balance.
But to take such a view would, I believe, run an increasing risk of further imbalances.
<START>As I look at both household and corporate balance sheets, I see growing liabilities and debt service burdens that are reasonable only when one factors in growing market values of assets and relatively low debt service costs.<END>
It goes without saying that this is an economy that is increasingly vulnerable to changes in market perceptions, market prices, and interest rates.
And it appears that this is an economy that increasingly buys into the idea that things go only in one direction.
That takes me to the major risk we face when thinking about economic forecasts, which is the risk that policy actions taken to tighten credit conditions may cause large market reactions that not only affect U.S.
balance sheets but cause foreign inflows to our markets to decline as well.
The Greenbook forecast has moved away from an assumption that policy tightening will cause market values to decline.
The stock market flattens out but does not turn down.
Personally, I think that is a reasonable assumption based on the experiences of the late 1980s and 1990s, and it figures into our own forecast as well.
But in many ways, that would be the ideal outcome.
So, I think it would be wise to be a bit agnostic in that regard as well.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
Economic growth in the Eleventh District has been strengthening over the last few months.
It turns out, after some revisions in the data, that employment growth 56was very, very slow in the first half of last year but picked up nicely in the second half.
That pickup is expected to continue as Texas feels the lagged effect of higher oil prices.
The energy industry is showing definite signs of rebounding.
Producers are more confident, thanks to strength in Asian economies and increasing confidence in OPEC's solidarity.
Most of the gain in drilling activity has been for gas so far, but recently we are seeing some shift in emphasis toward oil drilling.
In the high-tech area, semiconductor manufacturers have been revising up their forecasts for 2000, consistent with what Bob Parry just said.
Demand has been especially heavy for telecommunications chips.
One of our directors noted at our board meeting a couple of weeks ago that the pickup in chip demand from Asia has been especially strong, underscoring other evidence of a rebound in Asian economies.
<START>Both home building and commercial construction activity have been showing signs of cooling, probably due as much to overbuilding as to higher interest rates.<END>
It seems that construction activity has become more sensitive to growing inventories and supply/demand imbalances in recent years.
The benefits of information technology for inventory control are becoming more pervasive in the economy.
In spite of the Texas unemployment rate being near its 20-year low at 4.4 percent in November, wage gains have been moderating across a wide range of sectors.
<START>Overall, there seems to be an absence of inflationary pressures in the Eleventh District other than for goods whose prices are tied to oil.<END>
We've seen some easing in price pressures for sheet rock and cement, but one of our directors noted upward pressure on the price of asphalt, reflecting the strength in non-building construction--that is, road construction.
Turning to the national economy, my forecast is pretty close to the staff’s;
the main exception is that I see somewhat less inflation than they do.
In fact, I turned in a 4 percent 57number for real GDP growth this year, just a bit less than the staff’s 4.1 percent.
That means I'm going to be increasing my forecast and I imagine Mike Prell may be reducing his as well!
I have one piece of anecdotal information that supports the view that the economy is very exuberant on a national basis.
I took my annual trip to Vanderbilt University in Nashville last week to speak to former Governor Daane’s class.
As usual, he had me meet with a group of Nashville businesspeople beforehand.
The main conversation at lunch was whether they were going to have to pay closer to $2500 or $3500 for scalped tickets to the Super Bowl.
Those Nashville business titans were taking their football very seriously.
The Dallas business community, incidentally, feels that some parts of the country take football too seriously!
[Laughter] MR. POOLE.
St. Louis isn't one of them!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Seventh District economy entered the New Year with considerable momentum.
To date, higher interest rates have had only a marginal impact on the traditionally interest-sensitive sectors like autos and housing.
Auto producers expect 2000 to be the second best year ever for sales of light vehicles, following last year’s record-setting pace.
Thus far, the automakers see few signs of slowing.
And reports from our District directors indicate that sales at District auto dealers generally were brisk in January.
The numbers we heard this morning seem to bear that out.
attended the National Automobile Dealers Association meeting in Orlando in January and reported that the auto dealers were very upbeat and bullish about the outlook for this year.
The housing sector in the Midwest continues to outperform the nation for reasons I don’t fully understand.
The head of a distribution company that sells building materials to 58Chicago-area construction firms told me that his customers who are residential contractors have seen no slowing thus far and are booked for at least the next six months in the Chicago metropolitan area.
Retailers’ sales of appliances and home furnishings are still quite strong.
More generally, the holiday shopping season was exceptionally good for most District retailers.
Inventory levels at the beginning of the year were described as rational, not excessive, thus requiring little aggressive promotional activity in January.
Also, the steel industry in particular is benefiting from strength in autos, appliances, and other consumer durables, with steel order books said to be solid and showing little tapering off of demand in January, similar to what Jerry Jordan said earlier.
<START>It is difficult, if not impossible, to find any signs of easing in our very tight labor markets.<END>
In fact, very preliminary results from Manpower’s latest survey of hiring intentions show net hiring strength near a 22-year high, and that’s both before and after the seasonal adjustments that they do.
These results should be treated confidentially since they won’t be released until February 28th.
Wage gains in the temporary help industry remain in the 3 to 5 percent range of the past few years but recently seem to be concentrated in the higher end of that range.
Our directors report significant or record shortages of nurses for retirement homes, truckers, and construction workers.
And in some cases these shortages are constraining activity.
For example, a major heavy-duty truck manufacturer cited the shortage of truck drivers as a major reason for the recent softness in orders for heavy trucks at his firm.
Manufacturers generally continue to face higher prices for some of their inputs such as energy, steel, copper, and aluminum, but they still say they cannot pass these higher costs on to their customers.
<START>Increasingly, we are hearing that the Internet is helping to hold prices down.<END>
59For example, the head of a major auto company told me that they estimate that 55 percent of car buyers now use the Internet to get information on pricing before they even enter the showroom.
<START>Turning to the nation, despite the surprisingly strong fourth quarter, our outlook for growth in 2000 is at nearly 4 percent.<END>
Unfortunately, like the Greenbook we see core CPI inflation rising this year to about 2-1/2 percent and core PCE inflation to about 2 percent.
There appear to be few weak sectors in the outlook at this moment.
Employment growth continues to be strong and inventory accumulations seem reasonably balanced on the whole.
Consumer spending in 2000 seems headed for at least moderately strong growth in spite of the restraining course of higher interest rates that we expect over the period.
The high levels of the stock market continue to propel consumers forward, and this continues to be a risk for the outlook.
Last week we convened a meeting of our Academic Advisory Council.
A major topic of discussion was growth in potential GDP.
Most participants were skeptical that the growth in potential output was as high as our estimate of 3-1/2 percent and, of course, questioned whether the faster productivity increases were sustainable.
Our inflation outlook for 2000 envisions a ½ percentage point pickup in core inflation with a further rise in 2001.
So, regardless of which core inflation measure one uses, it’s difficult to accept that the degree of acceleration forecast for core inflation is consistent with price stability.
And that, of course, is an area of major concern.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our Southeast region is healthy and the balanced expansion continues.
The final data and the conversations that we have had with retailers tell us that the holiday selling season was a blockbuster one that clearly exceeded expectations and even the early estimates that we had.
Tourism often gives us a good reading on 60discretionary spending.
As reported in the popular press, there was a measurable slowdown in tourism over the special year-end period, but advanced bookings for the spring are quite strong, suggesting that the strength we had been reporting in that sector will resume.
We hear mixed views from people we talk with about just how much of a slowdown we have been seeing in housing.
Certainly, our tightening moves and the rise in mortgage rates have had some effect, but in most of our markets housing construction remains at high levels and the inventory of unsold units is quite low.
Nonresidential construction has actually increased somewhat.
Overall manufacturing activity in our region has shown some pickup in both production and new orders, but that strength is attributed to domestic demand rather than to a significant pickup in exports.
Despite the recovery of many economies around the world, we are still hearing about sharp trade imbalances as we talk to people who run our ports.
They are saying the lopsided cargo trade has caused operational problems and surcharge fees on outbound containers that are being sent back to the U.S.
empty.
Our regional payroll rose to 2-1/2 percent year over year, which reflects even more strength than the national numbers, and labor markets feel tighter and tighter.
Just last week a new restaurant owner was telling me he had been operating at half capacity for several weeks because of his inability to hire enough cooks and servers.
<START>And the general manager of our told me he was now very concerned about being able to maintain their high quality of service and their top rating because of the marginal staff he has had to hire.<END>
At the same time, we are still being told that most employers are stubbornly trying to hold the line on broad-based wage increases.
Over the period since our last meeting, one gets the sense that more prices have been edging up:
Prices of construction materials are up to 2 to 5 percent;
copper prices are up 10 61percent;
and red meat prices are up 7 or 8 percent because of herd liquidations over the last two winters.
And those kinds of price increases are on top of the more talked about double-digit increases in energy, health care, and pharmaceuticals that are getting people's attention and are now working their way through the indexes.
The regional economy is strong and resource and price pressures seem to be building.
Nationally I see much the same picture.
Late last year it was clear to me that the national economy had great momentum.
But the latest data, once again, have been even stronger than I expected.
I don't see much evidence yet that our earlier policy tightening moves have more than dented the very strong consumer demand in the economy.
And as most of us have noted, the now relatively strong growth elsewhere in the world seems sure to put more pressure on domestic producers
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 110

INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 110

Indeed, while I am going to argue against a 50 basis point increase, I would say that if we were to decide on 50 basis points, we would have to do it with asymmetry.
In my opinion, 50 basis points with symmetry would be a terrible mistake at this stage.
It would imply that our job is over.
<START>What we have to convey to the markets, consistent with what is clearly an acceleration 126in productivity and I think increasing turbulence in financial markets, is that we are on the scene and that we are embarking on a routine of incremental tightening.<END>
What is the argument against 50 basis points today?
I would say the argument is basically twofold.
One is that, as a general rule in an environment like this, the last tightening move that we make is going to be a mistake.
We will not know that at that time, but it is almost invariably a mistake.
If we tighten in small incremental doses, the size of a mistake is smaller by definition.
Secondly and far more importantly, I think that our latest evaluation of the equity premium in the stock market is that it is downright scary!
I haven’t seen anything like this before.
<START>In fact, if we use the inflated earnings expectations of the security analysts and the P/E ratios that we have now, we get an extremely impressive equity premium.<END>
<START>Back in 1987, you will recall, long-term rates were going up as the stock market went up, and the market just ran out of steam.<END>
We are in a far worse situation now than we were then.
I am concerned that, if we are too aggressive in this process of tightening, we could crack the market and end up with a very severe problem of instability.
I don't know how far we will have to go.
Indeed, I don't know how long we can continue tightening by 25 basis points.
As a sort of working hypothesis, I would argue that we should think in terms of moving at every meeting and that we move by 25 basis point increments.
We would continue on that course unless and until it appears that we are getting behind the curve on inflation or inflation expectations, in which case we would raise the size of the adjustment.
On the other hand, we could continue to implement our strategy if we began to see the wealth effect stabilizing and/or the gap between supply and demand beginning to close.
Unless and until that happens, we will remain in a very unusual period that we have never experienced before.
What I am arguing is not something that is coming out of a particular simulation.
<START>All that is needed for my argument 127to be valid, as best I can judge, is that there is a wealth effect, that the market is at extremely high valuation levels, and that we have to take action to close the supply-demand gap.<END>
I would propose, therefore, that we move the funds rate up by 25 basis points today and that we include in our press release the equivalent of what we used to call asymmetry.
There would be a full expectation that we will be moving again in March.
If it turns out that the economic expansion is accelerating, and indeed I have every reason to suspect that it may, that would not in itself be a policy issue in my view.
That is not what we ought to be looking at.
We should be looking at the underlying inflation pressures in the economy.
And if they become larger, then I think we will have to move faster.
But for today I think it is appropriate to move 25 basis points and issue an asymmetric statement--I don't remember the exact language we plan to use to express that.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
“Balance of risks.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The balance of risks is toward inflation.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I fully support your recommendation, but let me make a few comments.
The issue clearly is not whether we should do nothing, but whether we should firm 25 basis points or 50 basis points.
And I agree that in either case we would have to use the balance of risks language indicating that we are more concerned about inflation.
I think we have to look at ourselves.
The reality is that we are perceived everywhere around the world as the best central bank in the business.
We are highly regarded, highly respected.
And our commitment to price stability, certainly as defined by you in speeches and testimony, is I think unquestioned anywhere.
Our style is that of a strong, silent leader, one who moves incrementally.
We move 25 basis points at a time in a very systematic way.
<START>If we were to move 50 basis points--to continue my analogy, if all of a sudden the strong, silent leader starts beating his chest to show what a tough guy he is--what would be your 128conclusion?<END>
I believe it would be that he is scared!
What do we have to be frightened about?
We can certainly go about our business in our normal way, continuing to exhibit the confidence that we have earned by our performance.
And I think that is the thing that will contribute the most to stabilizing the economy.
I agree with you fully that a working hypothesis that we will have to have a series of tightening moves is appropriate, and I believe that that should be in the background of our thinking.
<START>But I feel very strongly that 25 basis points combined with a balance of risks statement toward inflation concerns is by far the right package for today.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, I certainly also support your recommendation.
We are faced with very powerful, real forces that we want to allow to run to the extent that they can in terms of increasing productivity, employment, and real income without upsetting the inflationary apple cart.
I would like to relate your comments this morning to our discussion yesterday about the trade deficit.
The trade deficit is also part of this real adjustment that is going on in the economy and it is not fundamentally a nominal phenomenon.
The trade deficit is financing the capital flows that are coming to this country because the rate of return is so high.
And it cannot itself be an object of our policy because it is determined by these real forces that are so unusual, certainly in the context of postwar U.S.
history and perhaps much further back than that.
I think a move of 25 basis points and a statement that the balance of risks is toward inflation is exactly the right way to go.
The market is our friend.
The market, after all, has anticipated this move.
We saw interest rates rise.
This federal funds futures prediction has been in the market for four weeks or more, and we should not do anything that leaves the market wondering what we are up to.
<START>If we were to go with 50 basis points and a balanced risk 129statement, the markets would most likely say that we have concluded that we are done.<END>
And that is certainly not our conclusion.
So we want to make the market do as much of this work as possible, lead the way, and help us figure out what is the correct response to the incoming flow of information.
I absolutely agree that this is likely to mean a sequence of 25 basis point increases at each meeting.
It wouldn’t be correct to say in Dave Stockton's famous language “as far as the eye can see” but, nevertheless, for quite some time.
And by working cooperatively with the market I think we will have the best chance of coming out of this without a big upset.
So, I support your recommendation 100 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
<START>Mr. Chairman, I would prefer a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate and also a public statement that we are focusing on heightened inflation risk in the future.<END>
My concern is that the time period between this meeting and the next meeting on March 21st is quite long.
I might suggest something that would make me more comfortable with a 25 basis point increase and that is that we agree to assess the situation again at the end of this month.
We will have considerably more data, certainly more data about prices.
We could review those data and see if we feel at that time that a further move is appropriate.
I don't see why we have to be constrained by a fixed calendar, which in this case involves quite a long interval between meetings.
Over the 14 years I have been with the Fed, we have found telephone meetings at times like this to be very useful.
From my perspective, though it’s certainly not one shared by everyone here, it would reduce the possibility that we will get behind the curve.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The option of a telephone conference is always on the table.
It always has been.
It’s just that we have not needed to employ it for a while.
But it is obviously there.
130MR. PARRY.
Well, I think there might be a case for it this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The markets will tell us.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation in its entirety.
<START>It seems to me, given the kind of technology or productivity shock that we have had, that real interest rates need to rise.<END>
To some extent, that has occurred.
My judgment is that they need to go up more.
I do not see any way we can accomplish that other than by raising the funds rate.
So, a ¼ point increase is certainly acceptable to me.
I would not go beyond that and be more aggressive, principally for considerations of uncertainty.
<START>It seems to me that we are uncertain about the future path of productivity and we are uncertain about NAIRU.<END>
<START>I personally am uncertain whether the latter is a useful concept at all.<END>
And we are uncertain about the implications of the increase in real rates that has already occurred and what the effects may turn out to be.
So, I think what you are suggesting is what we ought to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I support your proposal completely.
I believe the increased risk of inflation is there, so I think we ought to say it.
Also, I am very much in favor of 25 basis points for several reasons.
First, while the models show direction, I agree that they don’t show it with precision, so I think we should proceed gradually.
Secondly, we are in an environment where core inflation has been very modest, and we need to recognize that as we begin to pave the way for higher rates.
And thirdly, some imbalances remain out there, which we are trying to take into account, but we don’t want to shock the system either.
So I think continuing the steady path that we have been on is the appropriate approach.
Therefore, I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
131MR. MEYER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation for a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate and what I will continue to call an asymmetric posture.
I also agree with you that we are likely to have to implement a series of tightenings this year;
it is likely to be appropriate to make a move at each meeting for a period of time.
<START>Given the uncertainties about trend growth, NAIRU, and inflation dynamics, and also given the uncertainty about the impact of our policies on financial conditions more broadly, I think there is a strong case for a gradualist approach.<END>
I hope we will be able to use the bias in the announcement that accompanies today’s action skillfully.
By that I mean that I hope we don't undermine what I view as very sensible expectations about the rise in the funds rate that are built into the term structure and futures markets.
<START>We had a lot of discussion today about uncertainty, about the structure of the economy and inflation dynamics, and about the value of humility.<END>
I don’t want to lead a discussion opposed to humility.
[Laughter] However, I think sometimes we draw an implication here that humility suggests inaction, though that is certainly not what you have been arguing, Mr. Chairman.
<START>But I want to bring us back to the discussion of our monetary growth targets because it seems to me that in a monetary growth target regime the danger of inaction is much less than in a funds rate regime.<END>
And that, I think, is consistent with some of the points that President Jordan was making.
<START>If productivity growth is a little higher, we will end up with a little lower inflation;<END>
it will be somewhat limited and won't be as much of a problem.
<START>But in an interest rate regime inaction can be very, very dangerous--and particularly dangerous in an expansion that is driven by higher productivity, which raises real equilibrium interest rates.<END>
I also want to comment a bit on your discussion of the role of the wealth effect.
It clearly has been very important.
We go from the productivity upturn, to the wealth effect on 132consumption, to the excess of demand growth relative to supply growth.
<START>And we’ve had a lot of discussion, not only here but in a number of other arenas, about how a declining equity premium or higher equilibrium growth rate can raise the value of equity prices.<END>
A lot of that is a partial equilibrium analysis.
You just plug into the formula a low equity premium and voilà--higher equity prices.
That makes very little sense in a general equilibrium model, because in such a model that wealth effect will ultimately generate increases in real interest rates that will significantly cap and diminish the increase in equity premiums.
I think the danger that we have been facing recently is that a monetary policy that has been somewhat slow to tighten and has allowed the economy to operate in this partial equilibrium world.
I think we are now going to see how equity prices evolve in a general equilibrium world, and I think that is one reason why we have to be a bit cautious and gradualist.
I want to make just a few comments on what I perceive to be the consensus strategy that is unfolding.
<START>It seems to me that what we have been talking about is being very preemptive now in slowing the economy to trend growth, but being very reactive once we get to trend growth and we have stabilized the unemployment rate.<END>
Then at that point we are prepared to be very reactive and respond only to evidence of higher inflation.
<START>I have been struggling with the issue of whether this is an appropriate strategy, or perhaps even an optimal strategy, given our uncertainty about the output gap.<END>
If it is a sensible strategy, I think there are some gaps or details we have to fill in.
Obviously, we have to decide what the appropriate path of the funds rate is to slow the economy to trend.
But we also have to keep in mind that if we are unsuccessful in slowing the economy to trend and, therefore, the output gap rises even further, that should affect our policy and we should tighten by more than we otherwise would.
That is, we should tighten enough to slow the economy to below trend so that we can push the output gap back down.
I 133think that is consistent with the nonlinear rule that I have discussed in the past.
As uncertain as we are about the output gap, that uncertainty about whether or not we are beyond the economy’s potential diminishes very greatly as the output gap increases based on our best estimate of potential.
And the third issue I think we are going to have to focus on in this strategy is just how aggressively we should move against higher inflation.
To the extent that we have down weighted our response to increases in the output gap, when inflation rises we have to be more aggressive than we would otherwise be.
<START>The way to think about that is that once we get to trend growth and the unemployment rate stabilizes, we have assumed that our policy setting and strategy are consistent with stable inflation and the output gap is basically zero.<END>
If inflation then begins to rise, not only do we have to respond to the increase in inflation the way we ordinarily would, we also have to revise our estimate of the output gap.
That requires a more aggressive response to inflation than would otherwise be the case.
So, those are a few thoughts that at least shape my views of the strategy going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree with both halves of your recommendation.
I think we should reinforce markets when they are right and I think they are right in their expectations.
<START>Secondly I, like others, am moved by the uncertainties that we have talked about, but I also recognize that inflation does not appear at this stage to be on the verge of a virulent outbreak.<END>
So a move of 25 basis points seems to me moderate and appropriate.
I think you're absolutely right in suggesting that over time we can and will continue to look at the reaction of markets generally, including the asset markets where I do think, as I said yesterday, 134there is likely to be some underlying turbulence.
<START>Finally, on the outlook sentence I believe the statement that suggests the risks are balanced toward inflation is obviously the right one to use because it does not take back all the other things that we're doing.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Boehne.
MR.
BOEHNE.
I agree with your recommendation of ¼ point and I think we need to convey the view that we have more tightening ahead of us.
My best guess is that there will be a significant amount of tightening over the coming year.
There may well be a time in this series of tightening moves where a move of ½ point is going to be appropriate.
But today I think ¼ is just right.
Our basic product is one of confidence--confidence that we're going to do what is appropriate to keep the economy on the right path.
And in today's environment a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate captures that because it indicates that, yes, we know that tightening is appropriate.
We're going to do what needs to be done.
We are neither going to underreact or overreact.
I think that is important for our image as a strong, confident central bank that the public deserves to put its confidence in.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, I am pretty much where Bob Parry is.
This is a tough call but, if I had my druthers, my preference would be to go the full ½ point.
It would be a very decisive move that would preempt any inflation expectations that might either be building or likely to build in the near-term future.
I recognize it would be a strong move, particularly in the context of the need for asymmetry whatever we do;
I agree fully with your point on that score.
So, I recognize that there are risks.
<START>To me the big risk is that we might get a market break that could lead to what I would refer to as a disorderly plunge in the stock market.<END>
That would complicate the situation and make it more difficult for us to take the kind of steps we will need to 135take.
So I am able to accept the ¼ point increase this morning.
But I would hope that we will do it with what I might call “asymmetry plus.” We need that language.
<START>Also, I would hope--and I expect you’d be inclined to do this in your testimony, which is not too far down the road--that we will underscore the intensity with which we are watching developments and our readiness to move more aggressively if in fact we need to do so.<END>
<START>Also, and I hope this is not out of line, I would hope that the Board of Governors might consider a complementary discount rate increase in the near future.<END>
Furthermore, I agree with Bob Parry.
I know that an intermeeting conference call is always on the table but, in the context of your remarks, I hope we will watch market developments very carefully for any signal that we should have a call.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
First, on the data point:
I talked yesterday about the difference in ten-year bonds between the nominal and the real spread.
I am no match for you in developing the synthetic yield!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I didn't do it!
It was your colleagues down at the other end of the table.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I was using the chart, Exhibit 18, that the staff sends around every Monday.
And on that rendering, certainly in the last month there has been a rise in the inflation premium.
But Don Kohn did persuade me that I way overstated it yesterday.
Nevertheless, it has gone up.
The second thing I would like to say is that I tend to agree with the Bluebook simulations on inflation targeting, humble as we are about models.
And I believe that we are likely to need a lot of tightening, and that the real question we have to deal with today is how we get there from here.
136I will support the recommendation of a 25 basis point move with a tilt and the implicit gradualism.
I recognize the benefits of that strategy.
I'm delighted to be thought of as a strong and silent leader!
<START>[Laughter] I think you make a good point, Mr. Chairman, that the economy is in many ways very fragile, that things could change rather abruptly, that the past record has not been good in calling the turns, and that, therefore, there is a chance that we could overreact.<END>
In that regard, as I thought about the tilt in connection with Roger Ferguson’s Working Group, there is one thing I like about the tilt.
It is easily reversible.
<START>If we were to raise the rate 50 basis points, discovered we did too much and then reduced it 25 basis points, it would look as though we didn’t know what we were doing.<END>
If we do 25 basis points with a tilt and new data come in indicating the economy is not as strong as we thought, we can take off the tilt.
Then it looks as if we do know what we're doing and we're just looking at the data.
That’s a nice advantage of the tilt and I’m glad we are using it in this situation.
So, there are a number of benefits in the gradualism strategy.
I recognize that and I support your recommendation.
Having said that, there are some costs to the gradualism strategy.
We could be moving too little and too late.
There is historical precedent for that, too, and I think we ought to keep that in mind.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
Thank you.
When I look out at what the financial markets are tellingly me--or maybe more importantly not tellingly me--I see the Treasury yield curve upward sloping a bit from two years out to five years.
Beyond five years it’s downward sloping, with corporate bond yields and mortgage rates at 8 percent.
I would be hard pressed to say that those are at the wrong levels for an environment as outlined in the Greenbook and the associated expectations.
<START>I would feel on much firmer ground in saying that there is something wrong with 137these market levels if, given the second-half experience of 5-3/4 percent real growth and, depending on the inflation measure, nominal spending of 7-1/2 to 8 percent, I thought it didn’t add up.<END>
But this says to me that the market is not building in that kind of real growth plus inflation inherited from the second half of last year through this year.
So, I don’t know that nominal interest rates need to go up.
<START>If inflation were to turn adversely and accelerate more than seems to be built into the marketplace right now and inflation expectations were beginning to rise, I do think it would be undesirable for real rates to go down.<END>
Then I would think that nominal rates would need to increase.
On the front end of the curve, though, when I look at the rise in rates for securities maturing in up to two years, it does leave me with the feeling that a 5-1/2 percent overnight interbank rate is too low to be consistent.
<START>Just closing that gap somewhat would be the wisest thing to do.<END>
And taking a step today, I think, is appropriate.
I have a comment, though, on this question of 50 basis points versus 25 basis points, and that requires me to make reference to the discount rate.
There was a time, and I think it is still the case, that a movement in the funds rate with an accompanying increase in the discount rate was interpreted as being a more lasting move as opposed to a move in the funds rate alone.
Given that, I would think a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate with a discount rate change is too strong.
And since I do consider directors’ recommendations for a discount rate increase appropriate in this environment, I would prefer ¼ point on the funds rate knowing it is to be accompanied by a discount rate move.
In fact, I would oppose a 50 basis point change in the funds rate either with a discount rate increase or without it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The Board of Governors will be meeting later to vote on the discount rate.
President Guynn.
138MR. GUYNN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I came into the meeting with the intention and inclination to argue for a 50 basis point tightening, and I think the staff presentations we heard yesterday and the comments made around the table would certainly support that.<END>
I believe there is evidence of mounting inflationary pressures.
<START>The probability of inflation moving up has clearly increased in my view.<END>
<START>My biggest worry was that if the consensus was to go with a 50 basis point tightening, there would be an inclination to slide back to a balanced risk statement.<END>
And as you eloquently pointed out, that is not where we want to be.
I can support ¼ point tightening today with the balance of risks on the side of inflationary pressures.
I guess you already answered this question, but let me just say that I, too, would really like to see the Board consider a discount rate increase.
I think that gives our directors some ownership in this policy action and reinforces the action we are taking.
And in my view there is a reasonably high probability that we will have to step up the pace in terms of further policy actions in the meetings to come.
But I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There was a table in today’s Wall Street Journal.
I don’t know how many people saw it, but it listed a series of possible Fed actions today, gave the odds on them and the likely market reaction.
It had all the different scenarios we’ve talk about--an increase in the funds rate of 25 or 50 basis points, with a tilt or without, and so on.
And the last line in the table was a rate cut by the Fed.
The odds were “as likely as the Cubs winning the World Series.” [Laughter] And the likely market reaction was “holy cow!” [Laughter] I found that very upsetting.
<START>Obviously, there is no chance we are going to lower rates today, but Cubs fans are always optimistic!<END>
139Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation very strongly.
I think the strategy of incremental moves is an excellent one, supporting the markets when they are right and helping confirm their inclinations.
It seems clear that if we do not move today, that would not only jeopardize the expansion but would also jeopardize our credibility as well, which is so important.
I should note that our outlook assumes a fed funds path that has a decidedly upward drift over the forecast horizon.
<START>And even with that strong upward tilt, we project a deterioration in the inflation outlook.<END>
Regardless of whether we look at the core PCE or the core CPI or all those measures that I mentioned yesterday, inflation is still going up.
So in my judgment, an increase of 25 basis points is not going to be enough over the forecast horizon.
I believe, as you said, that we should be thinking of a series of moves to make sure that we correct the imbalance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply.
I think it’s also very important that we say that the balance of risks is tilted to higher inflation for exactly the reasons that you explained so articulately.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One thing I came into this meeting very determined about was that we should end with an asymmetric directive, whether we went with a 25 or a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate.
So I’m glad it appears that we are going to do that.
I imagine that most people, if they gave any thought at all to what I might recommend at this meeting, would have thought I would clearly be on the side of a 50 basis point move.
But I must admit that I’m having more frequent debates with myself, not so much on the demand side of the equation--I don’t think anybody doubts the strength of demand--but about all the elements of supply that are so richly portrayed in Don Kohn’s different graphs.
I’m becoming much more a believer in the view that the potential for productivity to stay flat at its current high level or to 140grow in the future is better than I thought it was.
And I don’t know where the NAIRU is.
As with any forecast, all the forecasts we’ve been doing in Boston require a great deal of jiggering after they are done to try to capture a bit of the uncertainty that I know I feel and other people apparently feel on the supply side.
I also think that the interaction with the markets presents us with a series of risks that you talked about.
I tried to incorporate some of that into my discussion yesterday, with respect to the buildup of imbalances in terms of credit, all related to rising asset values.
<START>So, with those two things in mind, both a sense of risk and a sense of uncertainty about the economy’s actual capacity, I’m very comfortable with a move of 25 basis points.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for all the reasons that have been expressed.
I think it’s exactly the right thing to do.
But I do want to say that I feel a good deal of identification with the remarks of President Broaddus and others around the table.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I support both parts of your recommendation.
As far as the future is concerned, I hope we will keep looking at the data and make our decisions one step at a time and not get too programmed in advance as to what we are going to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I guess we have heard from everybody.
MR.
BERNARD.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>It looks as though we have strong support for an increase of 25 basis points and a balance of risks statement toward concerns about inflation.<END>
MR.
BERNARD.
I’ll be reading from page 29 for both the balance of risks sentence and the sentence on the federal funds rate.
Only one vote is involved, encompassing both:
<START>“To further the Committee’s long-run objectives of price stability and sustainable economic growth, 141the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 5-3/4 percent.” And moving on to the balance of risks sentence:<END>
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes President Broaddus Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Guynn Yes President Jordan Yes Governor Kelley Yes Governor Meyer Yes President Parry Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’d like to adjourn the FOMC meeting for a few minutes temporarily and ask the Board members to join me in my office.
Subsequent to that, we have to review the statement that we will be putting out.
So, just give us a few minutes.
I’m sorry, let’s also do coffee!
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The Board has voted to approve a ¼ point increase in the discount rate to a level of 5 percent.
The floor is open for comments or suggestions on the draft press release circulated to you.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Perfect!
142SEVERAL.
Perfect!
MR.
BOEHNE.
Absolutely perfect, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Including the run-on sentence?
[Laughter] MR. FERGUSON.
It couldn’t run on any better!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If there are no comments, then this press statement will be released on schedule.
Our next meeting is March 21, as President Parry mentioned earlier.
It’s 8 minutes and 10 seconds to noon.
What’s the status of lunch?
MR.
BERNARD.
It should be ready within the next 10 minutes.
MR.
BOEHNE.
Mr. Chairman, in addition to this remarkable economy, this is a remarkable meeting.
This Committee has resisted the opportunity to talk endlessly about a press statement.
I think we ought to note that!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Why don’t we adjourn.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I would just like to mention for the minutes of this meeting the passing of Frank Morris, the former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and a participant in these Committee meetings for 20 years.
He died a week or so ago.
He was, to my knowledge, an active contributor to the work of this Committee and of the Federal Reserve System in general.
And we will miss him.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is it appropriate to put that in the minutes?
MR.
KOHN.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Frank was a good friend to a large number of us around this table.
143MS. MINEHAN.
Ed Boehne mentioned last night that he was a good friend to everybody who is in the Federal Reserve System, both retired and current employees, in terms of his involvement with the Thrift Plan and his chairmanship of the Investment Committee.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 149
