
They are using hiring or retention bonuses as well as free or heavily subsidized 65housing to try to attract them.
All of the major amusement parks in the region are increasing prices.
The smallest increase of 5.4 percent is at a park that increased its fee 10 percent last year.
The highest is at Cedar Point, with a 15 percent increase in admission price.
We have been told that admission at Six Flags in New England will be up 22 percent for this summer.
And increases in parking fees are said to average 10 percent.
We’ve had reports of other price increases of note.
One was a 33 percent increase in paper costs.
These, of course, are all relative price increases and you all know that.
Another, which was reported in this morning’s Wall Street Journal, was that Chubb Insurance is raising premiums.
A major worldwide supplier for the motor vehicle and housing industries, said that its suppliers are asking for relief from the price caps in their long-term contracts.
<START>He said that with the strength in recent orders from Europe, Asia, and Latin America--in his words it is the first time all global markets are coming in strong--they expect to be able to renegotiate the price caps and to pass the higher costs on to consumers.<END>
<START>All of these anecdotal reports of tight labor markets, increasing cost pressures, and efforts to raise prices are the lagged effects of the very strong final demand that we have experienced--with an emphasis on the past tense of the comment.<END>
Very recently there are some tentative indications that growth in final demand is moderating, perhaps in response to the policy actions taken since last June.
In recent meetings with directors, advisory council members, and bankers we’ve heard many more suggestions that a degree of caution is starting to be reflected in the behavior of both businesses and consumers.
Certainly the combination of higher energy costs and higher debt servicing burdens is starting to have an impact.
I look forward to the June meeting, our Humphrey-Hawkins meeting, when we will get a longer- 66term perspective on the outlook beyond 2001.
That’s because the effects of actions we have already taken as well as any action we take today will really influence that period much more than the short term.
We are now experiencing a very familiar pattern.
Once we start raising the federal funds rate, market participants and Fed watchers talk about how far we will have to go and they extrapolate that to ever-higher rates.
In February of 1995 when we had previously increased the fed funds rate to 6 percent, the futures rate five months out indicated a funds rate of 7-3/4 percent.
And some commentators were talking about a rate over 8 percent.
Nevertheless, we stopped at 6 percent.
<START>We disappointed them and we were right.<END>
In December 1998, after the reduction of the funds rate from 5-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent, at least one very vocal Fed watcher said that we would cut the rate to 3 percent.
We did not and we were right.
The point is that the one thing that is certain is that we will need to stop raising the fed funds rate long before the commentators and the fed funds futures markets say we will.
And the question of when to pause cannot be avoided.
I think we are now much closer to that point, possibly with an action at this meeting, than is suggested by the assumptions behind the baseline forecast.
I have one little comment on the issue of raising the real fed funds rate--which is what some of my staff occasionally refer to--or otherwise raising real interest rates, let alone real exchange rates.
We don't raise and lower real interest rates.
The markets do that.
Fundamental forces of all types influence real interest rates and real exchange rates.
The issue is not that but where we are pegging the nominal fed funds rate--the overnight interbank rate--relative to market determined rates, nominal as well as real.
I now think that even talking about the concept of real interest rates is not only not useful but counterproductive.
It is really 67market interest rates more generally, both the real and the nominal components, that matter.
The issue is the nominal fed funds rate and whether we have it at the right level to be consistent with an expansion of central bank liquidity that is consistent with what’s going on in the economy.
<START>I was pleased to hear the Vice Chairman’s remarks and caution to the Committee about the international situation.<END>
I think that is very important.
It probably doesn’t get as much attention as it should, especially in the environment in which we find ourselves.
It is always difficult to make monetary policy in presidential election years, including Mexico’s presidential election years, as we have seen many times in the past.
Our objective, of course, is stable purchasing power of the dollar for our economy.
But increasingly that means for a lot of other economies, too.
Our policies, as we are seeing, do affect foreign countries’ policies and, therefore, foreign economies.
And that feeds back to affect our economy and our ability to achieve a soft landing, in line with the points of concern that Vince Reinhart raised in his remarks.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
Overall economic growth in the Eleventh District remains quite healthy.
However, a few signs of slower growth in response to higher interest rates are just beginning to appear.
At our board of directors meeting last Thursday, we heard more of a mixed picture on the economy than we have in quite some time.
In the Dallas area the demand for large custom homes has slowed noticeably in the last month, probably in response to the lower and more volatile stock market.
In Houston the housing market is said to be doing well but much less so than a few months ago.
Throughout Texas, with the possible exception of Austin, nonresidential construction of all types--offices, commercial space, 68roads, and other infrastructure--has continued the slide that began in January.
On the other hand, one of our directors from the industry noted that she is seeing the strongest growth in electronics in four years.
Purchases of PCs by businesses have begun to pick up.
Labor shortages are still the most common anecdote.
It has even spread to academia where “raiding” parties are trying to recruit away faculty members.
In Austin, where shortages of high-tech labor have persisted for a longer time than in other parts of Texas, some employers have been giving quarterly rather than annual salary increases, as Bill Poole reported for his District.
<START>In spite of the pressures on wages, there are few examples of businesses passing on higher input prices unless the increases are related to higher energy costs.<END>
In that regard, during my cab ride here yesterday I noticed a little sign in the cab that said a 50-cent surcharge was being added because of higher fuel costs, with dates indicating the time period during which the surcharge would be applicable.
Nevertheless, there are exceptions.
In Texas competitive pressures are keeping a lid on chemical prices.
Texas oil and gas employment is finally responding to the now fairly sustained higher prices we have had.
Oil and gas employment increased in March at a rate of 6.4 percent, the rig count is rising, and well permits increased in the first quarter in Texas from 793 to 1,121.
On the subject of automobiles that Mike Moskow was talking about earlier, let me pass on a comment of one of who owns some car dealerships.
He was telling me how remarkable it is that when one part of the country experiences a shift in purchasing, the pattern is almost identical all over the country;
it’s 69uncanny the way the country moves together on that.
And he reported that in early May sales dropped off quite considerably in those dealerships with which he is familiar.
<START>At the national level, it is a little harder to find consistent responses to the Fed's rate hikes.<END>
Last month's weakness in retail sales could be the start of a new trend, but it is too early to judge.
Housing demand probably has begun to deteriorate, but a rush to buy in anticipation of further increases in interest rates may have masked the underlying deterioration.
April’s down-drift in the stock market could produce a notable reverse wealth effect for the remainder of the year.
<START>This morning's CPI number serves as a hopeful suggestion that we may not be guilty of doing too little too late or be behind the curve.<END>
Our gradualist approach has served us well and I see no compelling reasons to depart from that strategy.
An upcreep in inflation pressures calls for a measured response and continued vigilance.
Or, as Tom Hoenig put it, let's not get “sweaty hands.
" CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In light of the time I will shorten what I otherwise would have said, but I do want to say a couple of things.
<START>First, I agree with others that the incoming data since we last met generally support our ongoing vigilance and concern on the inflation front, but to me those data do not indicate that the war is lost or that we have fallen behind the curve.<END>
I tend to agree that inflation risks have picked up and I, therefore, think that we should continue to act, and probably with a slightly greater sense of urgency, in order to achieve balance in our economy.
<START>As for the factors that suggest the risks of inflation are, if anything, perhaps a little stronger, a number of people have talked about the role of consumer behavior, and I would endorse that view.<END>
We have also talked about a number of other indicators of tightening in the 70economy that had been very quiet and seem to have suddenly come awake.
Let me just put two on the table that have not come up thus far.
Capacity utilization, which had fallen out of favor as a topic of discussion around this table in the last two years, appears to be reemerging as an indicator of resource tightness.
At about 81.4 percent that measure has reached its highest reading in two years.
Similarly, the labor force participation rate, which had been mysteriously quiescent, also appears to have returned to a slightly more normal pattern for a strong economy, edging up to 67-½ percent, which is well above the average that prevailed for the three previous years.
To a degree, therefore, I think strong demand-led and investment-led growth is forcing some of the usual indicators of resource tightness to return to a more normal pattern.
These elements of resource tightness I think are starting to show through a bit both in costs and possibly in price pressures.
Employment costs did jump 1-¼ percent in the first quarter, the fastest pace since 1989, which supports the notion that strained labor markets are starting to have an impact.
Some of the survey data, including those from small businesses, also show that compensation costs are increasing.
I view that as important supporting data.
More broadly on the inflation front, the GDP deflator posted its largest increase in three years in the first quarter.
And as others have indicated, short-term inflation expectations have moved up for the public at large.
Purchasing managers also seem to sense a tightening tone in prices.
<START>However, I think all is not lost on the inflation front, and I believe there are some real arguments for a less bleak picture.<END>
The CPI number for March was probably a bit of an anomaly, with much of the uptick in prices in the lodging component, which was a replay of April 1999 and was an upside surprise then as well.
Similarly, if one looks at the retail sales 71figures, there is a possibility, as President McTeer has indicated, that perhaps we are seeing a bit of a slowing but it’s too early to say for sure.
More importantly in my view, the financial markets do not necessarily show a major pickup in inflation expectations.
I would note that a few others have commented on inflation expectations and, contrary to what some have said, I’m not sure that I have seen an increase there.
I looked at the yield spread on 10-year Treasury bills versus 10-year TIPs.
And at least on the chart in front of me the spread seems to have picked up a little starting in October 1998 until about the middle of 1999 and, with two wobbles, then settled down at around 2 percent.
Of course, one can read a wobble up or down and either weigh it heavily or not weigh it very strongly at all.
<START>But contrary to the staff’s forecast, the markets are not suggesting a strong increase in inflation expectations in my view.<END>
Needless to say, Mike Prell has put on the table the question of whether the market has it right or the forecasters have it right.
And since I am neither a market participant nor a forecaster, I will let time tell on that one.
The second point I would note on this front, which again is not statistically proven, is that one could reasonably expect that the recent stock market volatility would in fact damp consumer expenditures somewhat.
The third point I would note is that we know corporate bond rates have increased noticeably since the start of the year, just as the issuance of corporate debt has also been cut back.
So, both developments in the corporate bond markets have the effect, I think, of amplifying our tightening moves and forcing borrowers back to banks, where conditions on both loan rates and terms or availability do seem to be tightening.
So, I believe there are reasons to think that some of our actions have been noticed by the market and will be reinforced by the market.
72Finally, I’d underscore a point that First Vice President Stone and a couple of others made, which is that long-term inflation expectations have not moved appreciably.
<START>Given this configuration, I believe that perhaps we should move a bit more aggressively than in the past, but not signal that we are concerned that the inflation genie is out of the bottle.<END>
While the risks may be somewhat heightened, I do not believe that we are clearly behind the curve.
I think the market is helping us in some ways.
And I would join with a number of the Reserve Bank Presidents and First Vice President Stone in suggesting, as President Hoenig said, that we not have “sweaty palms" here.
On the other hand, I think some action today clearly will help us to reinforce a market perception.
<START>If we can do that without overshooting, I think we can prove that Mike Prell, while he will be missed, has left the institution capable of making some good judgments.<END>
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Bluebook gets to the heart of what has changed and what has not changed since our last meeting.
I quote:
<START>“… incoming data suggested both that aggregate demand had continued to grow more rapidly than potential supply and that wage and price developments were becoming more worrisome.<END>
" So what has not changed is the momentum in demand and production and the imbalance between the growth in production and in potential supply.
But the quote does not make entirely clear whether the staff was referring to an imbalance in the growth rates between demand and potential supply or in the levels of actual and potential output.
It occurs to me that the ambiguity might have been intentional to allow each of us to interpret the observation in a way that we could accept.
<START>But I believe another critical and persisting element is a large imbalance between the levels of actual and potential output.<END>
This view is very consistent with 73the Greenbook and many other forecasts and it does suggest that we have a significant challenge ahead of us.
I don't know if we have “sweaty palms" or even if I have “sweaty palms," but I think the challenge is quite considerable.
And it is along the lines that I think Mike Prell laid out very well in his presentation.
By the way, I thought that was a particularly insightful presentation, although I should note that I always tend to find presentations insightful when they tend to confirm my own bias.
[Laughter] MR. PRELL.
I will take half a loaf!
MR.
MEYER.
But this is a good point for me to say how much I have valued your presentations to the Committee during my tenure here.
And you really ended on a high note today!
So, what has changed?
Well, first of all utilization rates have increased slightly further.
There should not be any surprise about that.
As long as demand is growing faster than potential supply, of course utilization rates will increase.
Now, I recognize that monetary policy acts with a lag, but my view is that the restraint we have put in place since last summer is not sufficient.
The virtual absence of signs of slowing suggests that if we don't take further steps to slow demand growth, utilization rates will most likely increase still further.
A second change is that inflation has become both more of a reality and more of a threat.
<START>It is more of a threat because of still high utilization rates and continued above-trend growth.<END>
But it is more than a threat.
We are seeing, I believe, the beginning of a pickup in inflation rates for both compensation and core consumer prices.
Certainly one can find some mixed signals, but I view the data on balance as quite compelling.
<START>There is a conflict among some of the data on wages and compensation, but on the basis of both the ECI and the higher frequency data for average hourly earnings I think it 74is clear that we are at an inflection point here.<END>
To me this assessment is very consistent with the reports summarized in the Beigebook and with the anecdotal reports that I am hearing as the various state banking groups visit the Board.
As for inflation, President Parry mentioned that the core PCE was moving up.
Its 12-month rate is now 1.8 percent, which is the highest rate of increase since October 1997.
And it has moved up 0.4 percentage point since just the end of last year.
In terms of the core CPI, of course, its 12-month rate is the same as it was a year ago.
But if I look at the pattern, I see that beginning in September the monthly increases were rather consistently higher.
I note that of the next four months to be dropped out of the 12-month core CPI, three of them were 0.1 percent and one was 0.2 percent.
So, I think the 12-month rate is moving up from being around 2 percent to being around 2-1/2 percent, consistent with what we are seeing in the core PCE.
Again, why should we be surprised?
Given the prevailing utilization rates and the dissipation or reversal of favorable supply shocks, some deterioration in inflation is what most forecasters have been expecting.
I think the third change is in the nature of the forecast errors.
<START>For a very long time we have been saying faster-than-expected growth and lower-than-expected inflation.<END>
No more.
<START>So far this year there is relatively little surprise about the strength of growth, which remains robust.<END>
And some key inflation data are now coming in either worse than expected or at least confirming expectations of an increase in inflation pressures--particularly, as I said, the core PCE and CPI measures, the ECI, and average hourly earnings.
This reflects, in my view, the fact that the dominance of favorable supply shocks is receding.
And as a consequence, the implications of the supply/demand imbalance are coming into clearer focus.
75At the end of last year there was a bold headline in the Wall Street Journal:
“So long supply and demand.” I have been waiting for a new headline:
“Welcome back supply and demand.” And then today in the Wall Street Journal on the front page there is an article about firms starting to raise prices.
It begins, “Even in the new economy at least one old rule still applies:
If demand exceeds supply for long enough, sellers will raise prices.
" Our job is clear.
We must restore the balance between supply and demand.
Until we do so, the threat and reality of higher inflation are likely to remain with us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Once again it seems that the basic conditions facing the Committee are little changed from those prevailing at the time of the most recent several meetings, except that perhaps many now familiar concerns have been escalating further.
<START>The economy has turned in another remarkable quarter, and recently hard evidence has begun to replace earlier perceptions that compensation increases are accelerating and some measures of inflation may now be on the move.<END>
There is little point in further reciting the factors at work here.
It appears clear from this discussion that most, if not all, of those around the table see the risks as continuing to be heavily on the up side, with further policy moves in order.
As the Bluebook discusses, the operative question is:
By how much?
There are a number of reasons to feel it is unlikely that inflation is suddenly about to surge.
Among other factors the dollar remains remarkably strong.
Oil prices appear to have peaked and commodity prices generally have flattened out.
Productivity increases continue to hold unit cost increases at bay.
<START>And the impact of policy easing in the fall of 1998 should be dissipating while the tightening over the past year should increasingly be kicking in.<END>
I believe we are still on or perhaps still ahead of the curve, although some inflation creep 76seems inevitable.
However, any signs of economic slowing are scattered at best and quite inadequate in my view to provide confidence that the needed easing of activity is likely to occur without significant additional policy moves.
It is helpful that both the real economy and financial markets today seem to be presenting us an unusual window.
<START>The more aggressive policy path is both expected and by many considered acceptable and is thus likely to present less risk than the more conservative alternative in the near as well as the longer term.<END>
I believe we should grasp this opportunity.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>It is a little late but let's go for coffee if it's there.<END>
It is probably iced coffee at this point!
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mr. Lindsey.
MR.
LINDSEY.
As indicated in the Bluebook, the issue today would appear to be not whether to continue to tighten monetary policy at this meeting but rather by how much.
At the March meeting, the Committee contemplated future firming, and its public statement conveyed its sense that the balance of risks was pointed toward higher inflation.
Incoming data since that time have on balance strengthened the impression of inflation risks.
The most obvious contenders for policy action today are increases of either 25 or 50 basis points.
As Mike indicated, core inflation picks up further next year in the staff forecast.
That forecast essentially is consistent with continued gradual increases in the funds rate target this year.
For example, increases of 25 basis points at this and each of the next four FOMC meetings, followed by a constant 7-1/4 percent funds rate through next year, comport reasonably well with the policy assumption in the Greenbook.
<START>would By our reading of term premiums, the 7-1/4 percent funds rate next year would also be somewhat higher than the expected peak for that rate that appears to be currently built into financial asset prices.<END>
The projected result of these financial conditions would be a core PCE inflation over next year of 2.4 percent, after an expected 2.2 percent over this year.
Because labor markets would still be experiencing an unsustainable degree of pressure late next year, the process of underlying price acceleration would persist beyond that time.
<START>77The case for the 25 basis point move at today’s meeting could rest on the judgment that extending the previous series of quarter point moves today, and perhaps continuing that pace at later meetings, would have a reasonable chance of keeping core inflation contained, in contrast to the staff view.<END>
A supporter of another gradual move might believe that the staff has overestimated the ongoing strength of aggregate demand.
<START>In this view, as a result of the recent greater stringency in credit markets and weaker behavior of the stock market, economic growth may already be poised to slow appreciably, perhaps by enough to match the expansion of potential supply.<END>
Support for a 25 basis point move also might derive from the view that the growth of potential supply itself probably will continue to pick up next year, as structural productivity accelerates further.
Another step-up in trend productivity growth could temporarily hold down unit labor costs even if wage gains are trending higher in response to taut labor markets.
<START>Other things equal, real private interest rates eventually would have to reach still higher levels at some point, but the need to get there is not urgent, given this near-term depressant to inflation.<END>
<START>And, of course, continuing even a gradual pace of tightening for an extended period would eventually produce large increases in nominal short-term interest rates, and in real short-term interest rates as well unless inflation expectations rise appreciably.<END>
The Committee could also want added evidence on the level of resource use that will provoke price acceleration.
The staff may have overestimated the extent to which the economy in the longer run is inflation-prone.
Especially if the long-run NAIRU is substantially lower than the staff has estimated, continued gradualism may not be likely to allow a continuing, underlying acceleration of prices.
<START>From a long-term perspective, the surprisingly favorable inflation and output performance of the U.S.<END>
economy over the second half of the 1990s understandably has fostered a greater sense of uncertainty about economic relationships.
This observation might well be interpreted as providing support for staying with the gradual policy approach used by the Committee to date.
Also, this year’s generally stronger-than-expected data on real GDP, employment, and inflation could be perceived as more noise than signal.
But this result rests on a number of demand and supply forces evolving favorably over coming months.
A less optimistic view of the probable balance of supply and demand--for example, as seen in the staff forecast--would support adopting the 50 basis point option today.
The Committee may be particularly concerned about the potential for accelerating prices under 78continued gradualism.
<START>A 50 basis point move could be motivated by the view that the more restrictive financial conditions associated with adopting the aggressive policy approach, at least at this meeting, would offer a better chance of containing inflation, while still not seriously risking an excessive degree of firming.<END>
The more aggressive strategy would lessen the potential for policy being “too little, too late” and for allowing a significant increase in inflation that would be hard to reverse.
In this view, the perceived expectation in a statistical sense of the costs of an inflationary outcome--that is, the probability of it occurring times the welfare cost if it does--would be high enough to outweigh the smaller perceived expectation of the costs of a tighter-than-needed policy inducing unwanted economic weakness.
The arguments for a 50 basis point move today might seem even more compelling to the extent that the Committee was persuaded by the discussion in the “Alternative Simulations” section of Part I of the Greenbook, based on the FRB/US model, which Mike also alluded to.
That section suggested that next year’s acceleration of core prices can only be short-circuited by a substantial steepening of the trajectory of policy tightening.
For example, if the FOMC were to raise the funds rate in four steps of 50 basis points each this year--and were to keep the resulting 8 percent level constant through next year--then in the simulation core PCE inflation would be held to a little above 2 percent in both years.
<START>This extent of policy tightening would succeed in capping core inflation in part through its effects on the dollar and on longer-term inflation expectations.<END>
In addition, the slowdown of real GDP growth to only 3-1/4 percent next year would raise unemployment to a 4-1/4 percent rate by the fourth quarter.
Labor markets would be on a path to reach sustainable conditions later on.
The Committee’s choice of the balance of risk statement with a 50 basis point move would be somewhat less clear-cut than with a 25 basis point move.
In the latter case, a continued tilt toward inflation would seem to be the obvious choice.
But as I just indicated, even with a 50 basis point rate hike, the staff believes that further substantial funds rate increases would be needed to prevent inflationary pressures from emerging.
Thus, even with a half point action today, in our view inflation risks would still dominate.
The Committee may agree with this judgment, although you no doubt depart in various ways from the point estimates of the Greenbook’s projections.
<START>If the Committee instead believes that the sizable 50 basis point move has an excellent chance of balancing the risks, it should indicate that.<END>
<START>The new language does not reference the future course of policy, so if the Committee still suspects that the risks are unbalanced but wants to pause for a while to weigh the effects of accelerated tightening, it would need to indicate this intent in a separate sentence in the announcement.<END>
79 The current funds market futures quote for May of 6.23 percent implies that the odds that market participants put on a 1/2 percentage point move today have moved somewhat below yesterday’s odds of about two-thirds.
Anecdotal reports suggest that they also expect the FOMC statement to maintain a sense of unbalanced risks toward inflation.
Thus, the rate move part of this combination might be enough of a surprise to raise interest rates a little across the maturity spectrum.
<START>Combining a 1/2 point hike with a balanced statement about the risks would represent two surprises in offsetting directions.<END>
And the difficulty of predicting the reaction of puzzled market participants makes the direction of the immediate interest rate adjustments uncertain, although the change in market rates would probably be muted.
Thank you.
That concludes my prepared remarks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
What actually happened, in basis points, to the federal funds futures rate for June as a consequence of the CPI release?
MR.
LINDSEY.
I have the May figure;
I do not have the June figure.
Does someone have that?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
What is the May figure?
MR.
LINDSEY.
The May figure as of about 11 o'clock this morning was 6.225 for the futures rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I just want the change.
MR.
LINDSEY.
Let me give you yesterday's.
We had 6.23 for May, although that was rounded.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
And what do you have now?
MR.
LINDSEY.
We have 6.225 now.
A significant change that also affects the calculation of odds is not just this futures rate but, believe it or not, today's spot rate.
That rate is 6.4375, or 6-7/16 percent.
So those are the two relevant new pieces of information that we got today that affect these odds.
80CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions?
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
David, you started with a reference to the risks at our last meeting as we stated them but also to the forecast and discussion of the risks around the table.
But then you ended with the focus on the interpretation of our statements of the balance of risks.
Isn't it the case, as long as there are lags--and maybe long and variable lags--that there will be a time when we will stop raising the funds rate when the risks of reported inflation are still rising?
<START>We cannot wait until we have seen the first break toward a downward trend in inflation or we are going to cause a recession for sure.<END>
So there has to be a time when, in spite of what the futures market projections say and in spite of what the forecasts and projections say, we stop.
Suppose we raised the funds rate by 125 basis points today to 7-1/4 percent.
<START>Wouldn’t the risk still be that inflation in the month ahead would be higher?<END>
MR.
LINDSEY.
I’m not sure that the sentence on the balance of risks refers to the month ahead or even the next few months.
MR.
JORDAN.
That is why I am raising the question.
MR.
LINDSEY.
Exactly.
In the case you cited, that really is an issue the Committee would have to confront.
That is, the Committee may expect inflation rates for the next three months to continue on the high side at least, though maybe not rising, and then ebb down.
The question the Committee would then face is what to indicate with respect to the balance of risks.
If I were a member of the Committee, I guess I would tend to say that the risks would be balanced.
So, even if I thought we might have some disappointing readings for a few months, I would be tempted to look even further ahead into the foreseeable future, which is longer than three months, and make a statement that the risks were generally balanced.
But I admit it would be a temptation not to say that.
81MR. JORDAN.
Let me follow up.
Suppose my own model had really long lags--I used to think the lag was about two years--and I think that the stance of policy today affects the inflation rate in 2002.
<START>And my guess is that inflation is going to rise for the next year and a half no matter what we do, just due to good old-fashioned momentum.<END>
Then how do I use this balance of risks statement as a communication device for people out there looking at it?
How do I handle that communications problem?
MR.
LINDSEY.
I may actually wish to turn to other members of the Committee to answer that!
[Laughter] MR. FERGUSON.
Let me step into the staff role here.
What we've worked hard on in developing this language is to try to get in this concept of the “foreseeable future,” which is clearly meant to be longer than the intermeeting period and longer even than after the next meeting.
As the working group and the Committee talked about this, frankly, I think most people thought the foreseeable future encompassed something like the lag that you are discussing.
Obviously, it would be a judgment call.
But if we thought that we had put in enough tightening today that we would slow inflation over a period of let’s say 18 months or so, it would not be unreasonable to say in this statement that we think the risks are balanced for the foreseeable future.
It is clearly longer than three months.
I think most people viewed it as longer than three months and probably somewhere on the order of a year to eighteen months.
<START>Needless to say, we didn’t try to tie ourselves down explicitly.<END>
MR.
JORDAN.
May I ask from that whether it is intended to be interpreted that we could at some point say with this action we now see the risks as balanced?
MR.
FERGUSON.
That is intended to be a possibility, yes.
It is also quite possible, though, that we might say we have taken this tightening action but we still do not see 82the risks as balanced just yet.
However, the reason we have not tightened further, obviously, is that we are waiting for incoming data and a variety of other things so that we can make a more informed judgment.
In fact, since we’ve used this formulation, we have had the option of both raising rates but also saying that the risks were a little unbalanced.
<START>And it is also true, as you made quite clear, that the market--I think appropriately--interprets statements that the risks are not balanced or more toward inflation as at least a possibility, though not a certainty, that we will continue to raise rates.<END>
<START>So we should not pretend that we have broken that link because it is still there, but it is not as strong as it had been before.<END>
MR.
LINDSEY.
<START>If I could just interject to answer the Chairman's earlier question, the June federal funds futures rate fell a basis point today.<END>
It is now at 6.475.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions for David?
If not, let me focus on the previous conversation because it really covers the issues that I think confront us.
My own judgment, and what I plan to recommend to the Committee, is that we have an opportunity now to move the funds rate up 50 basis points, remain asymmetric, and effectively adjust our longer-term posture to a better position than the one we are in at the moment.
The reason I am not concerned about moving the rate up quickly at this stage is that I think the evidence indicates that productivity, indeed perhaps underlying GDP, is still accelerating.
<START>I recognize that the staff’s estimate of productivity growth for the first quarter, based on the latest published figures and adjusted for the defense spending anomaly, is 1-½ percent.<END>
I don’t believe that estimate for a fraction of a second.
I don't think it has even a remote possibility of being accurate because of the evidence we are getting on profit margins, which clearly are still opening up at this point.
Indeed, using the available data on income and profits, which essentially reflect the unit cost structure of nonfinancial corporations, the 83productivity growth number that falls out of that system according to staff estimates is a 6 percent annual rate.
That number is consistent with our unit cost analyses and our estimates for prices, profits, and wages, granted that the estimate for wages may be a little to the weak side.
I would submit that what is creating a 1-1/2 percent estimate for productivity growth is the combination of a peculiar statistical discrepancy and some very dubious data in areas of the economy other than nonfinancial corporations;
the latter provide our most reliable underlying data.
The general view of a persisting acceleration in productivity is being picked up in a lot of the company reports where shortages of important inputs reportedly are beginning to arise.
These are particularly acute in the high-tech area.
Intel is in difficulty.
Cisco is in difficulty.
The problem of semiconductor shortages as a consequence of the earthquake in Taiwan has left some very deep pressures in its wake.
One reason is that the effects of network externalities in the high-tech area of our economy are clearly beginning to show up in an exaggerated manner.
That is, as we are all aware and as I have mentioned previously, when we go from two-at-a-time connections to large network connections, the benefits do not just go up arithmetically;
they go up exponentially.
The network externalities effect of our high-tech system is creating a major underlying acceleration in the economy.
<START>All the problems we have discussed previously, mainly the pressures on the safety valves of net imports and the labor market, are putting substantial pressure on the total system.<END>
What is remarkable at this stage is not that inflationary forces are picking up.
It is that there is so little evidence of a pickup.
I think, for example, that the acceleration in wages is unambiguous.
The one statistic nobody has mentioned today is the fact that average hourly earnings, adjusted for the industry mix that BLS publishes, is up 0.55 percent in April.
That 84increase is far greater than even the ECI is suggesting.
The average hourly earnings number has not been a particularly good estimator of the ECI, but it is an indication that the bias is clearly on the up side.
Nonetheless, when we look through the configuration of unit costs, the estimate we end up with is that unit costs have fallen over the last six months for nonfinancial corporations, indeed for nonfarm business generally.
If this is indeed the case, all of the price acceleration we have seen reflects widening profit margins.
This is not an indication of the beginning of a major acceleration in prices.
Indeed, the core PCE deflator for April rose less than 0.1 percent.
And over the 4-month period from January through April, when most of the inflation is showing up in the CPI, the average rate is 0.17 percent monthly or an annual rate of approximately 2 percent.
While that rate is higher than it was earlier, there is no evidence at this stage that we are experiencing a real underlying deterioration in inflation of the kind that we typically have seen in the past.
I think we are in a quite different environment than we have seen in the past.
In such an environment real long-term interest rates have to rise, and indeed they have risen very significantly in the last several weeks.
Real long-term BBB rates are up over 50 basis points after gradually edging higher for quite some period of time.
This indicates that the markets are adjusting rapidly to the evidence that overall demand forces are becoming very strong, driven in large part by the supply factors themselves.
I mentioned, I think late last year, that I was concerned about our tendency to get caught up in statistical acrophobia and feel the need to make our forecasts converge to the mean because that is basically what happens in our models.
I think we all have a tendency to do that.
I myself think that we will see some slowing in the macroeconomic data that we usually look at, in part because our seasonal adjustments are inadequate.
That is, it is very 85difficult to seasonally adjust for the type of global warming and related rise in degree-days that we experienced during the winter months without some impact on the GDP figures.
So, it is perfectly conceivable that the GDP growth numbers for the fourth and first quarters were just an exaggeration.
They will slow down in the second quarter, even though no slowdown or in fact major changes may have occurred.
I think what we have is still the beginning, or perhaps we are well into it at this stage, of a significant long-term change in the behavior of the economy.
<START>This is not to say that we don't have a cyclical element involved in these growth numbers nor does it mean that higher interest rates, especially real long-term rates, are having no effect.<END>
<START>Indeed, the evidence is now beginning to show that the alleged absence of any effect from what we have done to date, or more importantly what the markets have done to date, is a false notion.<END>
As Governor Ferguson pointed out, we have seen a very dramatic shift in the borrowing of the business sector.
Net issuance at the long end has come down, and the total of business loans plus commercial paper has suddenly surged.
What that means is that a very large number of business firms are moving out of the long end of the borrowing market to the short end.
<START>The reason is not that they are going to get significantly lower interest rates, because they are not, but that they expect the surge in interest rates to be temporary and they will be able to refinance their recent borrowings at lower long-term rates in the future.<END>
This is the classic way in which officers of corporate and financial firms behave.
As soon as they perceive that interest rates are not coming down, they will begin to adjust their capital expenditure projections.
This process has the effect of producing a gradual slowing.
<START>We are seeing some evidence that housing starts are slowing, but the evidence is really marginal.<END>
We are getting the same type of responses that Mike Moskow got from the 86motor vehicle manufacturers, which suggest that these two sectors of the economy are not doing all that outstandingly well in May.
Activity is still high in both, but it has come off its recent peaks to a considerable degree.
<START>The problem that we have with interest-sensitive areas of the economy is that if overall economic activity is accelerating, then what interest rates do is to alter the relative shares of expenditures.<END>
And, indeed, if motor vehicles and housing are flattening out while the economy is rising rapidly, interest rates are doing what one would expect them to do.
Responses are under way, and as far as I can see our policy moves have tracked the long end of the market very well.
If we move 50 basis points today, we will continue to track it very well, and I think that is what we want to try to do, namely try to maintain a policy that is consistent with the way market forces in the long end of the market are going.
I cannot say that I would personally envisage that the inflation pressures are about to ease quickly.
But Jerry Jordan is not wrong.
I remember 1994 exceptionally well.
At one point we decided to sit still while the markets were driving forward.
We chose not to continue to move and I think correctly.
Now, that doesn't mean we will always be correct.
<START>It may be that we were lucky, and if it was luck, the next time we may lose.<END>
I believe the risks in moving 50 basis points today are not very large because I think the underlying momentum in the economy remains very strong.
What is going to happen in the future is probably going to be dependent on a number of developments that we can't really forecast.
One is crude oil prices.
Those prices were declining when Mike and his colleagues started to put the Greenbook together.
One of the reasons was a surprising slowdown in domestic demand for oil.
It essentially showed up in the form of a significant slippage in the demand for residual fuel oil in the first quarter stemming from a major shift throughout the world toward natural gas.
I think the slippage amounted to 300,000 to 400,000 barrels a day.
87In Germany there also was a major shift into lighter distillates.
Overall domestic demand in the first quarter actually was up only marginally over a year earlier.
<START>Demand was stronger in April, and that may be the reason why crude pressures are currently rising.<END>
<START>But as far as the United States is concerned, the prospects of rising inflation pressures stemming from oil may be over, and I say "may" because one cannot rule out a big spike.<END>
The reason relates to the very large retail marketing margins in gasoline.
These occurred as a consequence of the sharp increase in crude oil prices earlier, which followed a dramatic decline in crude inventories.
The jump in crude oil prices pushed up retail gasoline prices at one point, as I recall, some 10 to 15 cents a gallon above where a historically average margin would have suggested they should be.
Those margins have eased back down, but they are still, I believe, something like 8 to 10 cents a gallon above average gasoline marketing margins in the United States.
So even if we have some pickup in crude prices, the margins may still fall back to earlier norms, and it strikes me that the upside pressure on gasoline prices may no longer be there.
The same is true for home heating oil.
Obviously, if there is a big spike in crude, all bets are off, and that could create some fairly significant problems for the economic forecast.
The crucial issue here is what will happen to domestic demand and whether the financial markets will readjust themselves to higher interest rates and ultimately exert a retarding influence on consumption expenditures, housing, and the stock market.
If those forces are essentially in place, as I believe they are, we could end up with an economy that comes in at a level below the Greenbook forecast.
I think it is too soon to make that judgment.
<START>It is conceivable that we will be more inclined to reach that conclusion in June, but I think it would be a mistake to do so now.<END>
I believe our best bet at this stage is to follow the long end of the market as we have been 88doing, and that implies 50 basis points as far as I can see.
Because there is as yet no compelling evidence that inflationary pressures are easing, I believe it would be a mistake not to stay asymmetric and our press release should reflect such a decision.
That is all I have to say.
Would anybody like to comment?
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I support your conclusion.
<START>Let me address myself to the concern about "sweaty palms." We have to remember that the mission that we have been given by the American people is to provide a monetary policy appropriate for sustainable economic growth through price stability.<END>
The demand in the economy is simply not sustainable.
It has worsened significantly since our last meeting and, therefore, it seems to me absolutely essential that we pick up the pace of tightening.
That in no way leads me to believe that we are going to end up at 7, 7-1/4, or 7-1/2 percent on the funds rate.
I don't have any idea where we are going to end our tightening.
And I think we have to be very cautious and make these judgments very carefully so that we don't overdo the tightening.
<START>That’s especially the case given my concern, which I expressed earlier, that we have such a state of euphoria among the general public in the United States that it could be subject to a rather rapid and quick change.<END>
In that circumstance the likelihood of overdoing it on the tightening side is something we have to keep very much in mind.
<START>But for today if we did not do 50 basis points with the balance of risks language indicating a greater concern for inflation, I think we would just feed the euphoria that I believe at the present time is rather dangerous.<END>
That would be very inappropriate to do.
So, I think we are not in the "sweaty hands" period but in the "cool heads" period, and I believe this is the right action to take.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
89MR. HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, everything you said convinced me that a 1/4 point seems right.
<START>Inflation is not taking off and in fact a lot of the evidence suggests some easing off in the expansion.<END>
Moreover, I don't think we should be validating the market necessarily.
I think we should be looking at what is in front of us, and 1/4 point with asymmetric language seems most appropriate.
A year ago when we were at 4-3/4 percent on the funds rate, there was a better case for moving more aggressively in the sense that we had put in a lot of stimulus.
And yet we were very cautious in moving up.
It seems to me that we have been on a pretty good track in our policy actions and if I had my preference, I would stay on that track.
I'll put that view on the table for consideration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
I strongly support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I think all of the right arguments have already been made.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
I'd also like to speak to the issue that Tom Hoenig raised.
I think we want to be careful not to confuse gradualism and predictability.
While the goal of predictability is extremely important, we can't always make policy predictable.
Sometimes we are going to have to surprise the market.
But I think it is extremely helpful when we are able to have the markets very much on the same wavelength as we are.
An increase of 25 basis points, after all, has been in the market for quite some time.
The extra 25 basis points, if we in fact opt for 50 basis points today, has only been in the market since the ECI release.
So, all the most recent reports reflect a policy assumption in the marketplace that includes the 25 basis points that we are putting in place 90today, and then we are saying we should put in some more because the market believes that additional restraint is necessary.
News from this meeting will consist of three pieces.
One piece is the funds rate, and we are matching what the market expects, so it's not really news.
The second is the balance of risks language and, given what is in the fed funds futures market, I think we will be matching what the market anticipates.
The main news out of this meeting will be the statement that accompanies our policy announcement.
To my taste, it is going to be important that our message somehow says that, given what we know today, we believe that rates are going to have to continue to rise.
I don't know how far that process is going to have to go, whether it's more or less than what the Greenbook forecasts.
And as Jerry Jordan rightly emphasizes, it will be very important that we not go too far.
But in terms of what we know now, I don't think we want to give the impression that we see the end of this process.
Some people may read the 50 basis points, despite what is in the federal funds futures market, as saying that we believe we are about at the end of our tightening.
In my view, that would be a mistake since I don't think that's what the evidence suggests today.
I would also like to comment briefly on the vulnerability of the stock market.
I think we all know that the stock market is still very elevated by historical standards and that the volatility in the market is really unprecedented.
The NASDAQ has been more volatile this year than in the entire history of the index.
The market is shaky.
It is not going to help us if the market cracks.
That would cause us a lot of trouble.
I don't mean just political trouble;
I mean trouble in carrying forward a monetary policy that does what we need it to do.
<START>So, I think having a policy that is well in line with what the market expects, while it certainly provides no guarantee, runs much less of a risk than if we surprise the market in a major way.<END>
91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support both halves of your recommendation.
Let me take just one minute to explain why.
<START>I think we are in the business here of trying to find a mini-max solution, if you will, to minimize the maximum regret we will have in terms of the effects of our actions on society and the economy.<END>
One way to do that is to support the market when the market is sending us clear signals.
As I said in my earlier remarks, long-term inflation expectations have not gone up.
I think the reason is that the market is expecting us to react today in a way that is consistent with the way they are looking at the long term.
And we have in fact worked very hard during this intermeeting period to make sure we are not looking in a mirror--that we are looking at the right data and that the market is as well.
<START>This might not always be the case but at this stage the market is sending us a very clear signal that the appropriate move is 50 basis points with a statement of continued concern about inflation risks.<END>
To me the wisest course is to follow that signal.
I think, as you pointed out clearly, that real long-term interest rates have to go up.
<START>In my view we would be in dangerous territory if we did not in fact support that, because otherwise we would be anchoring rates in a way that is inconsistent with where we really want to go.<END>
I strongly support what President Jordan and President Poole said because I, too, am not sure how far this tightening process is going to go.
But, fortunately, we are in a position where we only have to make decisions one meeting at a time.
And for today's meeting I think 50 basis points and a balance of risks statement tilted toward inflation is the right policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
92MR. GRAMLICH.
I support both parts of your recommendation as well, Mr. Chairman.
I think we have to get rates higher and that aggregate demand and aggregate supply are just not balanced.
<START>There is still tremendous momentum on the up side and I think the balance of risks is still on that side.<END>
I do believe that at some point, perhaps not far from now, that Jerry Jordan will be right and the risks will begin to tip toward our overshooting.
But if we have to respond to that, we can.
For right now, I don't see it.
I still think we have to go 50 basis points, with asymmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, it seems clear to me that we need to tighten policy further at this meeting, and I enthusiastically support your recommendation for a 50 basis point increase.
<START>I also believe that the balance of risks remains weighted toward higher inflation, and incorporating that view in the press release is for me an important part of the recommendation as well.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I strongly support your recommendation for a 50 basis point increase and for a balance of risks sentence tilted toward higher inflation.<END>
I recognize that there is some uncertainty about how far we will need to go and I personally think we are going to have to do more.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation and I do so enthusiastically.
<START>I would simply add the point that if in fact inflation expectations are now rising, this move of 50 basis points is really not that much more aggressive than the moves we have been taking up to this point.<END>
While some differences of opinion have been expressed 93around the table about whether inflation expectations are indeed rising, I think there is some evidence that that is the case.
So, I support both parts of your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
I fully support the 50 basis point move at this meeting.
My preference would be to say that with such a move the risks are balanced.
But I recognize the risk that such a statement would be misinterpreted, and that would be undesirable in my view.
But to my mind saying that the balance of risks is still tilted toward inflation also can be misinterpreted if the market's impression is that the decision at the June meeting is a foregone conclusion.
I think that would be a mistake and it would be miscommunicating.
I'm troubled by the concern over surprising the market because we do have to disappoint the market at times by not doing what it expects.
We know that;
we've done it many times before.
I prefer to think of this as a situation where sometimes we will have to take an action and communicate in a way to educate the markets and get them to adjust to us rather than have us adjusting to the market.
So, at least among us, if we are going to say that the balance of risks is tilted toward inflation and that the funds rate will be moved still higher, I wouldn't want to think about that in terms of the old tilt language.
That is, I don’t want the presumption to be that we are going to come back predisposed to another increase in June.
I think it would be desirable to take a stronger action at some time and then be willing to give it more time to have the desired effects.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
First Vice President Stone.
MR.
STONE.
Mr. Chairman, I support both parts of your recommendation.
I think a larger action by the Committee today will forestall any rise in longer-term 94expectations of inflation.
And in my view, not moving the funds rate up 50 basis points probably would lead to long-term expectations of some increase in inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
I do have to admit that I got to this decision by a rather different route than you did, but it is nevertheless good to end up with the same conclusion.
I am concerned that our challenge is much more demanding than slowing the expansion to trend.
The further increase in utilization rates and signs of building inflation pressures suggest that we are going to have to slow ultimately economic growth to below trend for a while.
And until this process is much further along, there's a threat of continued upward pressure on inflation.
I think the gradual approach we've been taking so far has been motivated by the possibility that our task might be a more limited one--just slowing the economy to trend--and also by the fact that until recently there hasn't been any sign of rising inflation.
<START>Moreover, we’ve had concerns or uncertainties about sustainable utilization rates.<END>
<START>But I think it has always been clear that there were risks in the gradual approach.<END>
And the risks were that during the time we were trying to slow the expansion, the imbalance between actual and potential output would become still worse and the threat of inflation would become more of a reality.
It seems to me that with a more aggressive policy action of 50 basis points today the risk of a policy mistake is much smaller than with a more gradual policy response.
What we're doing in some sense today is moving forward a rate increase that in any event we likely would have implemented in the near term.
<START>So, we don't have to have any larger cumulative increase in interest rates than we otherwise would have had, but we put ourselves in a position to implement a larger cumulative rise if it turns out to be justified.<END>
Thank you.
95CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, for all of the reasons that have been stated around the table.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I, too, support your recommendation.
I think we may be seeing some incipient signs of slowing in the economy but I don't think it's enough.
Our own forecast and the Greenbook forecast say that the slowing will not be enough.
Also, I see the 50 basis point move, while different from the moves we have been making, as consistent with them.
We have reached a point in time when that is an appropriate action because of developments in the market.
I disagree a little with President Poole on the volatility and the downward trends that we've seen in the market.
The fact is that other things have demonstrably not fallen out of bed at the same time--maybe they will down the road--but I don't get a sense that the volatility and market downturns are having a major impact in a real sense on the economy.
<START>So, I think we have some opportunity to act without fear of unsettling the market, whereas earlier I was in favor of a gradual approach to tightening because of concerns about the market and market volatility.<END>
<START>Now that we've seen a bit of that and bad things haven't happened, we have a window of opportunity during which we can move the funds rate up and send a consistent message that the risks are still on the up side.<END>
I think we should limit our statement to the usual language as much as we possibly can, saying that the risks are tilted toward inflation in the foreseeable future, and not give anybody room to play with the interpretation of what we meant by this word or that word.
I’d continue with a consistent approach toward tightening monetary conditions and be always watchful for signs of incipient slowing.
96CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm fully comfortable with your recommendation in all its aspects and I share the thinking that real interest rates should be going up from here.
Let me just add one other thought, which is that I assume we will be open-minded about where we are going to go next and at what pace.
One reason I think we want to maintain that stance is the point I alluded to earlier, namely my own uncertainty about the inflation outlook.
I'm not persuaded, especially with this action, that we're going to confront a significant acceleration of inflation.
<START>I say that in part because we in Minneapolis have been looking for the effects of labor market tightness and its correlation to future inflation--not only in the last several years but we've taken this back empirically for quite some time, and we can't find evidence since about 1984 that labor market variables make a significant contribution to forecasting inflation.<END>
I'm not entirely sure what we ought to conclude from that, but one thing we certainly ought to conclude is that we should be cautious as we think about what has happened in the economy and its implications for the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
While I would have preferred 1/4 point, I can also agree to 1/2.
Looking forward, I would just remind us that this afternoon the prime will go to 9-1/2 percent, and that's getting close to that psychologically important double-digit level.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, we can revise our method of estimating and reporting it to a monthly basis!
The majority appears to be in favor of 50 basis points with the balance of risks sentence toward inflationary pressures.
Would you read the directive that would capture that?
97MR. BERNARD.
I'll be reading from the Bluebook page that unfortunately did not make its way into the Bluebook.
[Laughter] "The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 6-1/2 percent" The "balance of risks" sentence would be as follows: "Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future." CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes President Broaddus Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Guynn Yes President Jordan Yes Governor Kelley Yes Governor Meyer Yes President Parry Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I'd like to adjourn the FOMC meeting temporarily while the Board of Governors goes into my office to confront requests from several of your Banks on the discount rate.
[Recess] 98We are back in session.
I'll just announce to your great surprise that the Board of Governors voted to move the discount rate up 50 basis points.
Is the draft press release that was just circulated satisfactory?
SEVERAL.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
In that event, shall we adjourn for lunch?
MR.
BERNARD.
President Boehne has arrived.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 72
