
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

Indeed, while I am going to argue against a 50 basis point increase, I would say that if we were to decide on 50 basis points, we would have to do it with asymmetry.
In my opinion, 50 basis points with symmetry would be a terrible mistake at this stage.
It would imply that our job is over.
<START>What we have to convey to the markets, consistent with what is clearly an acceleration 126in productivity and I think increasing turbulence in financial markets, is that we are on the scene and that we are embarking on a routine of incremental tightening.<END>
What is the argument against 50 basis points today?
I would say the argument is basically twofold.
One is that, as a general rule in an environment like this, the last tightening move that we make is going to be a mistake.
We will not know that at that time, but it is almost invariably a mistake.
If we tighten in small incremental doses, the size of a mistake is smaller by definition.
Secondly and far more importantly, I think that our latest evaluation of the equity premium in the stock market is that it is downright scary!
I haven’t seen anything like this before.
<START>In fact, if we use the inflated earnings expectations of the security analysts and the P/E ratios that we have now, we get an extremely impressive equity premium.<END>
<START>Back in 1987, you will recall, long-term rates were going up as the stock market went up, and the market just ran out of steam.<END>
We are in a far worse situation now than we were then.
I am concerned that, if we are too aggressive in this process of tightening, we could crack the market and end up with a very severe problem of instability.
I don't know how far we will have to go.
Indeed, I don't know how long we can continue tightening by 25 basis points.
As a sort of working hypothesis, I would argue that we should think in terms of moving at every meeting and that we move by 25 basis point increments.
We would continue on that course unless and until it appears that we are getting behind the curve on inflation or inflation expectations, in which case we would raise the size of the adjustment.
On the other hand, we could continue to implement our strategy if we began to see the wealth effect stabilizing and/or the gap between supply and demand beginning to close.
Unless and until that happens, we will remain in a very unusual period that we have never experienced before.
What I am arguing is not something that is coming out of a particular simulation.
<START>All that is needed for my argument 127to be valid, as best I can judge, is that there is a wealth effect, that the market is at extremely high valuation levels, and that we have to take action to close the supply-demand gap.<END>
I would propose, therefore, that we move the funds rate up by 25 basis points today and that we include in our press release the equivalent of what we used to call asymmetry.
There would be a full expectation that we will be moving again in March.
If it turns out that the economic expansion is accelerating, and indeed I have every reason to suspect that it may, that would not in itself be a policy issue in my view.
That is not what we ought to be looking at.
We should be looking at the underlying inflation pressures in the economy.
And if they become larger, then I think we will have to move faster.
But for today I think it is appropriate to move 25 basis points and issue an asymmetric statement--I don't remember the exact language we plan to use to express that.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
“Balance of risks.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The balance of risks is toward inflation.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I fully support your recommendation, but let me make a few comments.
The issue clearly is not whether we should do nothing, but whether we should firm 25 basis points or 50 basis points.
And I agree that in either case we would have to use the balance of risks language indicating that we are more concerned about inflation.
I think we have to look at ourselves.
The reality is that we are perceived everywhere around the world as the best central bank in the business.
We are highly regarded, highly respected.
And our commitment to price stability, certainly as defined by you in speeches and testimony, is I think unquestioned anywhere.
Our style is that of a strong, silent leader, one who moves incrementally.
We move 25 basis points at a time in a very systematic way.
<START>If we were to move 50 basis points--to continue my analogy, if all of a sudden the strong, silent leader starts beating his chest to show what a tough guy he is--what would be your 128conclusion?<END>
I believe it would be that he is scared!
What do we have to be frightened about?
We can certainly go about our business in our normal way, continuing to exhibit the confidence that we have earned by our performance.
And I think that is the thing that will contribute the most to stabilizing the economy.
I agree with you fully that a working hypothesis that we will have to have a series of tightening moves is appropriate, and I believe that that should be in the background of our thinking.
<START>But I feel very strongly that 25 basis points combined with a balance of risks statement toward inflation concerns is by far the right package for today.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, I certainly also support your recommendation.
We are faced with very powerful, real forces that we want to allow to run to the extent that they can in terms of increasing productivity, employment, and real income without upsetting the inflationary apple cart.
I would like to relate your comments this morning to our discussion yesterday about the trade deficit.
The trade deficit is also part of this real adjustment that is going on in the economy and it is not fundamentally a nominal phenomenon.
The trade deficit is financing the capital flows that are coming to this country because the rate of return is so high.
And it cannot itself be an object of our policy because it is determined by these real forces that are so unusual, certainly in the context of postwar U.S.
history and perhaps much further back than that.
I think a move of 25 basis points and a statement that the balance of risks is toward inflation is exactly the right way to go.
The market is our friend.
The market, after all, has anticipated this move.
We saw interest rates rise.
This federal funds futures prediction has been in the market for four weeks or more, and we should not do anything that leaves the market wondering what we are up to.
<START>If we were to go with 50 basis points and a balanced risk 129statement, the markets would most likely say that we have concluded that we are done.<END>
And that is certainly not our conclusion.
So we want to make the market do as much of this work as possible, lead the way, and help us figure out what is the correct response to the incoming flow of information.
I absolutely agree that this is likely to mean a sequence of 25 basis point increases at each meeting.
It wouldn’t be correct to say in Dave Stockton's famous language “as far as the eye can see” but, nevertheless, for quite some time.
And by working cooperatively with the market I think we will have the best chance of coming out of this without a big upset.
So, I support your recommendation 100 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
<START>Mr. Chairman, I would prefer a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate and also a public statement that we are focusing on heightened inflation risk in the future.<END>
My concern is that the time period between this meeting and the next meeting on March 21st is quite long.
I might suggest something that would make me more comfortable with a 25 basis point increase and that is that we agree to assess the situation again at the end of this month.
We will have considerably more data, certainly more data about prices.
We could review those data and see if we feel at that time that a further move is appropriate.
I don't see why we have to be constrained by a fixed calendar, which in this case involves quite a long interval between meetings.
Over the 14 years I have been with the Fed, we have found telephone meetings at times like this to be very useful.
From my perspective, though it’s certainly not one shared by everyone here, it would reduce the possibility that we will get behind the curve.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The option of a telephone conference is always on the table.
It always has been.
It’s just that we have not needed to employ it for a while.
But it is obviously there.
130MR. PARRY.
Well, I think there might be a case for it this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The markets will tell us.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation in its entirety.
<START>It seems to me, given the kind of technology or productivity shock that we have had, that real interest rates need to rise.<END>
To some extent, that has occurred.
My judgment is that they need to go up more.
I do not see any way we can accomplish that other than by raising the funds rate.
So, a ¼ point increase is certainly acceptable to me.
I would not go beyond that and be more aggressive, principally for considerations of uncertainty.
<START>It seems to me that we are uncertain about the future path of productivity and we are uncertain about NAIRU.<END>
<START>I personally am uncertain whether the latter is a useful concept at all.<END>
And we are uncertain about the implications of the increase in real rates that has already occurred and what the effects may turn out to be.
So, I think what you are suggesting is what we ought to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I support your proposal completely.
I believe the increased risk of inflation is there, so I think we ought to say it.
Also, I am very much in favor of 25 basis points for several reasons.
First, while the models show direction, I agree that they don’t show it with precision, so I think we should proceed gradually.
Secondly, we are in an environment where core inflation has been very modest, and we need to recognize that as we begin to pave the way for higher rates.
And thirdly, some imbalances remain out there, which we are trying to take into account, but we don’t want to shock the system either.
So I think continuing the steady path that we have been on is the appropriate approach.
Therefore, I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
131MR. MEYER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation for a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate and what I will continue to call an asymmetric posture.
I also agree with you that we are likely to have to implement a series of tightenings this year;
it is likely to be appropriate to make a move at each meeting for a period of time.
<START>Given the uncertainties about trend growth, NAIRU, and inflation dynamics, and also given the uncertainty about the impact of our policies on financial conditions more broadly, I think there is a strong case for a gradualist approach.<END>
I hope we will be able to use the bias in the announcement that accompanies today’s action skillfully.
By that I mean that I hope we don't undermine what I view as very sensible expectations about the rise in the funds rate that are built into the term structure and futures markets.
<START>We had a lot of discussion today about uncertainty, about the structure of the economy and inflation dynamics, and about the value of humility.<END>
I don’t want to lead a discussion opposed to humility.
[Laughter] However, I think sometimes we draw an implication here that humility suggests inaction, though that is certainly not what you have been arguing, Mr. Chairman.
<START>But I want to bring us back to the discussion of our monetary growth targets because it seems to me that in a monetary growth target regime the danger of inaction is much less than in a funds rate regime.<END>
And that, I think, is consistent with some of the points that President Jordan was making.
<START>If productivity growth is a little higher, we will end up with a little lower inflation;<END>
it will be somewhat limited and won't be as much of a problem.
<START>But in an interest rate regime inaction can be very, very dangerous--and particularly dangerous in an expansion that is driven by higher productivity, which raises real equilibrium interest rates.<END>
I also want to comment a bit on your discussion of the role of the wealth effect.
It clearly has been very important.
We go from the productivity upturn, to the wealth effect on 132consumption, to the excess of demand growth relative to supply growth.
<START>And we’ve had a lot of discussion, not only here but in a number of other arenas, about how a declining equity premium or higher equilibrium growth rate can raise the value of equity prices.<END>
A lot of that is a partial equilibrium analysis.
You just plug into the formula a low equity premium and voilà--higher equity prices.
That makes very little sense in a general equilibrium model, because in such a model that wealth effect will ultimately generate increases in real interest rates that will significantly cap and diminish the increase in equity premiums.
I think the danger that we have been facing recently is that a monetary policy that has been somewhat slow to tighten and has allowed the economy to operate in this partial equilibrium world.
I think we are now going to see how equity prices evolve in a general equilibrium world, and I think that is one reason why we have to be a bit cautious and gradualist.
I want to make just a few comments on what I perceive to be the consensus strategy that is unfolding.
<START>It seems to me that what we have been talking about is being very preemptive now in slowing the economy to trend growth, but being very reactive once we get to trend growth and we have stabilized the unemployment rate.<END>
Then at that point we are prepared to be very reactive and respond only to evidence of higher inflation.
<START>I have been struggling with the issue of whether this is an appropriate strategy, or perhaps even an optimal strategy, given our uncertainty about the output gap.<END>
If it is a sensible strategy, I think there are some gaps or details we have to fill in.
Obviously, we have to decide what the appropriate path of the funds rate is to slow the economy to trend.
But we also have to keep in mind that if we are unsuccessful in slowing the economy to trend and, therefore, the output gap rises even further, that should affect our policy and we should tighten by more than we otherwise would.
That is, we should tighten enough to slow the economy to below trend so that we can push the output gap back down.
I 133think that is consistent with the nonlinear rule that I have discussed in the past.
As uncertain as we are about the output gap, that uncertainty about whether or not we are beyond the economy’s potential diminishes very greatly as the output gap increases based on our best estimate of potential.
And the third issue I think we are going to have to focus on in this strategy is just how aggressively we should move against higher inflation.
To the extent that we have down weighted our response to increases in the output gap, when inflation rises we have to be more aggressive than we would otherwise be.
<START>The way to think about that is that once we get to trend growth and the unemployment rate stabilizes, we have assumed that our policy setting and strategy are consistent with stable inflation and the output gap is basically zero.<END>
If inflation then begins to rise, not only do we have to respond to the increase in inflation the way we ordinarily would, we also have to revise our estimate of the output gap.
That requires a more aggressive response to inflation than would otherwise be the case.
So, those are a few thoughts that at least shape my views of the strategy going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree with both halves of your recommendation.
I think we should reinforce markets when they are right and I think they are right in their expectations.
<START>Secondly I, like others, am moved by the uncertainties that we have talked about, but I also recognize that inflation does not appear at this stage to be on the verge of a virulent outbreak.<END>
So a move of 25 basis points seems to me moderate and appropriate.
I think you're absolutely right in suggesting that over time we can and will continue to look at the reaction of markets generally, including the asset markets where I do think, as I said yesterday, 134there is likely to be some underlying turbulence.
<START>Finally, on the outlook sentence I believe the statement that suggests the risks are balanced toward inflation is obviously the right one to use because it does not take back all the other things that we're doing.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Boehne.
MR.
BOEHNE.
I agree with your recommendation of ¼ point and I think we need to convey the view that we have more tightening ahead of us.
My best guess is that there will be a significant amount of tightening over the coming year.
There may well be a time in this series of tightening moves where a move of ½ point is going to be appropriate.
But today I think ¼ is just right.
Our basic product is one of confidence--confidence that we're going to do what is appropriate to keep the economy on the right path.
And in today's environment a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate captures that because it indicates that, yes, we know that tightening is appropriate.
We're going to do what needs to be done.
We are neither going to underreact or overreact.
I think that is important for our image as a strong, confident central bank that the public deserves to put its confidence in.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, I am pretty much where Bob Parry is.
This is a tough call but, if I had my druthers, my preference would be to go the full ½ point.
It would be a very decisive move that would preempt any inflation expectations that might either be building or likely to build in the near-term future.
I recognize it would be a strong move, particularly in the context of the need for asymmetry whatever we do;
I agree fully with your point on that score.
So, I recognize that there are risks.
<START>To me the big risk is that we might get a market break that could lead to what I would refer to as a disorderly plunge in the stock market.<END>
That would complicate the situation and make it more difficult for us to take the kind of steps we will need to 135take.
So I am able to accept the ¼ point increase this morning.
But I would hope that we will do it with what I might call “asymmetry plus.” We need that language.
<START>Also, I would hope--and I expect you’d be inclined to do this in your testimony, which is not too far down the road--that we will underscore the intensity with which we are watching developments and our readiness to move more aggressively if in fact we need to do so.<END>
<START>Also, and I hope this is not out of line, I would hope that the Board of Governors might consider a complementary discount rate increase in the near future.<END>
Furthermore, I agree with Bob Parry.
I know that an intermeeting conference call is always on the table but, in the context of your remarks, I hope we will watch market developments very carefully for any signal that we should have a call.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
First, on the data point:
I talked yesterday about the difference in ten-year bonds between the nominal and the real spread.
I am no match for you in developing the synthetic yield!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I didn't do it!
It was your colleagues down at the other end of the table.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I was using the chart, Exhibit 18, that the staff sends around every Monday.
And on that rendering, certainly in the last month there has been a rise in the inflation premium.
But Don Kohn did persuade me that I way overstated it yesterday.
Nevertheless, it has gone up.
The second thing I would like to say is that I tend to agree with the Bluebook simulations on inflation targeting, humble as we are about models.
And I believe that we are likely to need a lot of tightening, and that the real question we have to deal with today is how we get there from here.
136I will support the recommendation of a 25 basis point move with a tilt and the implicit gradualism.
I recognize the benefits of that strategy.
I'm delighted to be thought of as a strong and silent leader!
<START>[Laughter] I think you make a good point, Mr. Chairman, that the economy is in many ways very fragile, that things could change rather abruptly, that the past record has not been good in calling the turns, and that, therefore, there is a chance that we could overreact.<END>
In that regard, as I thought about the tilt in connection with Roger Ferguson’s Working Group, there is one thing I like about the tilt.
It is easily reversible.
<START>If we were to raise the rate 50 basis points, discovered we did too much and then reduced it 25 basis points, it would look as though we didn’t know what we were doing.<END>
If we do 25 basis points with a tilt and new data come in indicating the economy is not as strong as we thought, we can take off the tilt.
Then it looks as if we do know what we're doing and we're just looking at the data.
That’s a nice advantage of the tilt and I’m glad we are using it in this situation.
So, there are a number of benefits in the gradualism strategy.
I recognize that and I support your recommendation.
Having said that, there are some costs to the gradualism strategy.
We could be moving too little and too late.
There is historical precedent for that, too, and I think we ought to keep that in mind.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
Thank you.
When I look out at what the financial markets are tellingly me--or maybe more importantly not tellingly me--I see the Treasury yield curve upward sloping a bit from two years out to five years.
Beyond five years it’s downward sloping, with corporate bond yields and mortgage rates at 8 percent.
I would be hard pressed to say that those are at the wrong levels for an environment as outlined in the Greenbook and the associated expectations.
<START>I would feel on much firmer ground in saying that there is something wrong with 137these market levels if, given the second-half experience of 5-3/4 percent real growth and, depending on the inflation measure, nominal spending of 7-1/2 to 8 percent, I thought it didn’t add up.<END>
But this says to me that the market is not building in that kind of real growth plus inflation inherited from the second half of last year through this year.
So, I don’t know that nominal interest rates need to go up.
<START>If inflation were to turn adversely and accelerate more than seems to be built into the marketplace right now and inflation expectations were beginning to rise, I do think it would be undesirable for real rates to go down.<END>
Then I would think that nominal rates would need to increase.
On the front end of the curve, though, when I look at the rise in rates for securities maturing in up to two years, it does leave me with the feeling that a 5-1/2 percent overnight interbank rate is too low to be consistent.
<START>Just closing that gap somewhat would be the wisest thing to do.<END>
And taking a step today, I think, is appropriate.
I have a comment, though, on this question of 50 basis points versus 25 basis points, and that requires me to make reference to the discount rate.
There was a time, and I think it is still the case, that a movement in the funds rate with an accompanying increase in the discount rate was interpreted as being a more lasting move as opposed to a move in the funds rate alone.
Given that, I would think a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate with a discount rate change is too strong.
And since I do consider directors’ recommendations for a discount rate increase appropriate in this environment, I would prefer ¼ point on the funds rate knowing it is to be accompanied by a discount rate move.
In fact, I would oppose a 50 basis point change in the funds rate either with a discount rate increase or without it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The Board of Governors will be meeting later to vote on the discount rate.
President Guynn.
138MR. GUYNN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I came into the meeting with the intention and inclination to argue for a 50 basis point tightening, and I think the staff presentations we heard yesterday and the comments made around the table would certainly support that.<END>
I believe there is evidence of mounting inflationary pressures.
<START>The probability of inflation moving up has clearly increased in my view.<END>
<START>My biggest worry was that if the consensus was to go with a 50 basis point tightening, there would be an inclination to slide back to a balanced risk statement.<END>
And as you eloquently pointed out, that is not where we want to be.
I can support ¼ point tightening today with the balance of risks on the side of inflationary pressures.
I guess you already answered this question, but let me just say that I, too, would really like to see the Board consider a discount rate increase.
I think that gives our directors some ownership in this policy action and reinforces the action we are taking.
And in my view there is a reasonably high probability that we will have to step up the pace in terms of further policy actions in the meetings to come.
But I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There was a table in today’s Wall Street Journal.
I don’t know how many people saw it, but it listed a series of possible Fed actions today, gave the odds on them and the likely market reaction.
It had all the different scenarios we’ve talk about--an increase in the funds rate of 25 or 50 basis points, with a tilt or without, and so on.
And the last line in the table was a rate cut by the Fed.
The odds were “as likely as the Cubs winning the World Series.” [Laughter] And the likely market reaction was “holy cow!” [Laughter] I found that very upsetting.
<START>Obviously, there is no chance we are going to lower rates today, but Cubs fans are always optimistic!<END>
139Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation very strongly.
I think the strategy of incremental moves is an excellent one, supporting the markets when they are right and helping confirm their inclinations.
It seems clear that if we do not move today, that would not only jeopardize the expansion but would also jeopardize our credibility as well, which is so important.
I should note that our outlook assumes a fed funds path that has a decidedly upward drift over the forecast horizon.
<START>And even with that strong upward tilt, we project a deterioration in the inflation outlook.<END>
Regardless of whether we look at the core PCE or the core CPI or all those measures that I mentioned yesterday, inflation is still going up.
So in my judgment, an increase of 25 basis points is not going to be enough over the forecast horizon.
I believe, as you said, that we should be thinking of a series of moves to make sure that we correct the imbalance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply.
I think it’s also very important that we say that the balance of risks is tilted to higher inflation for exactly the reasons that you explained so articulately.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One thing I came into this meeting very determined about was that we should end with an asymmetric directive, whether we went with a 25 or a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate.
So I’m glad it appears that we are going to do that.
I imagine that most people, if they gave any thought at all to what I might recommend at this meeting, would have thought I would clearly be on the side of a 50 basis point move.
But I must admit that I’m having more frequent debates with myself, not so much on the demand side of the equation--I don’t think anybody doubts the strength of demand--but about all the elements of supply that are so richly portrayed in Don Kohn’s different graphs.
I’m becoming much more a believer in the view that the potential for productivity to stay flat at its current high level or to 140grow in the future is better than I thought it was.
And I don’t know where the NAIRU is.
As with any forecast, all the forecasts we’ve been doing in Boston require a great deal of jiggering after they are done to try to capture a bit of the uncertainty that I know I feel and other people apparently feel on the supply side.
I also think that the interaction with the markets presents us with a series of risks that you talked about.
I tried to incorporate some of that into my discussion yesterday, with respect to the buildup of imbalances in terms of credit, all related to rising asset values.
<START>So, with those two things in mind, both a sense of risk and a sense of uncertainty about the economy’s actual capacity, I’m very comfortable with a move of 25 basis points.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for all the reasons that have been expressed.
I think it’s exactly the right thing to do.
But I do want to say that I feel a good deal of identification with the remarks of President Broaddus and others around the table.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I support both parts of your recommendation.
As far as the future is concerned, I hope we will keep looking at the data and make our decisions one step at a time and not get too programmed in advance as to what we are going to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I guess we have heard from everybody.
MR.
BERNARD.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>It looks as though we have strong support for an increase of 25 basis points and a balance of risks statement toward concerns about inflation.<END>
MR.
BERNARD.
I’ll be reading from page 29 for both the balance of risks sentence and the sentence on the federal funds rate.
Only one vote is involved, encompassing both:
<START>“To further the Committee’s long-run objectives of price stability and sustainable economic growth, 141the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 5-3/4 percent.” And moving on to the balance of risks sentence:<END>
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes President Broaddus Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Guynn Yes President Jordan Yes Governor Kelley Yes Governor Meyer Yes President Parry Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’d like to adjourn the FOMC meeting for a few minutes temporarily and ask the Board members to join me in my office.
Subsequent to that, we have to review the statement that we will be putting out.
So, just give us a few minutes.
I’m sorry, let’s also do coffee!
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The Board has voted to approve a ¼ point increase in the discount rate to a level of 5 percent.
The floor is open for comments or suggestions on the draft press release circulated to you.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Perfect!
142SEVERAL.
Perfect!
MR.
BOEHNE.
Absolutely perfect, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Including the run-on sentence?
[Laughter] MR. FERGUSON.
It couldn’t run on any better!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If there are no comments, then this press statement will be released on schedule.
Our next meeting is March 21, as President Parry mentioned earlier.
It’s 8 minutes and 10 seconds to noon.
What’s the status of lunch?
MR.
BERNARD.
It should be ready within the next 10 minutes.
MR.
BOEHNE.
Mr. Chairman, in addition to this remarkable economy, this is a remarkable meeting.
This Committee has resisted the opportunity to talk endlessly about a press statement.
I think we ought to note that!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Why don’t we adjourn.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I would just like to mention for the minutes of this meeting the passing of Frank Morris, the former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and a participant in these Committee meetings for 20 years.
He died a week or so ago.
He was, to my knowledge, an active contributor to the work of this Committee and of the Federal Reserve System in general.
And we will miss him.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is it appropriate to put that in the minutes?
MR.
KOHN.
Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Frank was a good friend to a large number of us around this table.
143MS. MINEHAN.
Ed Boehne mentioned last night that he was a good friend to everybody who is in the Federal Reserve System, both retired and current employees, in terms of his involvement with the Thrift Plan and his chairmanship of the Investment Committee.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 39
