
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

So that’s my concern about the balance of risks.
In other 12/11/01 85 words, the message that I personally would like to send--to put some probabilities on it--is that there may be a two-thirds chance that we will not change the funds rate at the next meeting and a one-third chance, if the data continue to come in weak, that we will reduce rates another time.
What I would not like to do is to create an impression that we believe there’s a high probability that we will be cutting rates again at the next meeting.
That’s my concern about the balance of risks statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>I agree with that and I think there are two ways to handle that problem.<END>
One is in the balance of risks statement and the other is in the full press statement that we make.
I would much prefer to put something in the full statement itself that recognizes that the situation has changed from an unmitigated set of negative forces to a more mixed environment now.
I would prefer to do it that way because, as far as I’m concerned, it’s too abrupt an adjustment to change to a balance of risks statement that says it is just as likely that at the next meeting we will raise rates as lower them.
I just don’t think that’s credible.
But it’s certainly credible--in fact I agree with your probabilities that the chances are probably two to one--that we will not be changing the funds rate at our next meeting.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, the reduced size of the rate decrease, from 50 basis points several times in succession to 25 basis points, will in and of itself send the kind of signal that I think we’re looking for.
That’s part of the message that comes from reducing the size of the cut.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, it seems fairly likely to me that economic recovery would occur next year without any further easing of monetary policy.
However, that outcome is vulnerable to a number of negative shocks that could hit the economy at any time.
<START>With inflation well in hand and Federal Reserve credibility in good shape, I believe we have the flexibility to respond to these 12/11/01 86 risks.<END>
Therefore, I strongly support your recommendation of a 25 basis point reduction in the funds rate as some insurance against downside risks.
I also prefer a balance of risk statement that emphasizes economic weakness.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation and would like to associate myself with President Parry’s view.
The reason I support it is in large part because of the uncertainty about how to interpret the incoming data and the outlook.
In those circumstances, as he suggested, insurance is probably a good thing to have.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, let me make a couple of comments that may make your recommendation look a little more moderate and restrained.
[Laughter] There are certainly some differences in the situation we face today from the one we were looking at when we met last month.
But I think there are a lot of similarities as well.
At the November meeting I favored a 50 basis point reduction in the funds rate, which we eventually did, and I favored it very strongly and categorically.
There were primarily two factors that conditioned my thinking.
First, I didn’t see any evidence of either inflation or rising inflation expectations anywhere.
And second, given our high credibility, I thought we would have time to reverse course, if we needed to, and move the rate back up.
After all, we did that in 1999, so we have had at least one recent experience when we were able to pull that off.
Given these two preconditions, I thought we ought to use some of our credibility to ease policy aggressively and to reduce the risk that disinflation might undercut the stimulative impact of the reductions in the nominal funds rate we had engineered.
I think those two preconditions are still in place and in my view the policy risks today are much the same as those we faced last month.
12/11/01 87 What I think we need to do above all is to avoid getting into a situation where inflation expectations are quite low and we have the nominal funds rate close to zero.
That’s the so-called zero bound problem.
It’s very difficult to get out of that, as I think we know.
We don’t want to go there.
As we discussed earlier in the meeting, inflation expectations in the Michigan survey have dropped quite abruptly over the last several months as a whole.
<START>So I think that risk of a zero bound problem is still with us.<END>
For that reason I believe a persuasive case can still be made for another 50 basis point reduction today, using the current core PCE rate, which is about 1-1/2 percent, as our measure of inflation.
That would take the real funds rate down roughly to zero.
<START>Now, granted, we’ve gotten into difficulty in the longer-term past when we have pushed the real rate below zero--and this was especially evident in the 1970s.<END>
We took the real funds rate to zero in 1992--which is where a 50 basis point reduction today would put it--and we did not get a subsequent increase in inflation.
<START>So I still think the case is persuasive and in my view a 50 basis point cut is the best option.<END>
I recognize though that the tone of the economic data is a bit stronger in some respects and in some places this time.
Therefore the argument for a half point is a little less compelling today than it was last time.
But if it were my choice, I think that is the way I would go.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Mr. Chairman, I agree with the recommendation for a 25 basis point reduction in the rate.
In my view it’s appropriate this time because I think it will help to underpin the consumer while the inventory cycle completes itself and corporate profits and capital spending slowly return to more normal levels.
I also believe that the balance of risks should be toward weaker economic growth.
And I strongly support the idea of putting a signal in the wording of the press statement to the effect that the situation is not as bleak as we saw it last time.
I don’t want to encourage people to think that we continue to see only negative news on all fronts.
12/11/01 88 CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would prefer to leave policy unchanged today.
Let me quickly sketch out the elements of my reasoning.
Part of it I touched on earlier.
I do think that the story in the mainstream Greenbook forecast is a reasonably convincing one and I’m certainly more confident about the outlook than I have been for the past several meetings.
Is it a done deal?
Of course not, but that I think is too high a bar.
We’re not going to know that for quite some time.
It does seem to me that the recent spate of data suggests that the economy is stabilizing.
Not only do the data suggest that but a lot of market participants are expecting that, based on the way financial assets are being priced.
And at least in my view our economy has a history of being resilient and largely self-correcting.
Beyond that, I think policy has been very expansionary.
<START>I’m not talking just about aggressive reductions in interest rates, although we have done that.<END>
<START>We have also had very rapid growth in the monetary aggregates and it would be a shock to me if we got deflation, given the kind of growth we've had in money for some time now.<END>
I don’t know how fiscal policy will play out, but I would guess that we will get some added fiscal stimulus.
<START>And while it’s certainly true that if this further reduction in rates turns out to be a mistake we can reverse direction when needed, it’s possibly destabilizing--though I don’t want to overstate this--to embark on that kind of policy path.<END>
So for that combination of reasons, recognizing that perhaps no one of them is convincing by itself, I would prefer to stay where we are.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation.
While I support a statement of unbalanced risks toward weakness, I also believe that the Committee should avoid encouraging an expectation of further easing at the next meeting.
Given my recent experience in communicating with the markets, I’m not giving any advice on how to do so!
[Laughter] I will 12/11/01 89 view with great interest the statement this time, as it tantalizes us with a possible way of accomplishing that goal.
I’m very pleased to see that the Committee will continue its practice of using its two-day meetings as an opportunity to have a wider discussion of key issues related to the strategy of monetary policy.
Because this is my last FOMC meeting I will not have an opportunity to participate in these discussions or even to make suggestions for the agenda.
So I thought I’d take this opportunity to unveil some recommendations--in this case for improving the transparency of monetary policy--in the hope that the Committee might find it worthwhile to discuss this topic in the future.
Let me also note the excellent contribution to this topic from the recent conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Transparency means, in my view, revealing to the public both the objectives that drive the policy decisions and the rationale for specific policy decisions.
I see greater transparency as serving both to enhance the accountability of the Fed and to increase the effectiveness of monetary policy by improving the market’s ability to anticipate future policy actions.
In terms of transparency about objectives, I would urge the Committee to discuss again and to consider further setting an explicit numerical value on its long-run price stability objective.
I stated my case on this recommendation in a paper earlier this year, so I’ll focus today on recommendations related to the minutes and the role that document plays in conveying the FOMC forecast.
The Committee’s press statements have become briefer and more repetitious this year and in my view less revealing.
Moreover, some Committee members have expressed a preference for moving further in this direction.
To be sure, it is a challenge to have more than a very brief statement and still represent the consensus of the Committee.
In any case, as a consequence the minutes have become a more important vehicle for revealing the Committee’s views on the outlook and policy 12/11/01 90 options.
The minutes serve to illuminate the rationale of the recent action and in addition they recognize the diversity of views on the Committee.
The first change I would recommend is either to eliminate the discussion of recent indicators at the beginning of the minutes or to move it to an appendix at the end.
This discussion is presented on page one, I presume, to set the context for the meeting, not to describe what we discussed.
As it is today, it is the first substantial section in the minutes.
To my mind at least it numbs the reader [laughter] and may even distract those who continue on and remain for the summary of the Committee’s discussion that follows.
I had thought about recommending that the next section, which is the paragraph that summarizes the staff forecast, be expanded maybe to a full page.
<START>In the end, after some quite interesting and constructive discussion with the staff, I decided not to recommend this course of action out of concern that moving in this direction might interfere with the freedom the staff currently perceives in putting together its forecast.<END>
At the margin though, it still might be useful to expand the paragraph a little to better tell a coherent story about what underlies the staff forecast.
Furthermore, particularly to the extent that the Committee’s press announcement on the policy decision becomes less revealing, it would in my judgment be constructive to speed the release of the minutes--perhaps to the third Thursday following the meeting, or just over two weeks after the meeting.
My next set of recommendations relates to the FOMC members’ own forecasts, now revealed twice a year in the testimony and report on monetary policy.
My first concern is that these forecasts may not be developed as advertised.
That is, the forecast is supposed to reflect appropriate monetary policy from the perspective of each member.
This is a very weighty assignment, especially if the forecast extends out beyond a year--perhaps similar to the perfect foresight policy in the Bluebook this time.
It might be helpful, therefore, if the Bluebook included such a forecast based on 12/11/01 91 perfect foresight in the policy-related material.
I think the Committee members might want to discuss whether they’re preparing the forecast under this type of model and if not, whether and how to do so.
Second, these forecasts in my view should always cover a period of at least one and a half to two years.
In particular, the forecast prepared each January now extends only to the end of that year, while the forecast prepared in June extends one and a half years.
The January forecast in my view should be extended to the end of the following year, a two-year period.
<START>Now, I appreciate that this recommendation was considered and rejected in 1994.<END>
Some members of the Committee were concerned at that time that such an extension could allow the public to infer the Committee’s objectives!
Should I repeat that?
To my mind, this is an advantage.
Publishing an extended forecast might require more discussion by the Chairman at his monetary policy testimonies and perhaps by other Committee members.
That’s what transparency is all about.
Third, the ability of the forecast to serve as a rationale for the Committee’s decisions is limited today because the Committee does not reveal the assumptions underlying its consensus forecast and in particular the funds rate path.
I understand that this is especially radical, but I would encourage the Committee to consider revealing the central tendency of the funds rate path that underlies its consensus forecast.
I’d also suggest perhaps looking for other ways to reveal the key assumptions underlying that forecast.
Finally, I’d encourage the Committee to consider increasing the frequency of such forecasts from twice a year to four times a year.
This forecast provides a rationale for the Committee’s decision.
And it is more important in this respect because of the absence of a full statement that otherwise provides that rationale.
Just as a picture might be worth a thousand words, so might that be said of a forecast.
12/11/01 92 Let me conclude by repeating what I said during my very first meeting in June 1996.
This has been even more fun than I expected it to be!
It has been a privilege to serve on this Committee.
I’m certainly fortunate to have served during a time that has been so interesting and challenging.
I’m fortunate to have served on this Committee under the leadership of Alan Greenspan and with all of you.
I’m fortunate also to have had the exceptional support of the staff, as I wrestled with the outlook and tried to make contributions to the policy discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We will obviously be considering your notions and I’ll appoint two or three people to be the proxy for you.
It’s going to require two or three people to do that!
[Laughter] In any case, I’m sure that in the weeks ahead there will be a lot of statements about your contributions to this Committee.
But I doubt that any of us has to say very much.
I think we’re all acutely aware of your accomplishments.
[Applause] Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
I didn’t necessarily want to follow in this order!
Let me first say a word to my good friend, Larry Meyer.
I don’t always agree with him, but he always makes us think.
And I believe he has done that today.
<START>I’m frankly a little too tired to think about disclosure and transparency at this particular moment, but I agree that perhaps we ought to consider that issue again.<END>
However, I would say that lately the Fed seems to me to have been very well understood by markets.
When a data series comes out, everyone says here is what the Fed thinks about that and they’re usually not far wrong.
So I think somehow or other we are communicating fairly well already.
That’s not to say we can’t do more, but I don’t think communication is a huge problem at this point.
Now, back to the Chairman’s recommendation.
<START>I agree with going down 1/4 point and with continuing the bias toward weakness.<END>
I think that’s about the right policy in level terms.
As I’ve said many times over the year, I’m not too worried about the reversibility issue.
If we have to, we can do it.
We have done it.
Also, in line with what Bill Poole said, this small step paves the way for an 12/11/01 93 orderly repositioning of policy, which I think all of us want to do.
The final thing I would say about the policy recommendation is that, if I’m not mistaken, going down 1/4 point today would be following exactly the strategy built into the Bluebook forecast in which the staff imputed the so-called perfect foresight policy.
I think it would be pretty close to the way they’ve got us in their equation.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>Hopefully we don’t have to comment all on transparency because I’m not going to!<END>
I am in agreement with your recommendation.
<START>Given the hard time I had with the 50 basis point reduction last time, some might ask how I could be and, frankly, on the case for standing pat I think President Stern has some good arguments.<END>
But as I view the data that have come out since the last meeting, there are not only glimmers of a turnaround but some enhanced downside risks as well.
I thought you covered them well in your statement:
<START>the trajectory of the unemployment rate, the euphoria in the stock market, the potential for no fiscal policy or one that’s not effective in any way like what is in our forecast, downturns in corporate profits, and so forth.<END>
So I see some new risks here.
I agree with the statement that the risks are biased to the downside, certainly over the near term.
<START>So with that logic, I come down on the side of a 25 basis point decline in rates as you have suggested.<END>
In some ways I think it is a measure of insurance and in fact I’m hopeful that it is.
<START>I’m also hopeful that the positives we’re now seeing do turn out to outweigh the potential for negative developments and that the next time we meet policy will be stable and the risks will be balanced.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I can accept your recommendation, but I have a preference for no change at today’s meeting.
I would like to associate myself with President Stern’s comments.
<START>12/11/01 94 It seems to me that after eleven months of very aggressive front-loaded easing and having been in an accommodative stance for some time now--the degree of which we could argue about--we have the latitude to pause today.<END>
That’s not to say we can declare victory but I think we ought to pause and see how things play out.
People around the table have made the point that we’re very likely to see some more ugly data over the next couple of months or next couple of quarters.
But I would argue that there is some considerable value in signaling several things.
One is that we are seeing some first signs--I underscore first--of stabilization and that many of the further adjustments that still need to be made are not particularly interest rate sensitive.
And finally, having done what we can to cushion the slowdown over the cycle, we can send the message that we have gotten back to--in fact have never gotten away from--a focus on the optimum long-term policy.
Perhaps the statement that you have crafted will achieve much of that, but I think there is some significant value today in making some of those points to the people who watch what we do.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
The recovery appears to be on track or at least visible in the distance.
As you point out, the timing and magnitude of the recovery depend on consumer spending, which is still uncertain.
And to counter the risk associated with that, I support further easing.
I also support leaving the risk statement weighted toward economic weakness at least at this time.
But I also feel that the wording of the press announcement is particularly important this time, so I look forward to seeing the craftsmanship.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’m glad it’s short!
[Laughter] President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
I agree with the views stated by Gary Stern.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
12/11/01 95 MR. HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I really think we ought to stay where we are.
A 2 percent fed funds rate is stimulative.
We’ve cut the rate 450 basis points this year, which is very aggressive for us, and 150 basis points of that has been done since September 11th.
We are seeing some signs of improvement and not all of the stimulus has come into play yet.
<START>While I recognize that inflation is not an immediate issue, and I appreciate that, I still think we need to take a little longer-run view at this time.<END>
So, I have to say I agree with Gary Stern’s comments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I can support your recommendation, although I’d like to associate myself with the comments of Gary, Jerry, Jack, and Tom.
<START>I think this would have been a good time to pause and no real harm would have come from it.<END>
It seems to me that it would be a good time to signal to the markets that they can’t get a cut every time they build one into the fed funds futures.
On the risk statement, since we put it out we have to say that the risks are biased toward the downside because they clearly are.
Nevertheless, I continue to feel that having such a risk statement at every meeting is not serving us all that well because I think it’s almost always interpreted as one more easing move to go.
So, eventually I think we ought to take another look at that practice.
One additional way we might signal that we’re winding down other than the language of the statement and the fact that the cut is 25 rather than 50 basis points, is to consider not reducing the discount rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I might note that in fact that issue did come up and the general consensus, at least among the staff, is that it probably would create more uncertainty than otherwise.
But it’s an interesting idea.
MR.
MCTEER.
Well, I’ve suggested it at the last two meetings as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’m aware of that.
12/11/01 96 MR. MCTEER.
<START>It seems to me that our long-run plan is to reverse the positioning of those two rates and that we’re missing a good opportunity to get a head start on doing that.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
I support the recommendation, but I do also support the comments that other people have made about beginning to signal that this may be one of our last easing actions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Will you read the directive wording?
MR.
BERNARD.
The directive wording is on page 14 of the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 1-3/4 percent.” And the statement for the press release that goes with that reads:
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks continue to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough YesGovernor Bies YesGovernor Ferguson YesGovernor Gramlich YesPresident Hoenig NoGovernor Meyer YesPresident Minehan YesPresident Moskow YesGovernor Olson Yes12/11/01 97 President Poole Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I’d like to ask that this Committee go into recess and that the Board of Governors congregate next door where we will address the issue of discount rate requests by the Reserve Banks.
I hope that while we are doing that, the preliminary statement will be distributed to everybody.
[Recess] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The FOMC meeting is now back in session.
The Board of Governors, much to everybody’s surprise, voted as was contemplated in the first paragraph of the draft press release.
Has everyone had a chance to read that statement?
Are there comments or suggested alterations?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
The statement captures it just fine.
It’s good.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I tried to capture what I thought would be the center of the Committee’s views.
If there are no objections, we will consider this the statement of the Committee.
I’d like to remind you all that our next meeting is a multiple-day meeting, to be held on Tuesday and Wednesday, January 29th and 30th.
We can go to lunch.
We have as our guest a prominent Treasury Department official whose name I won’t mention until he arrives.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 22
