
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

<START>If the Greenbook or we are at all right about the first quarter of 2001, real GDP growth will be zero or close to it, and growth in private domestic final demand will be about 1-1/2 percent.<END>
The average drop in GDP from peak to trough over the nine postwar recessions was only about 2-1/2 percentage points.
So even if it turns out that we’re not in a recession, it surely feels as if we are.
Second, how soon will the downturn be over?
The Greenbook and our Bank's forecast suggest a slow first half and a pickup by the second half of the year.
That would be a very short downturn, at least in postwar history, despite the fact that the peak-to-trough GDP drop would be fairly large.
<START>There are several reasons why this is the case and why this period may not be seen as a recession in the fullness of time.<END>
First, inflation is not a problem, so the amount of earlier policy tightening and its timing are not now working to greatly exacerbate and extend a slowdown.
The fiscal situation is good both nationally and locally, so government spending can be a source of support.
There is an inventory overhang but it seems small relative to earlier periods.
Construction spending 1/30-31/01 133has not been overdone in this expansion and the banking sector remains a source of strength.
Finally, major foreign economies--indeed the world in general--are in basically good shape, Japan notwithstanding, and can provide some support as well.
Thus, while the slowdown has been sharp, there is reason to believe it will be short.
Third, what is the appropriate policy response?
That’s obviously a topic for discussion later, but I think a couple of observations are relevant now.
I’m struck by the absence of upside risks in all of the Greenbook scenarios.
<START>Inflation rises only very modestly above 2 percent even with 100 basis points of extra policy easing, and unemployment jumps about 1 percentage point even in the strongest scenarios.<END>
With this range of possibilities, we should definitely move decisively now and be prepared to do so at the next meeting and maybe thereafter.
But I remain a bit skeptical about all of these one-sided scenarios.
For one thing, there’s a small but increasing probability that fiscal impetus in the form of a tax cut will be larger and come sooner than we would have expected even quite recently.
I don’t debate that a very sharp slowdown seems to be in the works, but I believe there are negative consequences to thinking that the upside risk has totally vanished.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In the Tenth District, economic growth has slowed further since our last meeting.
Manufacturing and even some areas of homebuilding are experiencing outright declines in activity while other sectors generally are growing at a slower pace.
As far as we can tell, for the District’s economy as a whole growth is still positive and labor markets are still relatively tight but far less so than they were just a month ago.
Moreover, with all the layoff announcements and talk about the 1/30-31/01 134slowing economy, consumers clearly are becoming uneasy.
In our surveys of District contacts, businesses are showing more caution;
they are waiting to see how the economy fares before they make any major decisions.
<START>Employment edged down last month and, in a departure from prior experience, last month’s slowdown in job growth was due more to weakness in demand than to the lack of qualified labor that we’ve talked about in the past.<END>
A lot of the job losses in December were in manufacturing and construction, and these are also the sectors about which we have been hearing the most reports of declining activity lately.
And we are hearing of extended layoffs at our local auto manufacturing plants.
We’ve also been getting a steady flow of layoff announcements from other areas as well, which could limit job growth in the next couple of months.
Retail sales have been sluggish.
Despite heavy discounting, sales in December and early January were up only modestly over a year ago.
Many of our contacts said unease about the economy was causing consumers to put off purchases, especially of big ticket items such as autos.
On a more positive note, some areas in commercial construction did hold steady.
Work continues on a number of large projects, and commercial space is still in relatively short supply in most of our cities.
A few contacts expressed concern about overbuilding in the retail market, but otherwise markets seem to be in general balance.
Of course, energy activity remains a source of strength in our region, expanding as fast as firms can find equipment and workers.
The District’s rig count climbed further last month and is now at an 8-year high.
<START>In our District inflationary pressures remain relatively subdued and may even have eased slightly since our last meeting.<END>
Only a few of our business contacts reported above-normal wage increases, less than in the past months.
Retail prices also appear to have edged down last month due to some heavy 1/30-31/01 135discounting.
To be sure, some manufacturers have been hit hard by higher input costs, especially for natural gas.
However, they are not finding it any easier to pass those costs on than before.
Let me turn to my comments on the national economy.
<START>I think recent events have confirmed our concern--or my concern at least--that the economy might slow more dramatically than desired or than thought likely only a month ago.<END>
Incoming data on economic activity suggest that the slowing continues and, like the Board's staff, I have marked down my outlook for near-term growth.
But also like the staff, over the longer run I still remain confident about the underlying resilience of our economy.
Currently, though, we are in a cyclical slowdown.
Weakness in the economy is likely to be broad-based.
Consumption, especially durable goods expenditures, and business fixed investment continue to soften.
Residential housing should tread water, I suspect, as low mortgage rates help to prop up demand.
But inventory investment, as we’ve already noted, is softening noticeably.
<START>Incoming inflation data confirm a trend of moderate inflation pressures.<END>
<START>Given that the economy is slowing, that energy price increases are showing some signs of unwinding, and that inflation expectations remain well anchored, inflation could ease some.<END>
This projected economic weakness and moderate inflation outlook suggest to me that a 50 basis point reduction in the fed funds rate might be appropriate for us to consider.
In my view, the current federal funds rate continues to represent a tight policy.
The issue is not just whether we’re in a recession but whether policy is tight, and I think it is.
A 50 basis point reduction would take us toward a more neutral policy and would reflect prudence.
I would suggest, as I have before, that it is in the early stages of a 1/30-31/01 136policy shift that we can be more aggressive in our rate actions.
As we get to lower rate levels, we should be more cautious about any change or hold the rate constant to assess the situation.
<START>It is at times like the present that I think we can, and probably should, act a little more boldly.<END>
Let me also take a minute to talk about the risks.
As I’ve said, I think the longer-term outlook is for a pickup in economic growth as we get into the second half of the year.
But there are important risks to this forecast.
First, I think investment could decline further.
<START>Softer aggregate demand has a depressing effect on business fixed investment and future business spending.<END>
In light of weakening financial balance sheets and past spending levels, business fixed investment may be particularly vulnerable.
Second, consumer debt service levels remain relatively high and asset values have softened.
These factors and the low saving rate, along with declining consumer confidence and slower employment growth, undermine consumer spending and the economy’s growth.
could And finally, the foreign sector continues to embody some risks.
<START>With our large current account deficit and perhaps a slowing in economic growth elsewhere, I believe there are some risks in that area as well.<END>
These are the kinds of factors that we need to have in mind today as we consider our policy actions in the next part of this meeting.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Economic activity in our Southeast region continues to slow in many sectors, although by most measures overall activity remains at a very high level.
<START>Retailers were generally disappointed by the flat holiday sales compared to last year, and many expressed concerns about the impact of 1/30-31/01 137widespread discounting on profits.<END>
<START>A number of merchants tell us they are revising down their expenditure plans for 2001, and some--including Sears, Office Depot, and Walden Books--are scaling bank operations or closing stores because of weak sales.<END>
Continuing a trend observed for several months now, manufacturers across the District reported weaker conditions.
Lumber and chemical firms continued to report sluggish activity.
Paper mills are operating far below capacity or have gone to temporary shutdowns because of weak market conditions.
Auto and light truck producers and their suppliers are cutting production but our relatively newer auto facilities in the South seem to be less affected than the older plants elsewhere.
There are some brighter spots in our region.
It will come as no surprise that our energy extraction industry is strong.
The drilling fleet is nearly fully utilized and day rates are beginning to reflect that.
In New Orleans investment in new drilling rigs, production platforms, and wellhead equipment is increasing but oil field service companies report that a shortage of labor is slowing investment.
And new military and private contracts continue to boost the shipbuilding industry in Louisiana and Mississippi.
News from our hospitality sector remains mostly positive, although there has been some measurable falloff in business at the big casinos and in New Orleans.
There is also some concern that as the travel season and convention dates get closer, we may see some cancellations and falloff in business.
Since our last meeting we’ve had a rash of announcements of worker layoffs and plant closings, many among technology and Internet companies.
As best we can tell, so far those workers seem to be having no trouble quickly finding jobs with other employers at many of the old economy companies.
<START>With the exception of medical and 1/30-31/01 138energy costs, prices generally remain in check, and producers indicate they are still unable to raise prices because of stiff competition and now reduced demand.<END>
At the national level, I, too, continue to be surprised by the extent of the adjustments that clearly are taking place and the speed with which they have come on us.
<START>Like the Greenbook, I find it difficult to judge with great certainty just where we are in that adjustment process and to forecast with any great confidence how long it will take.<END>
<START>Everything we know about new inventory control systems would seem to suggest a relatively quick, although dramatic, inventory correction.<END>
<START>And I still have considerable confidence that the great promise from technology across almost all industries and all sizes of companies argues for an early return to substantial investment spending.<END>
My staff’s work continues to point toward a high probability of a good bounce back to a moderate pace of growth later this year.
<START>Having said that, I still see a number of downside risks, including the uncertain petroleum and energy situation--punctuated by the problems in California which my contacts in that industry say could show up in other states.<END>
While we probably can’t do anything about the prospects for the first quarter, the rebound in the second half of the year predicted by nearly everyone is contingent upon further declines in the funds rate in the near term.
<START>With the real rate still higher than seems appropriate and with a very favorable inflation environment, I think we can and should move decisively and quickly.<END>
There would seem to be little value in keeping people guessing and adding to financial market uncertainty.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
1/30-31/01 139MR. SANTOMERO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It seems to me that the question we’re facing at this meeting is whether the economy in 2001 will behave more like the economy we had in 1995 or more like the one we had in 1990.
In 1995 growth slowed substantially after the Fed had tightened policy over the previous year but there was no recession.
In 1990 the economy was growing very slowly and then went into recession by the middle of the year.
Most incoming regional information seems to be more consistent with the 1995 scenario.
We are seeing a significant slowdown in our regional economy.
We don’t seem to be slipping into a recession, at least not yet.
Currently Pennsylvania is doing worse than New Jersey and Delaware, and that was the case in 1995.
<START>Manufacturing in our District is a key area of weakness and reports from manufacturers are more consistent with the recession scenario.<END>
Many of the component measures in our latest business outlook survey of manufacturing firms--including the indexes of general activity, new orders, and shipments--registered their second largest decline in the survey’s 32-year history.
<START>Reports from these firms that we received after the Fed’s easing move in early January were worse than those received before the Fed’s action, [laughter] confirming the need for action.<END>
But those later reports were somewhat more optimistic about activity six months ahead, presumably because we did act.
The decline in manufacturing in the District has been widespread.
The slowdown in the region’s durable manufacturing activity has been evident over a period of several months.
In contrast, nondurable manufacturing activity declined sharply only recently.
Several other sectors of the District do not appear to be as weak;
they have shown slower growth, but not the sharp drop evident in manufacturing.
Construction 1/30-31/01 140contracting in our region has slipped in recent months but office and industrial vacancy rates continue to be quite low.
And quite a few projects are under way or scheduled.
Our real estate contacts generally indicate that the real estate sector is not overbuilt.
Housing permits are holding up pretty well, particularly for single-family housing.
Contacts in the industry suggest that housing is likely to be fairly steady in the District this year.
And banks report that their lending, including refinancing activity, is up.
Although the unemployment rate in the District has edged up slightly, particularly in Pennsylvania, labor markets continue to be quite tight in many areas.
From talking to business people in the District I don’t get the sense that they feel they have big inventories that have to be worked off.
Many I’ve contacted recently have made comments like "things are pretty good." Outside of manufacturing, regional businesses do not convey a sense that their business or the economy is going into the tank;
in fact, quite the contrary.
<START>On the price front, retailers report that wage and benefit increases are not accelerating.<END>
And in our regional surveys of retailers and manufacturers, price pressures seem less evident than before.
Turning to the national perspective, incoming data tend to confirm the views expressed here that the economy has slowed significantly, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
As of now, the economy is softer than I had expected it to be just two months ago.
<START>We may indeed get a negative quarter of output growth but I don’t see signs of a credit crunch, which we had in 1990-1991, that would impede a rebound in economic activity.<END>
<START>And absent something like an adverse oil price shock that could tip the economy into recession, I don’t see such broad-based weakness across all sectors of the economy that I am led to conclude that a recession is imminent.<END>
1/30-31/01 141Accordingly, our forecast for real GDP growth and unemployment through this year is not quite as pessimistic as the Board staff’s.
We think the slowdown in the first half of the year will be somewhat smaller and less lengthy;
the adjustment portrayed in the charts is a bit more dramatic than we see.
Part of the difference involves the size of the inventory correction in the two forecasts.
This is in turn related to how quickly consumer and business investment spending return to higher growth paths.
Since there are wide confidence intervals around these forecasts, however, I cannot ignore the possibility that the staff’s forecast will be correct.
And given the deterioration in consumer and business sentiment that we have seen so far, certainly there is reason to continue to be concerned about the downside risks to the economy.
That is, the range of outcomes for economic growth this year seems to me to be skewed toward less growth, while the outcome for inflation is of less concern.
<START>So I worry that if my forecast is wrong, it’s likely to be because we overestimated economic growth.<END>
In sum, I think it’s important for the Committee to insure that the year 2001 turns out to be more like 1995 than 1990.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I will have been on this Committee 10 years tomorrow and I’ve never seen a Beige Book as negative as the current one, and that’s true both for the Eleventh District and for the overall summary for the nation.
The economist at the Dallas Fed who manages our Beige Book contacts confirms that this was the most pessimistic they have been in her more than 10 years' experience, and that includes the period of the last recession.
Many of our contacts spoke of current and prospective deflation in their industries.
<START>Various segments of the economy are, to use Beige Book language, either 1/30-31/01 142softening, decelerating, cooling, slowing, weakening, declining, falling, or dropping.<END>
In manufacturing, steel producers are “in difficulty,” auto assembly plants are “shutting down,” and computer production is "declining." About the only thing rising is the level of inventories.
And to quote a line from the national summary:
“Layoffs in a wide variety of industries were announced in most Districts.” Under current law, layoffs by large employers must be announced at least 60 days before they take place, so we should not be lulled by the current low rate of unemployment.
And when the layoffs begin in earnest, consumer confidence and consumer spending could plunge.
<START>Texas does have some good news in continued high oil and gas prices.<END>
I doubt that the rest of the country will benefit too much from that.
[Laughter] Texas energy activity is increasingly concentrated in the Houston area.
That is reflected in the National Association of Purchasing Managers' Manufacturing Index for the Houston/Gulf Coast area, which actually increased from 58.8 to 61.7 in December.
By contrast, in the Dallas/ Fort Worth area, where manufacturing is increasingly dominated by high-tech manufacturing, the index fell in December from 53.5 to 44.7--nine points in one month.
At the national level, the index fell by a similar amount over a slightly longer time period.
Declining manufacturing activity nationwide was confirmed by the index of industrial production, which has fallen by .1, .3, and .6 over the last three months.
<START>The contraction has been concentrated in investment spending so far, but rapidly sinking consumer confidence doesn’t augur well for consumer spending going forward.<END>
People are watching too much CNBC and are being demoralized by the constant drumbeat of downward revisions and missed earnings estimates.
The blues are contagious.
<START>1/30-31/01 143Our new and improved economy seemed able earlier to survive Fed tightening, rising energy prices, and a swooning NASDAQ stock market, but dimpled, pregnant, and hanging chads were apparently too much for it!<END>
And that was before the lights went out in California.
<START>To paraphrase Rudyard Kipling, “If you can keep your head when all about you are losing theirs and blaming it on you, you don’t understand the gravity of the situation.” [Laughter] Despite all this, my projections for this year are relatively optimistic.<END>
That’s because they are based on my assumption of another bold and immediate policy easing at this meeting, followed up as necessary both early and often.
For reasons I’ll come back to later, I believe this Committee should front-load its policy moves as much as possible.
On the question of whether we are in or about to be in a recession, it seems to me that we may be relying on an outdated rule of thumb.
<START>The standard of two quarters of negative GPD growth has been used to define a recession during a time period when conventional wisdom presumed that potential output growth was around 2-1/2 percent or perhaps a tad higher.<END>
Given the rise in structural productivity growth and the increase in labor force growth stemming from increased immigration, we now believe that potential output growth is somewhat above 4 percent.
The Greenbook has GDP growth for three quarters, from the fourth quarter of 2000 through the second quarter of this year, slowing on average by more than 2-1/2 percentage points from the new higher rate of potential.
In the old days a drop that large would have put us into negative territory.
Maybe that’s why this air pocket we've hit already feels to many people like a crash landing or certainly the early stages of recession.
1/30-31/01 144Most of you probably think that I sound too much like Chicken Little.
You may be right.
The sky may not be falling, but I think that we can all agree with the Chairman that it has been measurably weakened.
Certainly the downside risks-- CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The sky has been "measurably weakened"?
[Laughter] MR. MCTEER.
I was referring to that cartoon of a few years ago.
It had a chicken with your head on it and it came off!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I understand!
MR.
MCTEER.
Certainly the downside risks have increased, perhaps even since January 3rd, particularly on the international front.
<START>In recent weeks we’ve seen signs of slower growth abroad, with leading indicators in many of our key trading partners moving in the wrong direction.<END>
This could be the first time in a long time that all of the world’s major economies are slowing sharply at the same time.
<START>At the beginning of a new monetary policy cycle, which is where we are now, the need for decisive action is usually clearer and stronger than it will be later in the cycle.<END>
Further ease is clearly needed now.
We have little to lose in making it substantial.
<START>Later on, several months from now, the risks of one easing too many will be much higher.<END>
One reason for front-loading the easing is to get the additional stimulus into the pipeline as soon as possible while it is clearly needed.
Another corollary reason to do it now is to reduce the need for a large move later when it might prove to be the one move too many.
If the last move in this cycle turns out to be a mistake, let it be a small mistake.
A third reason for front-loading policy was recently illustrated by one of my colleagues.
He is furnishing a house and was about to do some heavy-duty shopping for 1/30-31/01 145furniture.
But a prominent furniture store in Dallas announced in the middle of January that it will be having a big sale in February, so my colleague is now waiting on the sidelines and saving his money for the sale.
A likely tax cut in the next few months may already have some potential spenders on the sidelines.
The near-term damage will only be magnified if we also give people a reason to wait for the monetary policy easing that they and we expect will be necessary eventually.
Another ½ point cut at this meeting would go far toward nipping in the bud our recession or banana or whatever we want to call it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Overall, the District economy has evolved recently largely as has the national economy, as best I can judge.
Consumer spending was lackluster both during the holiday season and since then, and sales promotions and discounting have been intense.
Employment gains have decreased and labor market conditions appear to be a little less tight than they were earlier, although I don’t want to exaggerate that.
In the services sector today in our District it seems easier to get a job than to get service!
[Laughter] The manufacturing sector is clearly in difficulty.
The mining sector is weak and natural resources for the most part--outside of the energy sector--are struggling.
And anecdotes, mostly coming from our bankers, suggest that higher energy prices are greatly stressing both households and businesses.
The bankers expect delinquency rates to rise.
They are seeing some plant shutdowns as a consequence of the higher energy prices and seem to expect more of that.
1/30-31/01 146Not all is negative;
there are a couple of regional bright spots.
Maybe the most obvious and distinct one is commercial construction activity, which is quite strong.
Residential construction activity also has held up well.
As far as the national economy is concerned, I’m in general agreement with the contour of the Greenbook forecast.
But I seriously doubt that we will avert a recession.
I say that for several reasons.
One is my sense of the inventory situation.
The other is my experience with the type of consumer spending forecast in the Greenbook.
As I look back over the data for the postwar period, we’ve seen consumer spending as soft as depicted in the staff's outlook for the next four quarters only in recessionary periods.
Of course, consumer spending is only part of the economy and historical patterns aren’t always repeated, but that pattern of consumption expenditures really raises a flag in my mind.
<START>I recall that back in 1990 we at the Minneapolis Fed had prepared internally a forecast with a very similar pattern of consumer spending--a type of pattern we typically see in recessions, although we weren’t forecasting a recession.<END>
One of our economists observed that if we got that path of consumer spending, we were going to get a recession.
He turned out to be right.
So it seems to me that the probability of recession at this point is uncomfortably high.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
On that pleasant note, why don’t we break for coffee and come back?
There’s only one direction we can go from there!
[Laughter] [Coffee break] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>Unfortunately, I’m not much more optimistic than Gary Stern, who spoke before the break.<END>
1/30-31/01 147As you would expect, reports from contacts in the Seventh District indicate even further slowing in activity, particularly in our manufacturing sector.
In fact the news last week from our directors as well as from our other contacts was downright gloomy.
I’m going to mention several new pieces of information;
all are gloomy.
The weakness in manufacturing has been widespread.
Indeed, the Chicago Purchasing Managers' Survey results for January that will be released tomorrow show declines in the construction components of the composite index to levels not seen since late 1982.
The Chicago PMI is down to 40.2 percent.
Production cutbacks in the auto industry are a major reason for the further weakening in the region’s manufacturing sector in recent months.
Based on reports from our contacts at the Big Three, first-quarter assembly schedules have been scaled back even more than is indicated in the Greenbook.
And one of our directors with very close ties to the auto industry indicated that the whisper estimates for first-quarter production are even lower.
Estimates of sales for January by Big Three analysts center around 16 million units, up from sales of 15.3 million in December.
<START>The January increase was due to factors such as fleet sales, better weather than in December, and higher incentives offered by dealers who are concerned about the drop in consumer confidence.<END>
These factors, of course, be temporary.
may Dealers report that they have not seen a sharp decline like the total for the last two months since the early 1990s.
Conditions in the domestic steel industry are bleak, with slowing demand now exacerbating the impact of import competition and low steel prices contributing to numerous bankruptcy filings.
<START>Some District retailers report a modest sales rebound in January stemming from heavy discounting and promotional activities which, of course, 1/30-31/01 148will reduce their profit margins.<END>
One piece of good news involves the construction industry.
Our assessment of residential and nonresidential construction is that there has not been significant overbuilding, at least so far.
But for the first time in many years, tax revenues in District states are coming in below budget.
The weakness from the third quarter to the fourth quarter of 2000 in all sources of state revenues, notably sales tax collections, was evident across all of our five states, especially Michigan.
In part reflecting the slowing in the region’s economy, our labor markets show further signs of easing.
The unemployment rate for the five District states moved up to 3.8 percent in December;
it had been 3.3 percent in October.
Contacts report less difficulty finding workers.
And Manpower’s latest survey results, which will not be released to the public for quite some time--not until February 26th--are going to show a very sharp reduction of 20 to 25 percent in hiring plans for the second quarter of this year.
That’s the biggest drop in five years, with the decline sharpest for the Midwest.
As you may recall, this measure had been breaking new records on the up side every quarter for the last several years.
Wage pressures seem to be easing as well.
One of our directors from organized labor noted that recent contracts typically include wage increases of around 3 percent, down from the previous 5 to 8 percent range.
Turning to the national outlook, the economy has slowed rapidly and dramatically, much more than expected.
Despite our weaker outlook for auto production, our current assessment of real GDP growth for 2001 is not quite as pessimistic as that in the Greenbook.
We expect this quarter’s growth to be slightly positive and overall growth for the year to be about 2-1/2 percent.
Inventories explain much of the difference in the two forecasts for the first half of the year.
We expect a slightly smaller inventory 1/30-31/01 149correction, spread out over this quarter and next, which is more in line with historical experience.
For the year as a whole, the main reason for the difference in forecasts is that we expect more monetary policy easing than does the Greenbook, and that easing raises growth in the second half of the year.
In assessing economic conditions and inflationary pressures, our staff has been computing a monthly index of national economic conditions.
This single index summarizes 85 data series on economic activity and was adapted from research done by Jim Stock and Mark Watson.
With data available through December, the current reading of our index is minus 0.56.
Historically, an index reading between minus 0.7 and minus 1.0 percent is associated with a high probability of the onset of a recession.
Of course, this is not a definitive economic indicator, but it is suggestive.
And this reading seems quite consistent with my view of the situation, which is that the economy is not currently in a recession, nor inevitably heading into one, but we could be close.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
Mr. Chairman, as elsewhere in the country, economic activity in our District has softened somewhat.
It softened quite markedly in December and apparently somewhat further in January, although we have a few hints of some leveling out in District activity in January.
And I gather that Baltimore’s economy has been looking stronger over the last couple of days, especially for the bars and the T-shirts shops!
[Laughter] Otherwise, though, our contacts in the retail sector reported weak sales in both months.
One of our directors is the recently retired CEO of the Hecht’s department store chain in this region.
<START>He indicated that December was the roughest month for retailers in a decade, though he did say that sales were a little better than 1/30-31/01 150expected in January.<END>
I’m not sure what was expected, but in general the retail picture is weak, with perhaps some leveling out this month.
As elsewhere, manufacturing activity in our region--and manufacturing is a big part of the economic base in the southern part of our District--is very weak, with paper, furniture, and textiles especially hard hit.
Of course, the textile industry is in the midst of a longer-term structural shift, but the current situation certainly isn’t helping.
There has been an increasing incidence of layoffs at factories and laid-off workers are having more difficulty finding substitute employment now than they were earlier.
<START>One modestly encouraging report from the manufacturing sector, at least in our region, is that the rate of decline seems to be diminishing.<END>
It was less pronounced in January than in December, which I guess holds out a bit of hope that business firms are making some progress on the inventory correction and might be a little further down that road than is generally believed at this point.
Labor markets overall remain tight;
although not as tight as they were, they’re still remarkably tight.
A long time friend and business contact asked me the other day if I remembered the jobless recovery of the early part of the decade.
<START>I said I did, and he said, “Well, we’re now in a full employment recession!” [Laughter] With respect to the national economy, it’s hard not to be impressed by the weak data that have come in since our December meeting.<END>
We have a slew of discouraging reports from the manufacturing sector.
The index of three-month changes in industrial production, for example, hit its lowest level since December 1991.
<START>That suggests weakness that extends well beyond the motor vehicle industry.<END>
And, as other people have noted, household and business confidence has clearly weakened 1/30-31/01 151dramatically.
<START>It’s always difficult to understand a sharp deterioration in confidence such as this.<END>
<START>I think part of it may be that whenever the Fed acts to restrain the economy after a period of unsustainably strong growth, the public and the markets see an actual decline in economic activity.<END>
There’s always a lot of nervousness until people get some sense that it’s beginning to bottom out.
And I don’t think we’re there yet.
<START>With inflation apparently well contained, at least for now, I think we can reasonably ease further at this meeting without materially endangering our longer-term credibility.<END>
I do believe that we should exercise some caution in doing this, so I would endorse the point that you made, Cathy.
<START>And I would add one other point, which is that virtually all postwar recessions in the United States have been preceded by a sharp deceleration in money growth, occasioned by ongoing tightening of monetary policy, and that’s not the situation right now.<END>
I’d like to make one final comment, Mr. Chairman.
Let me preface this by saying that I’m not trying to put inflation targeting back on the table;
I lost that one last month and I recognize that.
But I do worry that we may lose something with the demise of our explicit consideration of the money supply targets at our January and July meetings each year.
That was always a separate agenda item.
And while I don’t think very many of us were giving a lot of weight to the money supply targets per se, it was a nice occasion to think strategically about monetary policy issues as opposed to the shorter-run tactical issues on which we normally focus.
Personally, I found these discussions very useful as the context for the shorter-term tactical issues we had to deal with in the intervening meetings.
And hopefully, Mr. Chairman, they were helpful to you in conveying the sense of the Committee’s views in your semiannual testimony.
I don’t 1/30-31/01 152know what is going to happen tomorrow, but I would recommend that we consider reinstituting a separate agenda item involving some discussion of the longer-term strategic issues, with maybe some longer-term simulations besides the ones in the Bluebook.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I don’t know about the rest of our colleagues, but I get a chart on M2 and M3 every week.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
So do I. CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
So it’s not as though we’re not monitoring it.
MR.
BROADDUS.
I really wasn’t thinking about the aggregates so much, although certainly if we want to discuss money supply trends, that’s fine with me.
I'm just talking about taking a longer-term look at where we’re headed and maybe reaffirming our objectives.
I have in mind the kinds of discussions we had a few years ago when we were looking at whether or not we should approach reducing inflation in an opportunistic way or in a more deliberate way.
I hope we leave a place on our agenda for that kind of discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think we tend to do that in any event.
Take this morning's discussion, for example.
It was an add-on to a rather long agenda.
We’re going to have short agendas at some point and we can put in an agenda item on strategic and other related issues at that time.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Second District trailed the national economy in strengthening in the early part of the 1990s and then grew a bit more slowly thereafter.
Apparently justice prevails in the end because I think we have the most optimistic District commentary so far today.
The Second 1/30-31/01 153District’s economy has shown few signs of slowing in recent weeks and there is little indication of any pickup in inflationary pressures.
In the fourth quarter, private sector job growth decelerated somewhat in New Jersey to a 0.9 percent annual pace but remained strong in New York State at 1.8 percent.
<START>Weakness in manufacturing employment, of course, is a lesser problem for us because so much of manufacturing has long since left the District, but the bit of weakness we saw in that area was offset by strong job gains in construction, business services, and finance.<END>
As a result, unemployment rates were little changed.
Retail sales were reported to be steady in early January, and steep markdowns of clearance merchandise, especially clothing, helped to keep inventories at satisfactory levels.
Construction and real estate remain generally strong with only very scattered signs of softening, mainly in the Manhattan office market, which is still very, very tight but slackened somewhat in the fourth quarter.
Availability rates have edged up.
Rents have stopped rising but certainly have not started to fall.
And subleasing activity has risen sharply, largely in space given up by dot-com companies that no longer exist.
Regional purchasing managers reported steady to stronger business conditions in December as well as increasingly widespread input price pressures.
And finally, local banks reported weakening loan demand, some further tightening in credit standards, and an uptick in consumer delinquency rates.
<START>Against that background one might think--if one attended the same sort of parties that many attend on the upper West Side, the upper East Side, lower Manhattan, Staten Island, or elsewhere--that everybody seems optimistic.<END>
Of course they are not.
They are deep in the doldrums and predicting that the end of the world is very close upon us.
That leads me to believe, even though we have essentially the same forecast for the 1/30-31/01 154economy as in the Greenbook, that we are experiencing an inventory adjustment.
We expect it to be quick, deep, but rather short, ending by the end of the second quarter.
Our forecast for the first quarter is not quite as weak as the Greenbook's, but we certainly agree that the latter is a definite possibility.
We have the same view as the Greenbook that the economy will snap back because of our belief in the persistence of the ongoing productivity improvement.
However, I do think that business confidence is a very considerable downside risk.
I’m much more concerned about that than I am about consumer confidence because I agree that consumer confidence tends to be a coincident indicator by and large.
<START>Because of the real concern that I have about business confidence, a concern I have heard reflected around the table, it does seem to me that a definite additional easing action by the Committee continues to be in order.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I guess it’s not surprising that the Twelfth and the Second Districts are doing well, in contrast to our region.<END>
We ought to be viewing it as payback time for the prosperity we enjoyed in the '90s.
It probably will take long memories to remember how good it once was.
I didn’t need to see really the Michigan Survey of Consumer Sentiment or the Conference Board's survey results to know that consumer sentiment had deteriorated.
That's because of an experience I had yesterday morning when I got to the office.
Before I went to a briefing with our economists, my secretary thought I ought to see her heating bill for the month of December and that of her elderly aunt.
The numbers were really shocking.
November and December were the coldest months on record.
Combine that with the rise in energy prices and it's clear that people are taking a huge hit.
So it’s not 1/30-31/01 155surprising that confidence is down, though we don’t really have an answer to Governor Gramlich’s question about whether we are seeing a permanent income kind of effect.
We’ll have to wait until it warms up and see how it thaws out!
Mike Moskow referred to the steel industry as bleak.
That’s not what my contacts are saying.
spent his career in the steel industry said steel is “an unprecedented disaster,” which is worse than bleak.
He said we should expect to see more bankruptcies of integrated steel companies, further consolidation, some plant closings, and sustained reductions in employment in the steel industry.
I’ll come back in a minute to some structural issues about large manufacturing companies more generally.
A large producer of plastics said that business has fallen through the floor and is still falling.
He's found another floor!
After more than two years of continuous overtime, auto assembly and parts plants have no overtime and have been announcing layoffs that they hope will be only temporary.
But it now looks from the latest news in the last couple of days that there will be some permanent plant closings in our District.
<START>Possibly as the result of the weakness in manufacturing, retailers reported that for the first time in several years they had no trouble at all hiring the seasonal workers that they needed.<END>
As a reflection of how much weaker the region is than the national figures suggest, unemployment claims in December rose from 57,000 a year ago to over 90,000 this year, a 65 percent increase.
My guess is that our increase in unemployment is going to be temporary.
As soon as the benefits run out, many people leave the workforce, or they head west or south.
1/30-31/01 156Putting a positive spin on all this, one director said that the dramatic loosening of the region’s labor markets means that firms will be giving smaller raises than they had earlier budgeted for this year.
And no one is offering retention or recruitment bonuses, which were a big issue with everyone last year.
Another director said his firm is seeing more applications than openings for the first time in two years.
As of last week, auto suppliers said they now expect no pickup in orders before the fourth quarter.
And we were told that just since the first of January there has been a noticeable decline in orders from both Mexico and Canada.
A retailer said the drop in sales in December was so sudden that he at first suspected that their computers were broken.
He claims that the shake-out in retail will be worse this year than in the 1990-91 recession.
Every division of Limited stores had declining year-over-year same-store sales.
At Hallmark stores sales were down 6 percent year-over-year.
<START>After complaining most of the last year about the difficulty of attracting deposits, our bankers reported strong deposit growth in December and early January, which is consistent with the national figures we’re seeing.<END>
They also say that mortgage refinancing is booming again;
and home equity loan demand is very strong, which might not be a good sign.
One banker said it is common for homeowners to take out additional equity when they refinance, reinforcing what was suggested in some of the materials we were given.
Other comments by bankers included a rising trend of late payments and a rapid and serious deterioration in their credit card debt.
Turning to more general remarks about the region, I think we are now going to see what I view as a longer-term decline in the old economy industries that had been the 1/30-31/01 157strength in our part of the country over recent years.
<START>I now believe that the right way to think about what we saw in the last few years in the behavior of these companies is that the healthy glow of a fever was masking a serious fundamental illness.<END>
They didn’t deal with their problems and it’s going to be very difficult for them to deal with them now, as we’re seeing in what the steel companies and their workers are asking for.
<START>When I talk to civic and government leaders in the region, they remind me of somebody who runs a retail establishment and says that the customers aren’t coming, the products aren’t selling, and our competition is killing us, so I guess we’ll have to raise our prices.<END>
I say that because these politicians want to tax anything that moves in order to subsidize those parts of the economy that are not moving.
They are scrambling to find any and every way to raise taxes, mainly because population and employment are declining and the revenue base is now starting to decline.
So suddenly they’re desperate for more revenue.
Let me turn to the national economy.
<START>With regard to the remarks about how difficult it is to forecast recessions--and I certainly agree with that--I'd note that that is true also of forecasting recoveries.<END>
When the economy turns, it is surprising how rapidly and vigorously it sometimes turns.
<START>As we have seen in the past, recessions often have been associated with some unforeseen event, whether it was the Gulf War of 1990 or the near recession in the aftermath of the Long-Term Capital Management debacle--a development that didn’t turn into a recession.<END>
But we are sometimes just as surprised by the vigor of an upturn, most recently in 1999.
If we go back to the fall of 1998, in the forecasts that we were looking at and the Blue Chip forecasts as well, nobody foresaw the vigor of ’99.
So the surprises can come from both directions.
1/30-31/01 158Underneath most forecasting exercises there’s an inherent philosophy about the nature of the market economy.
A lot of models historically have been based on what I think of as older ideas about economic activity.
They tend to reflect the view that there is a natural tendency for the economy to stagnate, for a decaying process to take place as the old stimulus wears off in the absence of new stimulus.
The opposite view, of course, is that the market economy is inherently resilient, that it tends to expand except when it gets knocked down for some reason or other.
And as we know, over time it has been knocked down for a whole host of reasons--sometimes even because of perverse economic policies, monetary or fiscal.
I believe that one aspect of our job is to do no harm--not to be a part of the problem.
And whether or not we need to be a part of the solution, in terms of the stimulus, is a different way of thinking about things.
Like Tom Hoenig, given the current circumstances, I think our policy recently has been more restrictive than is appropriate.
And I come to that view with some difficulty.
I read the yield curve and other things as telling me that, but I don’t read the money numbers as telling me that.
So I put a lot of weight on the staff's explanations that mortgage refinancing or this and that are affecting the money numbers and that by May or June M2 growth is going to be down to 1 or 2 percent.
If that doesn’t turn out to be true, I’m going to change my assessment about how restrictive policy is.
I agree with Bob McTeer on the general idea of front-loading policy changes.
My view on this is symmetrical;
I mean it in both directions.
At times I'm just as impatient to move toward restraint as to move toward ease.
But I recognize, given the external pressures and the dynamics, that it’s always a lot easier to front-load on the easing side than on the other side.
While I would support the “early” part of Bob's 1/30-31/01 159suggestion, I do not agree with the “often” part.
I would front-load--move early--and then pause.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>At this point it’s unclear to me whether the present pause in economic growth will be a relatively short inventory correction or a more serious downturn.<END>
<START>But there’s plenty of evidence that real output growth has stalled, and even with the cut we made in the funds rate earlier this month, the rate still seems much too high in my view for today’s conditions.<END>
I had prepared a long statement to persuade you all of this.
At this point I think reading that would be piling on, so let me just tick off the points and try to get through them fairly quickly.
One piece of evidence is that in the face of rather pervasive economic weakness the real funds rate is currently higher than it has been for most of the last seven years.
A second point relates to the Greenbook baseline forecast.
Last time, as I saw the unemployment rate in the baseline forecast rising to 5 percent, I said that I didn’t think that did anything for us in terms of inflation credibility and that we should act to cut off some of the rise in unemployment.
Well, if I didn’t like 5 percent, I certainly don’t like 5-1/2 percent!
A third point is the Taylor Rule.
Generally since I’ve been here, the Taylor Rule--because of the implicit output gap assumption in it--has been telling us to raise the funds rate.
Now even the Taylor Rule has turned around and is telling us to lower the funds rate.
More on the current numbers front:
<START>Last time we noticed several sources of weakness--the stock market, foreign real growth, auto sales, industrial production, diffusion indices, consumer confidence, and even the beginnings of a slowdown in high-1/30-31/01 160tech investment spending.<END>
This time all of those sources of weakness have been confirmed and we have several new developments.
One is the very negative tone of the Beige Book, which Bob McTeer mentioned earlier.
Another is the downward revision in the Blue Chip forecast;
the average anticipated real growth for 2001 is down from 3.1 percent in November to 2.6 percent in December.
I don’t take that forecast literally because I think most of us would be delighted if we got 2.6 percent real growth this year.
<START>But for a stodgy index that represents an average of 50 forecasters to be revised that much in one month seems rather remarkable to me.<END>
<START>The same is true of the Goldman Sachs forecasting model, in which the predicted probability of a recession went from 35 percent in November to 50 percent in December--again, I think a remarkable change in one month.<END>
The staff has cut its forecast for consumption, investment, and final demand very sharply.
The high frequency chart that Larry presented earlier showed--and this is an old Fed term--“disquieting similarities” to an earlier period of recession.
One could go on and on, but I think all of these indications of a slowdown on top of the earlier softness make a powerful case for reducing rates.
This is all from a short-term perspective.
We should also be trying to find a policy path that works for the longer run.
But for several reasons I think an early funds rate cut satisfies this longer-term test as well.
<START>For one--again without going through my whole list--most indicators of inflation are fairly quiescent right now and have been downgraded at least moderately since our earlier meetings.<END>
For another, as a number of people have said, if policy is out of equilibrium--as I think it is--to avoid instrument instability we should make our big moves back to the middle or even lean on one side early in the process, not late.
Third, while I don’t want to steal his thunder, Don is going 1/30-31/01 161to take us through some strategic simulations tomorrow and to me they further strengthen the case.
I’ll let Don explain all that tomorrow.
This is an uncertain world, no indicator is perfect, and models should only be taken with a grain of salt.
But it's hard to imagine that a reduction in the funds rate would be a mistake when so many signs are pointing in one direction.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Following the intelligent lead of my colleague, I also will truncate what I was going to say.
I was going to begin by saying that the circumstances surrounding us seem filled with great uncertainty.
<START>But having listened to everybody who has spoken thus far, in some sense I think the circumstances surrounding us are filled with great unanimity and certainty, namely that we do have a risk of what some people euphemistically have called a banana.<END>
I don’t think we are there yet.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We’re on a slippery slope!
MR.
FERGUSON.
We may be on a banana peel!
Let me note some of the reasons I think we’re not fully there yet.
First, most of the weakness that we’ve seen clearly is in manufacturing;
it has not yet spread broadly into services, but it’s broad and deep in manufacturing.
<START>Secondly, as we start or move toward the middle of this process of weakness, the banking sector still seems to be relatively strong, so that sector is unlikely to add to our problems at this stage at least.<END>
A third reason, and others have mentioned this, is that the real estate markets have been if anything relatively healthy.
Having said all of that, obviously I think the risks are primarily to the down side.
We’ve already had quite an exposition on consumer confidence.
I, like others, am 1/30-31/01 162quite surprised and concerned about the very rapid change we have seen in that.
And even if it is a coincident indicator, it does not bode well for consumers actually helping to shore up the economy.
And like Bill McDonough, I would also put perhaps more weight than others have on the state of business confidence.
Obviously, a great deal of the economy’s strength has been driven by investment behavior.
In fact, the staff’s expectation is that productivity will hold up.
I presume that it is built into the forecast that we’ll get back to a situation where equipment and software investment is positive as opposed to totally flat.
In this expansion that kind of investment has been heavily financed by the markets.
The financing gap, as I’ve said before, is quite large by historical standards, and that means that the tone in the financial markets is really quite important now.
It is true that the markets showed a rebound to somewhat healthier conditions after our January 3rd move, but as the staff presentation pointed out, the commercial paper market could be described as anything but healthy.
And we also have from the Senior Loan Officers' Survey ongoing evidence that conditions and standards with respect to loans for medium size and larger companies continue to be tight.
Others have raised the issue of strategy, so let me join in by commenting on my general sense of what it should be.
I think we’re faced with two alternatives.
<START>One, which is bad but relatively manageable, is that associated with the baseline forecast.<END>
The other alternative is far worse and perhaps even less manageable.
In that case, it does strike me that the appropriate approach to strategy is to be very aggressive up front, recognizing that we have a chance later to see exactly how the medicine has gone down, if you will.
I think it’s also important to remember, and no one else has mentioned this, that we have a number of different things to say in our press statement in addition to our 1/30-31/01 163decision on moving the fed funds rate.
<START>And even if we move it down by 50 basis points today, having put in 100 basis points of easing within a month, it is far too early to suggest that the balance of risks is anything other than to the down side.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In our perpetual journey along the economy’s mythical curve, we came to a sudden hairpin turn late in the fourth quarter of last year.
<START>With a quick and aggressive maneuver, I believe we’ve stayed on track, but this passage is leaving us with a new landscape to negotiate.<END>
To belabor the obvious, there is no doubt that we are now in a slowdown of potentially ominous proportions.
And yet, as the Greenbook recognizes, this could still prove to be a growth pause.
After all, we’ve seen such pauses before in this expansion.
<START>And once we get this worrisome inventory correction behind us, we might be off to the races again.<END>
Indeed, there is still a lot of strength in place especially in the huge services sector of the economy.
Among other factors, the banks are still healthy and open for business with rates much more attractive than several quarters ago.
Labor markets are still tight, with unemployment still very low.
And recent retail and other anecdotal evidence has been more upbeat.
The very intensity of the inventory correction under way holds promise that unless demand implodes--and that’s an important caveat--that correction will soon run its course.
<START>There does not seem to be much reason for a serious collapse and good reason to expect renewed strength.<END>
But to me an early return to very strong growth also seems unlikely.
Consider three of the major drivers of the recent boom.
The first is consumer durables.
Over the past twelve quarters, its growth was in the teens in five quarters and 1/30-31/01 164in two of them it was well above 23 percent.
But that rate fell to minus 5 percent in the most recent quarter.
Furthermore, consumer debt service burdens over this period rose to levels that match the high of the late 1980s.
<START>It's hard to see a new boom very soon in consumer durables.<END>
Business fixed investment, another major driver, has traced much the same pattern.
In the past twelve quarters it grew at annual rates in the teens in six of them, with growth in the first quarter of 2000 at 21 percent.
In the most recent quarter it was at or near zero.
Capacity utilization has fallen substantially below its average level.
<START>It's hard to see a new boom there soon.<END>
Finally, the stock market rose steadily from August 1982 through March 2000, with the S&P 500 reaching a price-earnings ratio in the mid-30s.
Today that measure is still well over 20, matching the previous high of 1992.
From that level it’s hard to see much room for another sustained rise in the market that would rekindle the wealth effect.
In summary, Mr. Chairman, I believe we are at an important juncture.
<START>I’m optimistic that the economy can and will soon be okay, but I see a clear and present danger in the very short term.<END>
While this inventory correction runs its course, consumer behavior may be the key.
If the consumer decides to go into hibernation, the entire economy could easily follow in a self-fulfilling prophecy.
I hope we will aggressively counter that possibility now and then see what emerges in the spring.
Fortunately, the outlook for inflation seems to give us a comfortable degree of room to maneuver.
With two quarters of sub-trend growth already registered and the current quarter plus one to three more in prospect, the inflation outlook over the forecast period seems favorable.
Thank you.
1/30-31/01 165CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The trend of downward revisions in the staff and private sector consensus forecasts, as well as in my own, has continued over the intermeeting period.
While they now point to near zero or even slightly negative growth in the first quarter, there is yet no evidence that the forecasts for the near term have themselves stabilized.
<START>There has been a lot of talk around the table of pessimism regarding the near-term outlook, so I thought I’d focus my remarks on the basis for some optimism about the recovery from this very sharp slowdown.<END>
That optimism is founded on several considerations.
First, I do believe that a period of below-trend growth, which now seems inevitable at least through the first half of this year and likely a little longer, will have beneficial aspects in terms of unwinding some of the excesses of the long period of robust growth.
And I refer not only to the probable excesses of output relative to potential.
I'm talking about excesses in equity valuations in some sectors, excesses in terms of a frenzied pace of investment that has produced over-capacity in some sectors, and excesses in terms of leverage in both household and business balance sheets.
Now I admit that what I had in mind, or had hoped for, was a much more gentle version of what I called a reverse soft landing in response to our policy tightening.
But the sharper version has the benefit of getting the job done quickly, allowing the Fed to ease as the process is under way.
The second reason for optimism is that I see, as the staff portrayed very well in its presentation, a series of reinforcing developments in support of a projected recovery in the second half of this year and into 2002.
Monetary policy will clearly be supporting such a recovery, with the combined dissipation of the restraining effects of the earlier 1/30-31/01 166tightening and the effects of the recent and prospective easing.
The prospect of further declines in energy prices remains good and the projected depreciation of the dollar is in my view plausible.
And perhaps especially important is the assumption that the underlying pace of productivity growth will remain high, if not as high as was earlier projected.
This suggests an accumulation of profitable investment opportunities at the low rates of investment projected through the first half of this year, setting the foundation for sizable increases in equipment spending in the second half and into 2002.
Last, but probably not least among the forces that may support recovery is that we will have fiscal stimulus.
I suspect that the coming fiscal stimulus may be understated in the Greenbook.
I would not be surprised to see the tax cut become effective earlier and to be larger cumulatively or more front-loaded--or both--than implied in the Greenbook projection.
<START>A third consideration that supports some optimism is that the sharpness of the decline in production that appears under way this quarter may reflect a very front-loaded inventory correction.<END>
Perhaps this will be an IT version of the traditional inventory cycle, one that is sharper but also shorter than classic inventory corrections.
<START>To achieve a balance between the anxiety about the immediate weakness and near-term downside risks versus the optimism about a relatively quick revival and a move toward trend growth next year creates a real challenge for monetary policy.<END>
<START>That's because of both the lags in the effects of monetary policy and the practical difficulties of rapidly reversing the direction of policy, especially from easing to restraint.<END>
<START>The policy challenge is that there may be nothing or little we can do about the weakness in the economy during the period when it’s likely to be most intense, namely in the first half of 1/30-31/01 1672001 and especially in the first quarter.<END>
But we can powerfully reinforce the rebound that the staff projects with only slight additional easing.
<START>So the questions we face today are how much insurance we should buy against a sharper and more persistent downturn and what degree of rebound we want to encourage on top of the forces I have mentioned above.<END>
It’s relatively easy to see the appropriateness of front-loading, so I don’t think the decision that we face at our meeting tomorrow is that difficult.
But I do believe we will face a challenge thereafter about how to continue.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much.
Have we heard from everybody?
No, President Poole has not yet commented.
MR.
POOLE.
I didn’t know I was going to get the last word this afternoon.
In the Eighth District there is a sense of caution, but I think deep gloom would be the wrong term to use.
People seem to feel that things have flattened out.
The banking system appears to be strong;
<START>there is some increase in problem loans but not large numbers of defaults and delinquencies.<END>
<START>Everybody is aware of the TWA bankruptcy and there is a great deal of local support in St. Louis for a quick reorganization in the bankruptcy court.<END>
It appears that TWA is going to be reorganized under the ownership of American Airlines, with essentially no employment impact.
My guess is that all will continue smoothly on that front.
I’ve been searching to find the optimal level of gloom because I think it is too easy to be all one sided in assessing the current situation.
Let me comment on a point that I don’t think has been mentioned.
There is no question that December's weather was lousy.
It was the coldest and snowiest December in many, many years.
I think we need 1/30-31/01 168to try to sort out how much of what we are observing is an impact from days lost at work and days lost by retailers and so forth in December.
I have a sense that December's weather is not the primary story, but let me give you a few numbers that I got from my UPS contact.
Domestic airfreight last year through November, compared to the same 11-month period of the previous year, was up 3.1 percent.
But in the month of November 2000 as compared to November 1999, it was down 1.3 percent.
The same was true for international traffic.
In 2000, year-to-date through November, international airfreight was up 11-1/2 percent;
but just comparing November 1999 to November of 2000 it was up only 6 percent.
So November is the month when the downdraft really hit and that predates the worst of the weather.
However, my contacts at UPS and FedEx both are projecting an upswing in the second half of 2001 after a slow first half, which is consistent with the pattern for the year that our forecast shows.
UPS is putting a contingency plan into place, however.
The company has a working assumption that business in the year 2001 will be up 11 percent over the previous year, but is developing a contingency plan that assumes business will be up only 6 percent.
So UPS managers are knocking 5 percentage points off their growth assumption and making plans for what they will have to do if that scenario materializes.
My UPS contact says that his folks have surveyed their 300 major customers and those customers see weak business in the near term but a pickup in the second half of the year.
So, again, that fits with the picture that we’ve developed.
The only other point I’d like to mention in terms of the national economy is that to a large extent our sense about how these processes work comes from a long 1/30-31/01 169experience with business cycle fluctuations.
Historically, until the 1990-1991 recession, both long- and short-term interest rates turned at the cycle peak or within plus or minus two months from the peak.
<START>This time, long rates reached a peak, depending on exactly which series one looks at, back in the spring of last year and have gone down quite a bit in recent months.<END>
Al Broaddus noted that money growth at this point is well maintained.
Historically, there was a substantial cycle in money growth.
We don’t have that this time.
Past recessions have always involved residential construction.
Typically we see big declines in housing.
This time housing starts are holding up.
So I think the prospects are that, yes, the economy is going to be weak.
But I don’t believe that we have a falling- out-of-bed situation.
We do need to respond;
I’m not trying to say that we don't.
But I think we want to be careful that we don’t have a sense of more gloom than is justified by what we know.
I’m talking about the optimal amount of gloom here!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
You did get the last word.
We will recess until 9:00 a.m.
tomorrow morning.
Thank you, everybody.
[Meeting recessed] 1/30-31/01 170Wednesday, January 31, 2001--Morning Session CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mr. Madigan.
MR.
MADIGAN.
As background for this briefing, I have distributed two charts from the Bluebook in a package entitled “Material for Staff Presentation on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” 3/ The baseline scenario, shown by the solid lines in chart 4, used the key elements of the staff’s view of the macroeconomy to extend the Greenbook forecast through 2005.
Under this baseline, and in contrast to those shown in Bluebooks in recent years, monetary conditions are seen as already relatively close to those that, over time, foster sustainable economic growth.
<START>would In effect, the real funds rate is now estimated to be very close to its long-run equilibrium value--the rate that eventually would result in no output gap and stable inflation.<END>
The FOMC is assumed to reduce the nominal federal funds rate slightly further--another 25 basis points at this meeting--and then to hold that rate over the forecast period.
<START>As shown in the upper right-hand panel, the real funds rate eases somewhat more over the balance of this year because short-term inflation expectations, as proxied by four-quarter inflation in the core PCE shown in the lower panel, edge up a few tenths over 2001.<END>
<START>These lower real short rates help cushion the negative shock that the economy currently is experiencing.<END>
Nonetheless, the unemployment rate, the middle panel, rises over the course of this year to nearly 5-1/4 percent.
Still, core inflation declines only very gradually over the next few years because the effective NAIRU edges up over time.
<START>This occurs because the catch-up of wage gains to previous productivity increases, as those increases level out, brings the restraining effects on inflation of the previous acceleration in productivity to an end.<END>
<START>The other scenarios depicted in chart 4 focus on two major supply-side uncertainties--the level of the NAIRU and prospects for productivity.<END>
The dot-dash line assumes, in contrast to the staff’s view, that the current 4 percent unemployment rate is sustainable.
The dotted line portrays the much less appealing possibility, discussed by Dave Stockton yesterday, that productivity growth soon reverts to its 1973 to 1994 average of about 1-1/2 percent, rather than remaining at the 3 percent rate of the baseline.
In both cases, monetary policy operating under a Taylor rule would ease.
But the __________________ 3/ A copy of “Material for Staff Presentation on Monetary Policy Alternatives” is appended to this transcript.
(Appendix 3) 1/30-31/01 171Committee’s choices are considerably more attractive under the 4 percent NAIRU scenario than in the baseline or in the productivity slowdown scenario.
<START>Here we have assumed that the Committee opts to take the windfall partly in lower unemployment than in the baseline--the dot-dash line in the middle panel--and partly in lower inflation, the lower panel.<END>
With structural productivity continuing to grow strongly, the estimated long-run equilibrium real funds rate is about unchanged from its roughly 4 percent baseline level, but the actual real funds rate can run well below this value for the next few years to foster the spending consistent with the higher sustainable path of output.
Achieving that track for the real funds rate requires a considerable reduction in the nominal funds rate--to nearly 4-1/2 percent by the end of next year--before tightening after that.
Chart 5 shifts the focus from the supply side to the demand side of the economy.
The dot-dash line portrays a situation in which final spending is temporarily weaker than in the baseline, pushing the economy into a recession this year.
<START>The Taylor rule calls for aggressive easing, with the funds rate declining to 4-1/2 percent by the fourth quarter as unemployment rises steeply to about 6 percent.<END>
Inflation, after initially edging higher because of weakness in the dollar, eventually drops below the baseline.
Ultimately, though, with underlying productivity growth remaining strong, the real funds rate needs to be returned to its estimated long-run equilibrium value--a little above 4 percent.
<START>The dotted lines, by contrast, assume that the stalling in output that is currently evident is due entirely to the desire of businesses to adjust inventories rather than to persistent weakness in final demands, which rebound promptly in the second quarter.<END>
The upshot is a growth pause.
In this case, the Taylor rule, which looks at the current output gap rather than the situation likely to prevail in the future, still calls for an easing in the funds rate to 5-3/4 percent in the current quarter.
It then reverses course fairly quickly as pressures on resources remain intense and as policy needs to adjust to the permanently higher equilibrium real rate that results from stronger spending propensities than in the baseline.
Even with the tighter policy, policy does not succeed completely in capping inflation near current levels during the simulation period.
Market prices suggest that investors see a different economic outlook than the one portrayed in the baseline.
In particular, futures quotes now reveal expectations that you will cut the funds rate to nearly 4-1/2 percent this year, before beginning to firm policy in 2002, and longer-term yields do not indicate concern on the part of investors that such a policy course will produce heightened inflationary pressures.
Apparently, many investors subscribe to some combination of the low NAIRU possibility explored on the previous chart and the potential for appreciable economic weakness assumed in chart 5.
1/30-31/01 172 Market quotes and surveys suggest that investors, consistent with this economic outlook, anticipate that you will cut the funds rate by at least 50 basis points today--with a few apparently seeing the possibility of a 75 basis point move--and state that the risks remain weighted toward economic weakness.
Consequently, the 25 basis point action of alternative A, even if it were accompanied by the anticipated balance of risks statement, would likely lead to a sharp selloff in financial markets.
<START>Nonetheless, the Committee may see benefits from this course, especially if you think that market interest rates probably exaggerate the degree of monetary ease that will ultimately be consistent with sustainable growth and stable inflation.<END>
Taking account of the usual lags in the effects of policy, the more accommodative financial conditions that would evolve from action now would have little effect on near-term weakness as inventories are adjusted.
Indeed, the bulk of its effects may be felt when the weakness has already passed and when fiscal expansion measures may just be coming on line, with the combination potentially providing excessive stimulus to spending.
But, as was evident from your discussion yesterday, many Committee members see good reasons for choosing the stronger, 50 basis point action of alternative A.
<START>Even if you view the staff outlook as the most likely outcome, many of you clearly put substantial weight on the possibility that the economy could turn out to be appreciably weaker.<END>
<START>Such weakness could be prompted by any number of factors, such as deteriorating confidence, on which you received another reading yesterday.<END>
<START>But it could be exacerbated by a substantially larger-than-expected negative response in financial markets to a more measured policy action, resulting in a substantial further pullback in risk-taking.<END>
That could involve a selloff in the stock market, a widening of spreads in the open markets, and additional stringency in loan terms and standards at financial intermediaries.
<START>Moreover, a sense that the staff may be too pessimistic about the sustainable degree of labor market tightness would suggest that inflationary pressures going forward could remain relatively subdued even with the added stimulus from more aggressive action at this meeting and consequently stronger aggregate demand.<END>
<START>This, and the fact that inflation expectations evidently have remained reasonably well anchored, may be seen as giving the Federal Reserve scope for decisive action to shore up spending and output, and even to front-load such action to help safeguard against cumulating weakness.<END>
With regard to the balance of risks sentence, investors anticipate that a 50 basis point move today would be accompanied by a statement that the risks remain weighted toward economic weakness.
Such an assessment would seem justified, even after a 50 basis point reduction, by the lack of firm evidence that growth has stabilized, much less begun to rebound, and 1/30-31/01 173by a sense that inflation pressures are more likely to abate than intensify if demands remain weak.
A statement instead that risks were balanced would surprise market participants, who, as noted, seem to be anticipating nearly 100 basis points of further easing this year even after a 1/2 percentage point action today.
Markets would probably sell off in response as prices adjusted to the prospect of a much flatter trajectory for the funds rate.
<START>If the FOMC announced that it saw the risks as still weighted toward weakness, any immediate reaction would probably be muted, although it seems more likely to be a bit negative than positive, given the perceived possibility of a 75 basis point move today.<END>
There is a chance that such a statement could condition markets to rally sharply further in the event of apparently weak economic data.
<START>The wording of the announcement could help make clear that, although the FOMC might see the risks as still skewed toward weakness, it remained optimistic about longer-term prospects and recognized that considerable stimulus was now in the pipeline.<END>
The Chairman, of course, also will have the opportunity in the semiannual monetary policy testimony to temper market perceptions should they evolve in a way inconsistent with the Committee’s objectives.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Questions for Brian?
Everyone is talked out!
Let me start by reviewing what we discussed earlier just to give us a little context.
We experienced a remarkable surge in activity during the first half of last year, partly in response to Y2K.
We saw some extraordinary numbers.
Production numbers for some high-tech industries were up 50 percent and more on a year-over-year basis.
Orders were coming in at a pace that caused order backlogs to surge almost vertically upward.
<START>The acceleration in activity was very clearly unsustainable in terms of any plausible longer-term scenario, and hence it was by no means a surprise to see a slowdown in growth.<END>
What we didn’t anticipate was how fast that slowdown would be.
In retrospect, what we have seen recently is an obvious deceleration in business investment in durable equipment and consumer expenditures on durable goods.
A prime example of unsustainable growth in spending on the consumer side was the rise in the number of cars on the road at a pace that just could not be sustained.
We were going to run out of parking and highway space relatively soon at the motor vehicle sales rates we 1/30-31/01 174were experiencing in the early part of last year!
The capital stock, especially in the high-tech area, began to rise at an inordinate rate.
Our estimates of industrial capacity growth indicated an extraordinary pickup in a number of the high-tech areas that could not realistically be projected to continue.
As I have noted before, the demand for a broad range of products in the high-tech area may be doubling annually, but supply has been increasing even faster.
As a consequence, the industry has experienced a glut that has eroded prospective profitability even though underlying demand has been moving up at a very rapid pace.
A goodly part of what is going on in the high-tech area clearly fits that description because there is no evidence of which I’m aware to support a conclusion that these technologies are approaching a state of maturity.
To be sure, personal computers have exhibited some elements of the tail end of the “S” curve, but once we get beyond personal computers and some related technologies, there’s nothing in the high-tech area that is even remotely suggestive of a maturing process.
I say that even though the Internet consumer markets look like a dud in the sense that no one really has been able to find a highly profitable means of using the Internet in a business-to-consumer mode.
What has happened, however, is the emergence of extraordinary improvements in the cost structure on business-to-business applications, with unit costs falling in a lot of areas.
<START>Not only has the ability of business firms to control their internal cost structures with respect to physical investment flows and inventories continued to improve, as we can see very readily on the factory floor and in all sorts of service areas, but it also has become quite apparent that more efficient inter-company interactions are having a quite measurable effect on overall productivity.<END>
In that regard there is just no evidence that we 1/30-31/01 175are close to an inflection point in relation to an “S” curve.
<START>So, as best I can judge, we’re not looking at the end of this high-tech boom.<END>
<START>What we are observing is a really quite dramatic intra-long-term cycle, if I am allowed to choose simple terminology.<END>
[Laughter] The stock adjustment that is now under way clearly stems from softening final sales.
We can see it in motor vehicle sales, in appliances, and in new orders for all sorts of capital equipment.
Final sales have fallen at a pace that has been faster than anybody expected--I’ll get back to that in a moment--and inventories have backed up very quickly.
But because improved supply-chain management and flexible manufacturing techniques are in place, the response in production has been very quick and, as we’ve observed, quite pronounced.
But while consumption is falling fast, we have not yet seen, at least through the month of December, any clear evidence that inventories are being liquidated.
The rate of accumulation has come down very dramatically, but the decline in production that we have observed has not been enough to move output below final sales.
As a consequence, as best we can judge inventories of manufactured goods--forward of the producers and in the distribution channels basically--are probably at roughly zero inventory change as of December.
The presumption is that we are getting some liquidation in January but that we are nowhere near the tail end of this inventory adjustment process.
In other words, it’s not as though the liquidation began in October and will be over by February.
There’s no evidence that that is the case.
<START>We do know that production and company receipts are falling, but they have not fallen below the level of final sales, so more inventory adjustment is ahead of us.<END>
What has to happen first is that the inventory-sales ratios have to stabilize, a process that is probably under way now, and then those ratios have to fall to the level 1/30-31/01 176consistent with the downward trend in those ratios associated with the adoption of just-in-time inventory practices.
And indeed the Greenbook projects an inventory trend that in effect accomplishes that.
One can argue that first- and second-quarter inventory numbers may have to be redistributed in relation to the Greenbook forecast, but at least at the end of the forecast period the Greenbook has inventory-sales ratios back down in line with where we would expect them to be on a just-in-time basis.
<START>The inventory adjustment appears to have been far faster than we expected, principally as best I can judge--though we really won’t know this except in retrospect--as a consequence of improvements in inventory management.<END>
Obviously, we are observing the effects of the remarkable changes that have occurred, for example, in the area of bar code scanning in retailing.
Some 20 years ago merchants still had to use paper records, store them, and reorder periodically.
Their current inventories were to a large extent unknowable until they shut down the store and took an inventory.
Even then they didn’t know precisely what inventories they had until maybe weeks later.
Now businesses know in real time, and in an ever growing number of cases there are Internet or electronic interface systems that in effect work off the bar codes in the retail stores to reorder from suppliers.
The suppliers probably see the data before the vice president of the retail establishment sees them.
If the current inventory adjustment process is indeed moving fast, then any presumption that the process will take as long as it did ten years ago, when the last significant cyclical contraction occurred, is probably not going to hold up.
I don’t know how fast the current inventory adjustment is going to go, but it will surely be faster than in the past.
The danger is that while the adjustment process is faster and technology has 1/30-31/01 177augmented its speed, human nature has changed not at all.
And human nature responds negatively to change and uncertainty.
As I mentioned yesterday, when the economy is in an expansion phase, which is still going on but slowing down, increased uncertainty in and of itself raises risks and induces people to differentiate among the risks they are willing to take.
<START>And if the fabric of confidence is broken because it is truly shot, the issue is never which among alternative risks individuals will choose.<END>
They don’t want to take any risks;
they don’t want to know about the different levels of risks;
they want to be wholly liquid.
<START>And that, as I mentioned yesterday, is the reason why in the fall of 1998 we found the extraordinary circumstance where even riskless instruments, off-the-run Treasury instruments, were selling at 20 basis points above those that were on-the-run.<END>
Now, that has nothing to do with the taking of risks;
it’s a sheer liquidity fear response.
We are nowhere near that point at this stage despite the fact that confidence has deteriorated a great deal, albeit from very high levels.
I trust no one has been raising the analogy about falling off the proverbial 30-story building.
[Laughter] In any event, what’s happening is understandable:
The adjustment process is quicker.
We do not seem to be experiencing a significant acceleration in final sales in January.
First of all, despite the drop in consumer confidence, chain store retail sales data do not look bad.
They have risen from their December levels, and last week’s data were basically not bad.
As David mentioned yesterday, the information we are getting from the auto companies indicates that retail demand through the first 20 days of January was about where it was on average in December.
But you will recall that December started off a lot better than the average for the month.
Indeed, when we questioned the automakers on December 4 or thereabouts, they came back with estimates for the month 1/30-31/01 178that were only modestly lower than sales in November.
Ten days later, the floor had fallen out of the motor vehicle market.
So even though we don’t have 10-day motor vehicle sales anymore, my suspicion is that the 10-day sales would have been dropping substantially during December.
January sales thus far have been higher than they apparently were in late December.
Now the actual published number for January is going to be higher basically because sizable fleet sales, of which we have been apprised on a confidential basis, are being put into the numbers, presumably for marketing purposes.
That is going to exaggerate the extent of the turnaround unless sales in the last 10 days, for which we have no information, fall on their face.
Remember that in the motor vehicle business the last 10 days account for far more than one-third of the month’s sales.
So while it’s quite possible that things could turn around, there is no evidence yet that that is the case.
I don’t know whether or not the housing sales figures have been published.
MR.
STOCKTON.
They are due out at 10:00 a.m.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The figures will be quite strong.
<START>Now, having said that, of all the poor statistics we have, the housing sales numbers win the prize every year.<END>
They have the largest revisions and often even the sign is not right.
But at this particular stage, I am not inclined to look a gift horse in the mouth.
I do think the proposition that final sales have not deteriorated in any significant way in January is at least consistent with the fragmentary data that we have.
And the clear weakening in production that we’re getting in certain areas of the economy in January, although production is not falling on its face, is probably an indication of the inventory liquidation that is now under way.
1/30-31/01 179Through all of this, as I have indicated previously, there is little evidence of which I’m aware that long-term profit expectations have deteriorated to any significant extent.
Indeed, in terms of the data that were shown to us yesterday, estimates by Street analysts are off a bit for the long term but nowhere near the extent to which the short-term results are.
I must say, however, that coupled with all of this is a really serious energy problem.
It is not a seasonal problem and it is not about to go away.
The natural gas production problem is very severe and is feeding into the electric power area.
We have a newly aggressive OPEC, which is not going to make things altogether easy.
The presumption of an early return to lower energy prices just is not consistent with anything we can see out there.
Energy is a major player at this point.
Clearly, as has occurred every time in previous energy crises, it has sapped consumer purchasing power.
<START>So over and above the capital stock adjustment that is bringing final sales down, the drop in consumer purchasing power stemming from both oil and natural gas developments is significant.<END>
And insofar as anyone can judge, the increased cash flow to domestic oil and gas producers is not creating a degree of capital investment that is offsetting the decline in consumption expenditures.
<START>So over and above the so-called “tax at the border,” which is the result of rising prices of imported crude oil and which exerts a full dollar-for-dollar drain, we presumably are also getting a net drain for domestically produced energy in that income is being shifted to those whose propensity to spend is lower than it is for those from whom purchasing power is being taken.<END>
The profit margin declines owing to cost pressures from energy are quite significant.
Data that we have put together here indicate that direct energy costs 1/30-31/01 180accounted for about one-fourth of the increase in unit costs of nonfinancial and nonenergy corporations in the second half of last year.
<START>Of the remaining three fourths, an unknown part doubtless reflects energy’s impact on final goods sales, whose softening has led to a lower level of aggregate production and has tended to slow cyclical productivity.<END>
So the energy effect is clearly a good deal more than one-fourth if one is assessing what caused the significant reduction in the total profit margins of nonfinancial corporations, excluding energy corporations, during the third and fourth quarters.
<START>Obviously, the margins of energy corporations went up, but the increase certainly was far smaller than the declines that have been occurring in the nonenergy sectors.<END>
As a consequence, there is more to the overall economic outlook than just strictly the question of an adjustment process stemming from capital stock corrections.
We have a real problem coming in from left field.
It is in a sense wholly unrelated, although one can argue that a sizable part of the problem is increased energy demand, which in turn is a function of the same technologies as those that are exerting pressure on many other parts of the economic system.
But whatever it is, it’s there, it’s important, and as far as I can see, it’s not going to go away for quite a while.
We have put together a quarterly energy accounting system for the corporate sector, and as far as I can guess the codes were not written for the short term;
they were written to last.
I think we’ll be keeping that system up to date for quite a while because I think energy is becoming a major player in a number of the data that we tend to look at.
In summary, we’ve got a very rapidly changing economy, one that still has a distance to go on the down side.
The key characteristic at this stage is an inventory liquidation process, which of necessity always ends and sometimes induces a V-shaped 1/30-31/01 181recovery.
The January data and the continuing leap in structural productivity growth both suggest that the V-shaped recovery is the most likely outcome.
<START>But after experiencing this huge bubble of speculative activity and looking at price-earnings ratios, which are not by any means depressed, we can’t be sure that this expansion will just slow down, then pop up, and continue the way it was.<END>
We may have a deeper problem facing us here, though I grant it has a low probability.
I would feel a lot more comfortable if a number of the speculative elements in the economy were now much reduced, if Baa-Aaa spreads were to come down to where they were a year or so ago, and if a lot of the skittishness in the banking industry were not there.
<START>And I also wish that Japan were doing better because we can’t forget that it has the second largest economy in the world and it is in serious trouble.<END>
So far in Japan all we’ve seen is a sluggish quarter-by-quarter performance that has not had any repercussions.
But hibernating bears also look tranquil.
Some day that huge economy is going to wake up or really go to sleep, and I don’t know which of those two is really the most likely outcome.
All in all, I think what is involved here is a judgment about how this economy is evolving.
To me the evidence strongly suggests that we are in an advanced high-tech and just-in-time inventory type of economic system, including the capital goods markets where adjustments happen far faster because information is so much more readily available.
If that is the case, since we are dealing with mood swings that are rooted in an unchanging human nature, then I think it follows that monetary policy must also compress itself into a narrower timeframe.
That means we have to move faster, sooner, quicker, and complete the operation in a shorter period of time.
At least that’s what strikes me are the implications for monetary policy of this new high-tech environment.
<START>1/30-31/01 182In that context, moving by 50 basis points today, as a number of you have suggested, strikes me as the right move along with retaining the balance of risks statement to the down side.<END>
I have been concerned about the possibility that our moving so fast in a month would suggest either a knowledge of facts that nobody else knows or that we are getting scared.
Fortunately, I guess, the markets as a result of yesterday’s consumer confidence index have now put something like a 20 percent probability that we’ll move 75 basis points.
And in the preliminary draft of our press statement that I’ll read to you, if we choose 50 basis points, there is a general statement that productivity gains are holding up.
The main purpose of that statement is to recognize the severity of the problem we have and the necessity to act, while still indicating that the underlying structure of the economy appears to remain substantially in place.
That’s my reason for including it.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Mr. Chairman, I fully support your recommendation and the reasoning for it.
<START>I think the only possible alternative would be to ease even further, and in my view that would be very unwise because it clearly would give an indication that we do know something that other people don’t know or that we’re scared, neither of which is the case.<END>
<START>Therefore, I think a 50 basis point easing with the balance of risks statement toward weakness is the appropriate answer.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
I’m in agreement with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
I fully support the recommendation.
Let me comment briefly.
I remarked yesterday that I thought the probability of recession was uncomfortably high.
1/30-31/01 183But what I would say even more strongly is that I recognize that I at least can’t forecast turning points.
<START>And while I would like to base policy going forward on a forecast, I have so little confidence in forecasting how the economy will perform over the next two, three, or four quarters that I’m reluctant to do that.<END>
So, in trying to get another perspective on policy, I’m thinking about real interest rates and the real federal funds rate.
And it seems to me that the funds rate does need to be lower at this stage, certainly by 50 basis points at least.
I think that’s the appropriate move now and I agree that a bias in the language toward weakness is appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, I certainly support your recommendation.
I’d like to make just a brief comment about the lags in this process.
I think it’s important to recognize that market interest rates have moved ahead of our actions in anticipation of what we’re going to do.
In explaining this move, when we’re giving speeches and that kind of thing, we should emphasize that a lot of ease has already been reflected in the marketplace ahead of our actions.
For example, the two-year constant maturity rate moved below 6 percent in October, dropped below 5-1/2 percent in early December, and then by early January it was down to about 4-3/4 percent.
So the market has moved ahead of us and we have some easing already in the pipeline, which clearly shows up in the housing numbers, as I mentioned yesterday.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Ferguson.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
I also think that your analysis is absolutely right in the sense that what we’re dealing with is a high-tech, highly productive economy that is slowing very quickly.
<START>We do have to be 1/30-31/01 184careful because it could pick up again, but at this stage I think 50 basis points is absolutely the right move and the balance of risks statement toward weakness is also correct.<END>
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I certainly agree with your recommendation.
<START>While we have reminded ourselves over and over, including in the comments you just made, that we can’t do anything about the short term, I think we can shore up attitudes and expectations about what’s likely to unfold.<END>
In the notes I had written out on policy, my final points were related to the statement that we make, which is where you ended your remarks.
<START>While I would agree that the markets won’t be surprised by our action today, I was surprised after our last meeting at how some business leaders and consumers on the fringe did have the sense that perhaps things were worse than they had thought.<END>
I believe that danger is still there, even given the expectations in financial markets.
So I think we have to choose our words as carefully as we can and try to eliminate some of the fear that people might read into another 50 basis point move quite so soon.
Nevertheless, I certainly agree with the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.
MR.
PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, I enthusiastically support your recommendation.
It seems to me that the financial markets clearly are expecting a move of this magnitude and if we were not to move along these lines, I think it could cause some problems.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Mr. Chairman, I support both parts of your recommendation.
I believe we’ve all been particularly impressed by the speed of this slowdown and I’m 1/30-31/01 185hopeful that this action will help us to achieve a quick recovery and to avoid moving into a recession.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Gramlich.
MR.
GRAMLICH.
Mr. Chairman, I support the recommendation.
<START>Yesterday I may have violated Bill Poole’s rule about optimal degree of gloom.<END>
In fact, I suppose I consider the high-tech V-shaped recovery the most likely outcome.
But I do think there is some probability that we will see something worse than that.
I strongly support your idea that in view of today’s economy we should be mindful that policy should be front-loaded and operate faster and quicker.
<START>A part of me thought you might recommend going to alternative A′′, which was a 75 basis point cut, and I’m not sure that you couldn’t have talked me into that.<END>
But I will go with this proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I also agree with both parts of your proposal.
<START>Whether one thinks like Governor Gramlich that things could well be worse, or like I do that fiscal stimulus might come earlier and be larger than expected and we could have a rebound sooner than anticipated, front-loading policy right now seems to me the wisest course.<END>
It seems appropriate to get the stimulus in there, to get its impact sooner, so perhaps it will improve whatever is going to happen 9 or 10 months from now.
<START>In thinking about the press statement, I had reflected on whether a balanced risk statement would work to solve the problem that President McDonough mentioned regarding the possibility that the size of the cumulative easing moves over a month’s time might feed into the pessimistic psychology about the economic outlook.<END>
I wondered whether a balanced risks statement might help calm things.
<START>But after listening to the television a bit this morning and seeing 1/30-31/01 186the degree to which there were now expectations in the market of an even bigger move--and not being able to reconcile in my own mind the real risks with a balanced risk statement--I came around to your position.<END>
So, I’m wholeheartedly in agreement with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Broaddus.
MR.
BROADDUS.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.
MR.
KELLEY.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
I also want to associate myself with President Guynn’s comments about the need to be careful with regard to the psychology associated with the wording of our press statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.
MR.
JORDAN.
Thank you.
I support the 50 basis point move today and I think 100 basis points of easing in a four-week period does achieve a significant degree of front-loading.
It is early and substantial.
And I would support that even though I think the baseline forecast is the best projection to go with.
It’s the one I certainly hope is correct.
But the funds rate path that was coupled with the baseline forecast is not the one that we prefer.
Where that leaves me is that if the baseline forecast does turn out to be the correct one, then we’re going to need to move the funds rate back up, perhaps to where the staff says it is going to be two years hence.
And it’s getting difficult for me to imagine the path that we will have to follow if that forecast is right.
I say that because the pressure for further cuts at the March meeting and especially at the May meeting, if 1/30-31/01 187we have a negative GDP number for this quarter and rising unemployment, is going to be huge.
It will be a time once again when the market fully expects us to move, when the analysts and everybody else say we’re going to move, and we will have to disappoint them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We’ve done it before.
President McTeer.
MR.
MCTEER.
I think we can wait and worry about that later.
For the current circumstances, I think your recommendation is just right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Meyer.
MR.
MEYER.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
I believe that’s the right move for today but I completely concur with the remarks of President Jordan.
I think we have to exercise care in the expectations that we encourage in the markets about the certainty and the cumulative size of the likely amount of future easing, particularly in light of what I view as a still plausible and sensible baseline scenario in the Greenbook.
One point I would like to make is that I’ve always looked forward to these two-day meetings as an opportunity to talk about some broader issues on the strategy of monetary policy.
This morning doesn’t seem to be the time to do that, given the nature of the discussion around the table.
<START>But I would hope, as we plan the agenda for future two-day meetings, that we would allow time for some comments that I would like to make about the appropriateness and direction of policy, how we monitor the monetary aggregates, and how we set inflation targets and our rules packet.<END>
<START>I’m always amused that we start off from the inflation target that John Taylor set but do so without any communication from the Committee to the staff about the inflation objectives Committee 1/30-31/01 188members might have.<END>
But I’ll save that topic for future discussions and express my hope that future agendas will allow more time for such discussions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We can do that prior to the July--if you’ll excuse the expression--“Humphrey-Hawkins” testimony.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
It’s the semiannual-- MR. KOHN.
The semiannual Monetary Policy Report.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
May I ask the Federal Reserve Board to adjourn to my office to discuss the discount rates?
Let me also request that Lynn Fox distribute the preliminary draft of our press statement.
MR.
KOHN.
Do you want to vote first?
You haven’t taken the vote yet.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We didn’t?
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
That’s something to report in the minutes!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I was going to do that when we came back, but I guess not.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
That’s an abnormal sequence of FOMC proceedings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I appreciate the assistance.
Would the Secretary read the text?
MR.
BERNARD.
The wording is from page 17 in the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the 1/30-31/01 189Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 5-1/2 percent.” With regard to the balance of risks sentence for the press statement:<END>
<START>“Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth, and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.<END>
Call the roll.
MR.
BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman McDonough Yes Governor Ferguson Yes Governor Gramlich Yes President Hoenig Yes Governor Kelley Yes Governor Meyer Yes President Minehan Yes President Moskow Yes President Poole Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>Vice Chairman, do we now have your permission to have the Board members meet in my office?<END>
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
You certainly do!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I request that we have a temporary recess.
[Meeting recessed] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Any comments, concerns, or otherwise about the draft press release?
MR.
POOLE.
Mr. Chairman, Larry Meyer and a couple of other people have asked why the St. Louis discount rate change is not effective today.
The reason is that 1/30-31/01 190the State of Arkansas has some bank usury ceilings that are tied to the discount rate.
<START>As a practical matter, the change in the discount rate can’t become effective until the following day.<END>
It has to do with Arkansas law.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
So you will go with the new rate officially tomorrow?
MR.
POOLE.
That’s correct.
We can’t make it effective immediately.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay.
Is this press statement satisfactory to everybody then?
MR.
MCTEER.
I think this is the first time the press release has made reference to when the discount rate change is effective.
This seems a bit ambiguous because not all of the Reserve Banks are a part of it.
I think it might be better not to include the entire last sentence.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Normally we do indicate when it’s effective.
MR.
PARRY.
Some Reserve Banks are not in and it’s confusing.
Is that what you’re saying?
MS.
FOX.
Actually, the sentence can be modified to say that the change is effective in the Districts noted and is effective for St. Louis the next day.
Maybe that would be better.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
<START>That’s probably not a bad idea.<END>
In other words, the change is effective for eight Banks or-- MS. FOX.
In those Districts the change is effective immediately.
In St. Louis, the change is effective tomorrow.
1/30-31/01 191MR. MEYER.
Is it necessary?
It seems there is more detail than is necessary in this release.
SEVERAL.
Yes, in this release.
SPEAKER(?).
Have we ever said this before?
MS.
FOX.
We usually say this when St. Louis is included.
I don’t have a strong feeling about it.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
I would take it out.
MR.
POOLE.
I think we could leave it out of this statement.
You might have to explain it, but-- CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
You know, we don’t need it.
We can say, “In taking the discount rate action, the Federal Reserve Board approved requests submitted by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco.” Period.
MR.
POOLE.
Full stop.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I know our boards of directors have to vote on it, but the reality is that we’ll all pass it this afternoon.
MR.
PARRY.
Not necessarily.
SPEAKER(?) It won’t be effective today in St. Louis.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
For some it may be tomorrow.
MS.
FOX.
Let’s just take it out.
If people have questions about it, we can answer them.
MR.
FERGUSON.
Bill, does it matter to you if we announce when it’s effective in your District?
1/30-31/01 192MR. POOLE.
Well, to me the way to think about it is that the Board accepted the recommendation from the St. Louis Bank but because of our peculiar situation as a standard practice the change has to become effective the following day.
But I don’t think we need to have that detail in the press statement.
MR.
FERGUSON.
But it’s not important to you that we announce-- MR. POOLE.
What is important is just the fact that the Board accepted our recommendation.
That is what you did, and that’s all you have to say.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That’s what’s usually done.
MR.
FERGUSON.
That’s the operative point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The operative issue is that we accepted the recommendation of the change you wish to implement.
We have now completed our formal agenda.
Our next meeting is scheduled for March 20 and with that we can adjourn our FOMC meeting.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 131
