Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  Without objection.  I think most of you know that President Lockhart has announced that he plans to step down from his position early next year, and this will be his last FOMC meeting. Dennis has agreed to come back for a reception in January on the evening of the first day of the FOMC meeting, which will provide us with an opportunity to honor him appropriately and express our best wishes in a more festive setting than an FOMC meeting. But I’d also like to make just a few remarks today.  After a long and varied career in finance and academia here and abroad, Dennis joined the Federal Reserve in March 2007 as President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.  That was just months before the Global Financial Crisis.  Fortunately, we all know that correlation is not causation.  [Laughter] For the past decade, President Lockhart has ably represented the Federal Reserve in the Sixth District. He has contributed greatly to the System’s work generally, including serving most recently as chairman of the Conference of Presidents.  And, in the course of attending 79 FOMC meetings, he has enhanced the Committee’s deliberations on monetary policy through his careful reporting on economic and financial developments in the Atlanta District, his thoughtful analysis of national conditions and the economic outlook, and his balanced approach to our policy decisions.   Dennis, we thank you for your service to the Federal Reserve, and we wish you all the best in the next phase of your career.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of thanks and recognition for President Lockhart's service.


Passage number 2.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  [Applause] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let us turn to our agenda.  The first item pertains to “Proposed Revisions to Rules Regarding Availability of Information.”  You recently received a staff memorandum that proposes certain revisions to the Committee’s rules regarding the availability of information.  To summarize briefly, legislation passed earlier this year requires federal agencies to implement a number of changes to relevant information availability policies by December 27. Approval of the staff proposal would align the Committee’s FOIA rules with the new statutory requirements and would implement a number of additional changes, all of which are technical. Let me ask: Does anybody have any questions for the staff about the proposals. [No response]  Okay.  If not, I suggest that we now have a single vote on the proposal, and I’m going to ask Brian to explain exactly what it is that we will be requested to vote on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a discussion and suggestion for a vote.


Passage number 3.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This vote will encompass three sets of items.  For your reference, I might note that these items are included on page 2 of the staff memorandum under the heading “Procedural Notes.”  First, the Committee would approve the adoption of the recommended changes to its rules regarding the availability of information.  A tracked-changes version of the rules is attached to the staff memo.  Second, the Committee would make two determinations that would allow the revised rules to be published in the Federal Register as an immediately effective interim final rule under the Administrative Procedure Act. One, the Committee would determine that there is good cause that public notice and comment on these amendments would be “impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to the public interest.”Two, the Committee would determine that there is good cause to waive the typical 30-day delay for the effective date of the rule. The staff believes that these determinations are reasonable because, one, the act requires agencies to implement the necessary changes to the rules in a very short time frame, and, two, the changes beyond those required by the act are technical in nature. Third, the Committee would authorize the Secretary in consultation with the General Counsel to do two things:  one, to take the appropriate steps to reflect these changes in the rules and records of the Committee and submit the appropriate filings to the Federal Register, and, two, to appoint a Federal Reserve employee as the Committee’s FOIA public liaison to fulfill the roles described in the amended rules. A draft of the Federal Register notice, which includes a detailed description of the changes, was attached as appendix 2 to the staff memo. That notice is the proposal on which the Committee is being asked to vote. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Do I have a motion to approve the proposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Madigan, is simply providing an overview of the items that the Committee will be voting on.


Passage number 4.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  And a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "So moved" implies agreement or acceptance of a proposal, and "And a second" suggests that someone else supports the motion.


Passage number 5.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Second. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Without objection.  Okay, Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply includes a statement made by Chair Yellen, who seeks the agreement or lack of objection from someone named Brian.


Passage number 6.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you very much.  I just have an additional note.  Although the interim final rule will be effective immediately upon publication in the Federal Register, the public will have 60 days to submit any comments.  The staff anticipates that after the public comment period, the Committee will be asked, potentially at the March meeting, to make the rule final either as is or with changes, if warranted by public comment, and to authorize publication of the final rule in the Federal Register.  Thank you.CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  And let me next call on Simon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the process and timeline for implementing a rule, allowing for public comments and potential changes before finalizing the rule.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 7.
 MR. POTTER.  It’s a Board meeting as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, this is a Board meeting as well.  We’ve already had a motion and closed the Board meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "We’ve already had a motion and closed the Board meeting" implies that there is disagreement or opposition regarding the timing or decision to close the Board meeting.


Passage number 8.
 MR. POTTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair. I was just checking. CHAIR YELLEN. Yes. We’re now going to go to “Financial Developments and Open Market Operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 9.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes, I have two or three questions.  One is about the SOMA Domestic Portfolio Unrealized Profit and Loss on exhibit 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they have two or three questions, with one specifically regarding the SOMA Domestic Portfolio Unrealized Profit and Loss on exhibit 3.


Passage number 10.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as there is a single person speaking without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 11.
 MR. LACKER.  There’s also a figure in Tealbook B, and, for November 30, I wasn’t sure if they lined up.  Is there something conceptually different between those numbers. Because some of us are going to be eager trackers of unrealized capital gains or losses in the months and weeks ahead, I suspect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or contention between the speaker (Mr. Lacker) and potentially some other individuals who are interested in tracking unrealized capital gains or losses. The mention of "some of us" being "eager trackers" suggests differing opinions or perspectives on the matter.


Passage number 12.
 MR. POTTER.  That’s very perceptive of you.  I also noticed that.  So, my reckoning is 80; they’ve got 120 there.  I think there’s a difference in definition and timing involved in that, but you’re right.  There is a bit of a difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Potter acknowledges and agrees with the observation made by the other person.


Passage number 13.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I believe that in Tealbook B we are using our estimates of what we would show in the Quarterly Financial Report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Laubach's belief about the use of estimates in Tealbook B.


Passage number 14.
 MR. LACKER. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a statement made by Mr. Lacker without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 15.
   MR. POTTER.  So I’m just giving you right up to what the controllers and markets tell us on that day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker is providing information based on what the controllers and markets told them on a particular day.


Passage number 16.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  I don’t expect someone to regurgitate the difference now, but would it be possible to circulate a little write-up of what the difference is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for a summary of the difference, without expressing any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 17.
 MR. POTTER.  We will do that, yes.  It’s a question I raised this morning on the call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 18.
 MR. LACKER.  Second, I really appreciated the overview of the operational-readiness framework.  I’m a longtime supporter of the Desk’s operational readiness and participated in readiness preparations, and I’m really glad to see the Desk taking a systematic approach to ensuring the Desk’s ability to conduct operations that it is currently authorized to conduct. I was intrigued, however, by the memo’s reference to the Desk assessing the readiness to conduct operations that it may be asked to conduct, might not have ever conducted, and might not be authorized to conduct now.  I was really curious about this.  First of all, there’s an appendix that shows 26 operations that have the highest readiness prioritization, and so you engage in regular readiness preparations.  And I was really glad to see selling MBS was on that list.  I want to commend you for that right off the bat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses appreciation and support for the operational readiness framework and commends the Desk for including certain operations on the readiness list.


Passage number 19.
 MR. POTTER.  We are authorized to do those types of open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Potter and his organization are authorized to perform open market operations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
 MR. LACKER.  But you maintain a catalog of 58 operations, and you just told us about 26 of them, and I didn’t see the other 32 listed anywhere.  These are things that you folks think you need to be ready to do, but we haven’t talked about them here.  I don’t know if any of us have even thought about them.  So, actually, I’m really curious about them.  Does it take many resources to maintain some readiness for these things that we haven’t even thought about doing. Have you assessed the likelihood of use.  Have you ever discussed any of these with external parties by way of researching what would be involved in operations in some far-flung market orin other—the imagination runs wild in this circumstance.  I was wondering if you could make available the list of 32 to the Committee at some point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Lacker is expressing his confusion and curiosity about the other 32 operations that have not been discussed. He questions whether resources are being allocated for these operations and if their likelihood of use has been assessed. The disagreement arises from his belief that the committee has not adequately addressed or considered these operations.


Passage number 21.
 MS. LOGAN. You’re right that the three categories that are listed here are the categories of operations in which we’re currently using resources, and that’s why we focused on the three.  There are about 30 other operations that we didn’t list, and they cover a wide variety of things, including things we did in the crisis.  Agency debt purchases would be one of those; TSLF Schedule 1 would be in that category.  They also include things that we may have done pre-crisis—for example, options on repos that we did during Y2K would be one—and some things that we haven’t done, such as municipal debt.  There may have been things that people asked us about during the crisis, and we may have done a little work on them but didn’t do any real operational work.  They include a wide variety of things, and we can certainly share that.  But we’re not using resources on the things that are in those two categories today, and the purpose of this is to show you the things in which we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing clarification and additional information on the listed categories of operations.


Passage number 22.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that "MR. LACKER" is speaking, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 23.
 MR. POTTER. We will be happy to share the full list.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that Mr. Potter will be happy to share a full list.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 24.
 MR. LACKER.  Great.  Are they all things that the open market Desk is legally entitled to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "legally" suggests a potential disagreement or uncertainty regarding the actions that the open market Desk is entitled to undertake.


Passage number 25.
 MS. LOGAN.  Yes, everything there is within the Federal Reserve Act. For example, there are agency debt sales, FX forwards, FX swaps with private counterparties, purchasing spec pools instead of TBAs, or doing repos DVP instead of through the triparty system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply listing different examples of actions that can be taken within the framework of the Federal Reserve Act.


Passage number 26.
 MR. LACKER. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I see" does not indicate any disagreement or contradiction, but rather indicates understanding or acknowledgment.


Passage number 27.
 MS. LOGAN.  So there are things that have been at this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there are things that have been at this table.


Passage number 28.
 MR. LACKER.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate contention or disagreement. It simply includes a brief statement expressing gratitude.


Passage number 29.
   MR. POTTER.  It will be very exciting reading for everyone. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen are simply discussing exciting reading material and moving on to other questions.


Passage number 30.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Is it your sense that the Chinese are selling Treasury securities to meet some of these redemptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This passage is simply stating a question about the perception of the Chinese selling Treasury securities.


Passage number 31.
 MR. POTTER. Yes, as they have been for quite a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement confirming that something has been happening for a while.


Passage number 32.
 MR. KAPLAN.  And that’s continuing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 33.
 MR. POTTER.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 34.
 MR. KAPLAN.  And then the second thing.  Do you think people are expecting—I know that it’s not explicit—that once the exchange reserves run low enough the Chinese might be thinking about taking some preemptive action to stem these flows, such as a devaluation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed to the person being addressed.


Passage number 35.
 MR. POTTER.  So I’ll let Steve comment as well. They still have more than $3 trillion in reserves and a current account surplus.  So I don’t think there’s anything next week. The notion would be if this kept going for another 12 months, then that might show a bigger rundown in the reserves. Part of the fall in exchange reserves is due to the valuation effect, because they hold nondollar assets.  If they’re pricing in dollars, that moves it down. Also, because they previously sold quite a lot of short stuff in the intervention, their portfolio will also have market losses in it, as the rates have gone up and the way they report is that way. Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of facts and possible future scenarios.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 MR. KAMIN.  I think they’ve already taken one preemptive action, which is to tighten up capital controls on outflows, and, meanwhile, I think there is actually an active debate within China among different observers and policymakers over whether a preemptive large devaluation would help by delivering the devaluation people are worried about or hinder because once you do one devaluation, a lot of market participants expect more to follow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions an active debate within China among different observers and policymakers regarding whether a preemptive large devaluation would be helpful or hinder the situation. This indicates the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 37.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 38.
  MR. KAMIN.  And history suggests they are correct.  In other words, an awful lot of out-of-control depreciations start with a deliberate devaluation. So this is still up in the air. Our forecast is for neither a preemptive devaluation nor a very large and continuing depreciation.  Our view is that a lot of the depreciation of the RMB against the dollar that we’ve seen is, more or less, in line with that of other currency movements and is in line with one of their standard objectives, which is to keep the RMB more or less stable against the basket of currencies, and, in fact, that has continued.  So our forecast over the next few years is that they keep the RMB stable against this basket of currencies, more or less, and as a result of that, you get a little bit more depreciation of the RMB against the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the author's forecast and analysis without explicitly conflicting with any alternative perspective.


Passage number 39.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, I need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 40.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  A second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer makes a motion, and Chair Yellen seconds it.


Passage number 41.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Second. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Without objection.  Let’s move along next to our “Economic and Financial Situation.”  Stephanie Aaronson is going to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 42.
 MR. FISCHER.  I am sure I should know this, but which are generally more accurate, the SEP forecasts or the Tealbook projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about the accuracy of SEP forecasts and Tealbook projections.


Passage number 43.
 MR. POTTER. For what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only contains the name "Mr. Potter" without any context or additional information.


Passage number 44.
 MR. FISCHER.  GDP, interest rates, whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "GDP, interest rates, whatever" simply suggests that the speaker is open to discussing any economic indicator or topic.


Passage number 45.
 MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  The answer is they are both equally bad.  [Laughter]  That’s the best answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It is a lighthearted statement followed by laughter, suggesting that the response is meant to be humorous rather than expressing a serious disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 MR. EVANS.  That was so diplomatic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That was so diplomatic" implies that the action or statement being referred to was handled in a tactful or diplomatic manner.


Passage number 47.
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  They are close enough. The Tealbook does slightly better on near-term inflation forecasts, but that’s on a very short-run horizon.  But other than that, they are really about the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that the Tealbook does slightly better on near-term inflation forecasts, but overall they are about the same. There is no opposition or conflicting viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 48.
 MR. FISCHER.  Do we need the SEP when we have the Tealbook. CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, we put the SEP into the public domain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Fischer suggests that the SEP (possibly referring to the Summary of Economic Projections) may not be necessary if they have the Tealbook. However, Chair Yellen disagrees and explains that they have made the SEP available to the public.


Passage number 49.
 MR. FISCHER.  Are we going to put the Tealbook out. CHAIR YELLEN. Yes. But we do that with a five-year lag. President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Both Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen seem to be in agreement that the Tealbook will be put out, although Chair Yellen mentions a five-year lag before doing so.


Passage number 50.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 51.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes.  I have two questions for the staff. One is a technical one on the simulations you reported this afternoon regarding fiscal policy.  Those on exhibit 5 were done with the FRB/US model.  Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Williams, is simply stating that he has two questions for the staff, one of which is a technical inquiry about the simulations reported earlier.


Passage number 52.
 MR. DOYLE.  No, they were done with the SIGMA model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Doyle, states that the SIGMA model is already completed, indicating no conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 53.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 54.
 WILLIAMS. In the Tealbook I thought they were done with the FRB/US model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states the speaker's previous belief that the FRB/US model was completed in the Tealbook.


Passage number 55.
 MR. DOYLE.  That’s right.  As I noted, we are trying to calibrate the response of U.S. GDP in a model that includes a bigger international sector.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a fact or observation without expressing any conflicting opinions or views.


Passage number 56.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 57.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.  That helped because it is a little confusing.  But when I look at the Tealbook assumption about monetary policy in the other advanced foreign economies, except for the United Kingdom, it sounds like you have basically constant, zero, or negative, or whatever interest rates for the next several years. So when you did the SIGMA model simulations of a strong fiscal expansion in the United States, did they incorporate these typically very large multipliers for them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and understanding about the assumptions made in the SIGMA model simulations.


Passage number 58.
 MR. DOYLE.  Yes.  So in this SIGMA simulation, it’s a three-country model, and the United States of course is one of those countries.  The other two countries are split up by thosethat are at the effective lower bound and those that are not.  And those that are not at the effective lower bound, say, for the blue lines, which is the assumed tax cut, get a little bit more than twice the kick because, at the effective lower bound, monetary policy doesn’t respond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation about how the SIGMA simulation works and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 59.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot determine the presence of contention or disagreement without the specific passage you are referring to. Could you please provide the passage so that I can assist you further?


Passage number 60.
 WILLIAMS. And what did you assume about their response.  Did you assume that they would just stay at zero for the next few years.  This matters a lot when you do these simulations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about assumptions made in simulations.


Passage number 61.
 MR. DOYLE.  Yes.  They don’t respond for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a delay or lack of response.


Passage number 62.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the actual passage.


Passage number 63.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.  For the rest of the world, fiscal stimulus in the United States is exactly what the doctor ordered, as they are at the interest-rate lower bound.  I just wanted to make sure that that I had that right. The second question was more of a question to the staff.  When I read Tealbook A, I was surprised.  I actually thought I was reading the September one.  Specifically, on the risks to the GDP outlook, I was surprised the Tealbook took the stand that the risks were still tilted to the downside.  When I look at the SEP responses or when I read the Monday morning briefing, which I know had an alternative view aspect, it seems to me there are now a lot of risks to the upside in terms of fiscal policy, at least in the short term. The way I describe my views, I was “balanced but slightly to the soft side” because of the effective lower bound, but then this shifted me over to “balanced but slightly to the upside” because of the potential for much larger fiscal stimulus than you incorporated.  Could you explain your thinking about why overall the risks were still to the downside on GDP and the upside on unemployment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 64.
 MR. WILCOX. Our views on fiscal policy have changed in the period since the outcome of the election.  Previously, our rationale had included a view that fiscal policy was unlikely to be marshaled heavily in opposition to material weakening in cyclical conditions.  But it remains  the case, in our judgment, that monetary policy, both here and abroad, is probably less well positioned to combat a significant cyclical weakening.  Even with the upward tilt, we think that, if it’s long enough until the next recession ensues, monetary policy in the United States, in any event, will be reasonably well positioned to combat that. But at the moment, on the basis of how much reduction in the funds rate the Committee has judged to be appropriate in the face of an average-sized recession and on the basis of how large the balance sheet is already, the capacity for a material monetary policy easing is now less than has been the case historically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their views and analysis on fiscal and monetary policy, but there is no contradictory or opposing viewpoint mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 65.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage refers to "MR," which is not defined or specified, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 66.
 WILLIAMS.  So, David, that’s exactly what I thought you were thinking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement of agreement or understanding.


Passage number 67.
 MR. WILCOX. I’m expecting that I am walking into something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Wilcox, is simply expressing his expectation about walking into something.


Passage number 68.
 [Laughter] MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only contains a word that represents laughter, which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 69.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes, you are walking into agreement with me, which is probably what you want to run from here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person speaking acknowledges that the other person is agreeing with them and suggests that the other person may have initially wanted to avoid agreement.


Passage number 70.
 MR. WILCOX.  And that makes me—I’ve got my hand on my wallet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about their current situation of having their hand on their wallet.


Passage number 71.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 72.
 WILLIAMS. But seriously, it sounds like it’s not really a near-term kind of assessment. It’s really more of a medium- or longer-term assessment of where we are in terms of—if I can say this—the steady-state balance of risks, because of the lower bound with a low r* and with the global conditions that you anticipate.  The reason I point this out is that it’s not just a statement in a way about, well, right now we’re still at a low interest rate, right now core inflation is 1¾ percent, because even with a 4.2 percent unemployment rate and core inflation roughly at our target, in the Tealbook you still see this as a scenario in which the underlying risks are still to the downside.  So I think that maybe just trying to make that point is helpful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
 MR. WILCOX.  Well, I thought I was with you, but you indicated the opposite conclusion than what I thought.  I thought I heard you just say that our judgment is mainly a medium-term judgment about asymmetric risks, and I would have said the opposite—that my  concern predominantly is a recession, if one were to occur.  We don’t have one in the baseline.   But we’re talking about risks here.  And a recession in the next year or two, before the level of the funds rate has moved further up in its trajectory, would cause greater concern in terms of the ability of the Committee to fight the effects of the recession.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wilcox, expresses a different belief or conclusion from what the other person indicated. He states that his concern is predominantly a recession, while the other person suggested that the judgment is mainly about asymmetric risks.


Passage number 74.
 MR. DUDLEY.  But then some ways, as long as there is a lower bound, isn’t that always the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Dudley is expressing his opinion or making a statement without contradicting any other viewpoint.


Passage number 75.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 76.
 WILLIAMS.  Right.  So that’s what I’m wondering about.  Because you have 4.2 percent unemployment, you’re basically at baseline in that situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is simply stating a fact about the unemployment rate.


Passage number 77.
 MR. WILCOX. Implicit in our projection, I think, is that there are some headwinds and that some normalization of real macroeconomic conditions will occur over the next few years, and that will give the Committee some greater scope to raise the funds rate.  In particular, the Laubach and Williams estimates are that the equilibrium real rate is, I think, in the neighborhood of about ¼ percent at the moment. In the longer run, we now, having incorporated a more expansionary fiscal policy, have it at 1 percent.  And so, as that process of increase in the equilibrium short rate unfolds, that will give a little bit greater scope for an easing of the stance of monetary policy in the future, several years down the road, than would be available today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting projections and estimates regarding the equilibrium real rate and the potential for easing of monetary policy in the future.


Passage number 78.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided. Please provide the passage in question so it can be analyzed.


Passage number 79.
 WILLIAMS.  Well, my concern, obviously, is that that doesn’t occur, right.  When we reduce our balance sheet and everything, we will find that the equilibrium real rate is actually quite low.  But, anyway, this is just a topic for further discussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concern and stating that their concern is a topic for further discussion.


Passage number 80.
 MR. WILCOX.  It certainly is an admissible risk.  It’s not what is envisioned in our baseline. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not show any explicit contention or disagreement between Mr. Wilcox and Chair Yellen. Mr. Wilcox simply states that the risk is admissible but not part of their baseline, and Chair Yellen does not refute or challenge his statement.


Passage number 81.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have several questions, but first I wanted to build on what President Williams said.  I guess my view of the risks to the forecast is that you have a modal forecast and then you ask, where is the skew of the distribution.  It’s not about where the lower bound lies relative to the funds rate.  So I guess I interpret the balance of the risks differently, I think, than you do. I want to ask about two different things.  First of all, what’s the staff’s thinking about what level of knowledge they have to have before they put something in the Tealbook.  I mean, I was really struck by how the FOMC participants handled the fiscal uncertainty in very distinct ways, yet the Tealbook put in 1 percent, starting in the third quarter.  What’s the threshold for deciding to do that relative to deciding to put something in for trade barriers going up or immigration policy being tightened.  I mean, how do you think about that.  Because we have this very specific fiscal forecast, and when I think about the uncertainty associated with it, it’s just enormous in terms of magnitude, timing, and composition.  When does it get over the bar.  What is the decision rule. I guess that’s what I’m asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing some differences in interpretation and asking for clarification, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 82.
 MS. AARONSON.  Yes.  I think there are two issues.  One is, how do we make the decision to put something in.  And then what do we decide to put in.  Because once we decide to do something, it’s a modal forecast, so we need to write down something specific.  In this case we felt that, in view of what had been said during the election campaign and as the Republicans will control the White House and the Congress, there seemed to be some appetite for doing something, and we thought it was likely.  There has long been talk about tax cuts. The Republicans have been in favor of doing that, and it was something that Donald Trump campaigned on.  The House Republicans have had a plan that has been circulated, and it is actually pretty similar in magnitude to what we built into the forecast. I think that there is clearly a huge range of uncertainty.  But a tax cut was under discussion to a sufficient degree that we thought it seemed likely that they would move forward on this.  And, actually, this situation is similar to what happened in the early 2000s when, even before the 2000 election, there was some talk about tax cuts.  And, actually, once George W. Bush came into office, their implementation moved forward pretty quickly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thought process and reasoning behind the decision to include a tax cut in their forecast. They mention various factors that led them to believe it was likely, including statements made during the election campaign, the Republican Party's support for tax cuts, and the existence of a plan by House Republicans. The speaker also references a similar situation in the early 2000s to support their reasoning.


Passage number 83.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the bar is sort of:  That you’re highly confident of direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any element of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 84.
 MS. AARONSON.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the full context of the passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement based solely on the mention of Ms. Aaronson saying "yes." The word "yes" by itself does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 85.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  If you’re reasonably confident of direction, then you’re going to put something in.  Is that a way to think about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a way of thinking about a situation without stating any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 86.
 MS. AARONSON.  I think so.  That’s how I was thinking about our having moved in that direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply describes someone's thoughts about moving in a certain direction.


Passage number 87.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The word "okay" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral word used to express agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 88.
 MR. KAMIN.  Although it’s worth noting, by comparison, on the trade policy front, we are also moderately confident in direction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there is moderate confidence in the direction of trade policy.


Passage number 89.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "right" by itself does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral term that can be interpreted in various ways depending on the context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
 MR. KAMIN.  We expect that if there are going to be moves, they will be toward higher barriers of trade.  But the array of different possible actions that have been floated by the campaign were so disparate, and the magnitude of some of the individual items—reopening NAFTA, declaring China a trade manipulator—were so difficult to gauge that it was very hard even to assess whether there would be actions that would be macroeconomically meaningful, or whether there would just be a series of disparate actions that might have microeconomic effectsbut not amount to a lot on the macro side.  So, for that reason, we chose not to assume trade policies in our baseline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and difficulty in assessing the potential actions related to trade policy. They suggest that the actions proposed by the campaign are disparate and difficult to gauge, making it hard to determine if they will have macroeconomic significance or only microeconomic effects. This suggests a lack of agreement or consensus on the potential impact of the proposed trade policies.


Passage number 91.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Look, I don’t think there is a perfect choice here. I think it is just really a hard choice.  I just wanted to understand the rationale.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that there is no perfect choice and that the decision is difficult. They also mention wanting to understand the rationale, which suggests a desire for clarification or explanation but not necessarily disagreement.


Passage number 92.
 MR. WILCOX. I’d just like to elaborate on one other aspect of how we made the decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 93.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "sure" is often used to express agreement or confirmation, but it does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 94.
 MR. WILCOX. We had to make a decision to do something.  It was clear that financial market participants made a judgment that something is likely to be in the offing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is reflecting on a decision that was made based on the judgment of financial market participants.


Passage number 95.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Agreed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is "Agreed," indicating that everyone has reached a consensus or agreement on a particular topic.


Passage number 96.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think it would have been reasonable, and, indeed, I contemplated seriously putting in front of the Committee a projection in which we had no fiscal adjustment. That would have required a more elaborate process of backing out, on the basis of financial market quotes, some allowance for the response that they had built in, in anticipation of a fiscal policy path that we were not putting in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating a possible alternative course of action that was considered.


Passage number 97.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the passage only contains the word "right" which does not indicate any disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 98.
 MR. WILCOX.  Now, it really was, more or less, a coincidence, not a design objective, that the fiscal package that our analysts proposed to put in does seem to be in pretty good alignment with what most financial market participants are writing down, and that’s documented in the memo that we sent to the Committee.  We look like we’re in the middle of the pack of the various people who were taking a swing at making some kind of judgment.  So to a degree I think that has eased our analytical burden in constructing a coherent forecast that had one story behind it.  But I would say that to help the Committee in its thinking, we put a couple of  alternative scenarios in the “Risks and Uncertainty” section, one with no fiscal package and one that is, roughly speaking, twice as big.  The other percentage point’s worth of GDP comes in the form of government spending rather than tax cuts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that their proposed fiscal package aligns with what most financial market participants are suggesting, and they have included alternative scenarios for consideration.


Passage number 99.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, I thought it was good to do.  I want to switch gears a little bit. I liked the memos on unemployment-rate undershooting.  The one thing they didn’t get into, though, is this empirical regularity, at least for the United States, whose unemployment rate either goes up a little or it goes up a lot, and I think in the memo they talked about different countries’ experiences.  I think there was one country, Canada, for which it did go up 1 percentage point.  But why we see this empirical regularity that the unemployment either goes up a trivial amount, or by a lot, is interesting.  And I guess I’m still curious about the staff’s views on that, whether that is just a statistical anomaly, because we haven’t had that many business cycles, or if there’s something dynamically going on in the economy when the unemployment rate starts to go up that generates those kinds of outcomes.  And the memos were silent on that one question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, I thought it was good to do.


Passage number 100.
 MS. AARONSON.  Yes. A couple of years ago, the staff actually did send a memo to the Committee on that, documenting that empirical regularity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. MS. AARONSON agrees with the statement and provides additional information to support it.


Passage number 101.
  And what it found was that those episodes in which the unemployment rate did go up a lot were often associated with efforts on the part of the Committee to— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Make it so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It discusses the findings of a particular study.


Passage number 102.
 MS. AARONSON. —to make it so, to tame inflation. And I will note that there were a couple of episodes—in particular, the mid-1990s—when the unemployment rate did come up a bit.  But it came up slowly enough that it didn’t trigger this particular stylized fact that you’re referring to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply providing information and acknowledging that the unemployment rate did increase slightly in the mid-1990s, but it didn't have the specific outcome mentioned in the stylized fact mentioned earlier.


Passage number 103.
   VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage as it consists of a single word, "Right," which does not indicate any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 104.
 MS. AARONSON. The stylized fact is something along the lines of, say, a three-month moving average of the unemployment rate, because it’s noisy, rises 0.4 percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the unemployment rate.


Passage number 105.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Or more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 106.
 MS. AARONSON.  Yes, or more, over the course of a quarter or two.  Actually, in the mid-1990s, when we did find one of these soft landings, in fact, it was a soft landing from below, where the unemployment rate, relative to what we thought was the natural rate then, did come up a bit. Clearly, we do think that there are some dynamics, once the economy does start into a recession, that generate these rapid increases in the unemployment rate.  But I wouldn’t say that I thought that the memo precluded the possibility of these other rises.  Actually, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the period for which we sort of identified the interrupted soft landing, the unemployment rate was gradually drifting up.  And we were kind of ambivalent about whether that would have ended in a recession, had not the shock associated with the 1990 invasion of Kuwait occurred.  But that’s another case in which there is some evidence of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing additional information and explaining their thoughts on the topic, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 107.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So, not to put words in your mouth—would you characterize yourself as believing, agnostic, not believing.  Agnostic, is that the way you are on this issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a straightforward question seeking clarification on the listener's beliefs.


Passage number 108.
 MS. AARONSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as no specific opinions or conflicting statements are mentioned.


Passage number 109.
  About whether the unemployment rate would— VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Whether there’s something there or just a statistical artifact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in the passage. It is simply presenting a question and stating the possibility of a statistical artifact in relation to the unemployment rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 110.
 MS. AARONSON.  I think there is something there, in the sense that I think when we enter a recession the unemployment rate goes up quickly, and that’s often when you see it.  But I   don’t think that that precludes the possibility that you can have those gradual increases.  I think we haven’t seen that many of them because we don’t have that many examples, but when we were looking, there weren’t that many examples we identified in which the Committee actually said that it was trying to achieve a soft landing. And so I think it’s just a little unclear.  I don’t think the fact that we view this empirical regularity rules out the possibility that it can also go up gradually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. MS. AARONSON acknowledges that there is a belief that unemployment increases quickly during a recession, but she disagrees that this precludes the possibility of gradual increases. She also disagrees with the assertion that there haven't been many examples of the Committee trying to achieve a soft landing.


Passage number 111.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So to President Rosengren, don’t despair.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  And with that, we turn the floor over to President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of encouragement or support.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 112.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  I want to follow up on Vice Chairman Dudley’s first question and David Wilcox’s response to it.  When I look at the revisions to the projections broken out by change in fiscal assumption and no change in fiscal assumption, I see that the no change in fiscal assumption for the real GDP is zero, minus 0.01, 0.01, and zero.  So, no change from the previous time. But we observe that the 10-year Treasury yield is 70 basis points higher.  Either you had to do the exercise that David talked about, which is to back out all the financial market movements in order to be able to come up with that forecast, or you have to be modeling a very severe monetary policy contraction because that would be the reason you don’t have fiscal policy changing—then, presumably, it’s a monetary policy change. In effect, this would be modeling a very substantial monetary policy tightening with no change in GDP. If this were to be something that were used in the press conference, I think it would lead to a lot of awkward questioning because you’d have to come up with how people actually backed out their expectation of how much the financial market reaction is due to changed expectations regarding fiscal policy.  That could generate a whole host of questions.  I don’t know if you were planning on using this in the press conference.CHAIR YELLEN.  I wasn’t planning on using this, but I was planning on, if asked about the SEP, saying that some participants included a fiscal policy change and some didn’t, and that you could note that even when there were assumptions of a fiscal policy change, the changes in the federal funds rate paths were modest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rosengren is expressing concern about the modeling assumptions and potential awkward questioning that could arise if the Federal Reserve were to use certain projections in a press conference. Chair Yellen acknowledges this concern but states that she was not planning on using those particular projections.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  But then, for those that didn’t, you have to explain how you had a 70 basis point increase in the 10-year Treasury yield that is not due to changed expectations regarding fiscal policy.  I mean, you do observe that the long rate has gone up a lot.  So how do you explain the way people actually came up with their assumption about no fiscal policy change using actual rates. CHAIR YELLEN.  And you have essentially a 25 basis point increase in the path, which is, as I understand it, similarly to the effect of this fiscal policy package on r*, and a larger, I guess 40 basis point, move in the 10-year Treasury rate.  Part of this occurs by term premiums and part by moves in the funds rate.  I think that’s consistent with the projections that you see here.  Now, there’s a larger market reaction, but there is a lot of uncertainty and we don’t know what assumptions have gone into that—maybe a larger fiscal package than the staff have penciled in here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Mr. Rosengren is questioning how the increase in the 10-year Treasury yield can be explained if it is not due to changed expectations regarding fiscal policy. He is suggesting that people came up with their assumption about no fiscal policy change using actual rates.

Chair Yellen responds by mentioning a 25 basis point increase in the path and a larger 40 basis point move in the 10-year Treasury rate, which she attributes to term premiums and moves in the funds rate. However, she acknowledges that there is uncertainty and they don't know what assumptions have gone into the larger market reaction. This disagreement or uncertainty suggests that there is contention in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 114.
 MR. WILCOX.  President Rosengren, I’m not sure that enough information in the SEP process was collected to answer your question because the 10-year Treasury rate is not specified. So, in principal, we don’t know how participants handled that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wilcox disagrees with President Rosengren's assertion that enough information was collected in the SEP process to answer a specific question. Mr. Wilcox argues that the 10-year Treasury rate was not specified, which means they do not know how participants handled that aspect.


Passage number 115.
 MR. POTTER.  Also, we didn’t really know why the 10-year Treasury rate was so low. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kashkari, then President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement between Mr. Potter and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 116.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Just one quick response—and then I have a question—which is, I didn’t necessarily assume that the market moves are going to be substantial.  And when we get more information, the markets may just reverse themselves. So that wasn’t a factor in my SEP submission.  And I put in no fiscal policy change. Onto my question to the staff:  In the alternative scenarios, I was surprised that the banking crisis in Europe was the most negative of all the scenarios.  The scenario that I worry about is one in which multiple banks get into trouble at the same time or a bank were to fail. But the scenario you picked was one bank doesn’t fail and goes to resolution.  And that alone was enough to trigger a negative scenario for the United States.  I wonder if you could expand on that, and explain that mechanism.  And then, how worried are you about this, in light of what we’re seeing in Italy and potentially what we’re seeing in Germany.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 117.
 MR. KAMIN. Brian.  Unless you’d rather I respond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kamin is simply addressing someone named Brian and offering to respond to something.


Passage number 118.
 MR. DOYLE.  No, if you want to go ahead, please.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Doyle is giving permission for someone to proceed with their plan.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 119.
  [Laughter] MR. KAMIN.  I’ll take this one.  First of all, just comparing the two international alternative scenarios, the banking crisis one was, I think, marginally more consequential for U.S. variables than the emerging market turmoil one, but not by a great deal.  And, as with most simulations, that reflected in some sense what we put into the simulation, and the inputs included some downward pressure on U.S. confidence and spending and upward pressure on spreads, as the reverberations arising from the banking crisis in Europe spread out through the global economy.  We assume that those will be greater in the case of this advanced-economy banking crisis than would be the case in the event of an emerging-market heightened-financial-stress situation. Now, going to the issue of comparing the effect of one bank having a messy resolution with, let’s say, some genuine bankruptcies of some smaller banks, our view was that the scenario in question was one in which if a very large, very systemically important, one of the most  systemically important banks in the world located in the northern part of Europe was forced into resolution, and potentially if that resolution was handled in a somewhat messy way, leaving a lot of uncertainty and leading to a sort of reverse-moral-hazard play in which some investors were surprised that they were not bailed out fully, then that situation, due to the highly interconnected nature of the bank, its many counterparties, and its prominence in the global financial system would lead to a lot more contagion and reverberations than, for example, the other very prominent banking situation right now in Europe, which is about Italian banks. Now, you can tell a story in which a resolution in bankruptcy of Monte dei Paschi— which is the current Italian bank that’s the most exposed to problems—with subordinated debt holders being bailed in and with it also being handled poorly so you get queues of people waiting to get their money out, which is seen on nightly television all around Europe, also leads to banking distress.  But the fact is, right now the resolution of that bank and maybe some other smaller Italian banks is a pretty well-anticipated development.  Our sense is that even if that bank gets resolved, which seems to be the most likely situation at present, it would take place without the shock to financial markets and the reverberation through a network of counterparties that would be the case in a messy resolution of a much larger and more systemically important bank. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is disagreement or contention. The speaker is arguing that a messy resolution of a large, systemically important bank would have more severe consequences than the resolution of smaller banks.


Passage number 120.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have several questions. First of all, on the net effect of fiscal policy, panel 6 on exhibit 2 shows a net boost to real GDP of 45 basis points.  And my question is, is that the total over the three-year period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on a specific point.


Passage number 121.
 MS. AARONSON.  The cumulative effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 122.
 MR. BULLARD. And I presume this is not statistically significantly different from zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a presumption about the statistical significance and does not propose any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 123.
 MS. AARONSON. Given our staff forecast errors, you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. MS. Aaronson is simply asking for clarification or confirmation about the staff forecast errors.


Passage number 124.
MR. BULLARD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 125.
 MS. AARONSON.  Yes.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Ms. Aaronson agrees with a statement or idea. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 126.
 MR. BULLARD.  It’s estimated to be a small positive effect, but sort of statistically speaking, you can’t say too much.  Okay.  Not to mention model uncertainty, which would be gigantic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating that there is a small positive effect, but due to statistical limitations and model uncertainty, it is difficult to make definitive statements.


Passage number 127.
 MR. WILCOX.  I think that’s correct.  I mean, it has to be correct.  On the other hand, if we were to apply the standard that we would only build in effects that were deemed to be statistically significant, we’d have remarkably little to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for a certain viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 128.
 MR. BULLARD.  I totally understand.  I just want to put in perspective what we can say about future fiscal policy in a realistic sense, in view of model uncertainty and statistical uncertainty, and I think the answer is “not much, but we do the best we can.” On “Understanding Movements in the Dollar,” exhibit 6, if I’m reading the graph on the real dollar—panel 2—correctly, we’re now assuming a bigger appreciation of the dollar.  We’ve talked about this before, and I’ve questioned this before. We’re saying that the dollar is going to appreciate because we’re going to surprise the world with more aggressive monetary policy than it currently expects.  And yet when I look at panel 4—“Implied Federal Funds Rate Path”—in Mr. Potter’s exhibit 1, I see that the market now expects a much higher federal funds rate path— in fact, much closer to the Committee median—than before. So it seems like if anything, on the basis of that, we should be expecting less appreciation of the dollar, not more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, questions the assumption that the dollar will appreciate due to more aggressive monetary policy. He points out that the market expects a higher federal funds rate path, which would suggest less appreciation of the dollar.


Passage number 129.
 MR. DOYLE. In panel 2, if you look at those black solid and black dashed lines of the current and previous forecasts of the broad dollar, most of the difference is the jumping off point—that is, the higher dollar that we’ve already seen.  And I realize that it’s almost imperceptible, but if you look at those two lines you’ll actually see that the solid line—the  forecasted line—is actually slightly flatter because market expectations and the staff’s implied path of the policy rate have come closer together. There’s less surprise built in, so this has flattened out the path a little bit.  But there’s still some surprise. And that gets you an upward tilt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the relationship between the current and previous forecasts of the broad dollar, noting that the forecasted line is slightly flatter due to market expectations and the staff's implied path of the policy rate coming closer together. The mention of "some surprise" and "upward tilt" does not indicate contention or disagreement, but rather adds additional information to the explanation.


Passage number 130.
 MR. BULLARD. Yes. Look at the implied federal funds rate path.  According to this picture, almost nothing in 2017, very little by the end of 2018—almost all of it is out in 2019.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating the implied federal funds rate path without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 131.
 MR. DOYLE. In Simon’s presentation, what he’s comparing is the market-implied path and the SEP path for September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating what Simon is comparing in his presentation.


Passage number 132.
 MR. BULLARD.  It’s changed a little bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The speaker is making a statement about something being changed, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 133.
 MR. DOYLE.  That’s right.  And what I was referring to was the staff’s assumption regarding policy.  And I believe there was a Taylor-rule panel that I feel like I passed through at some point in time.  Is it that one right there, Don.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is only a statement by Mr. Doyle about his own experience and the panel he believes he passed through.


Passage number 134.
 MR. BULLARD.  So it’s the appreciation of the dollar because the Committee is going to follow the Taylor (1999) rule—as opposed to the SEP path, which tells you what the Committee participants actually think they’re going to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement describing the Committee's decision-making process and the potential impact of the dollar's appreciation.


Passage number 135.
 MR. DOYLE. That’s what’s implied in the staff projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply states what is implied in the staff projection.


Passage number 136.
 MR. BULLARD. Isn’t this a little bit off in comparison with what we should be doing. I mean, you’re projecting increases in the dollar that are affecting the whole milieu of how we’re going to look at the future evolution of the international economy and the U.S. economy.  And it’s all based on what you think the Committee is going to do versus what the Taylor rule says the Committee should do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is just a statement made by Mr. Bullard expressing his concerns about the projections and the potential impact on the economy.


Passage number 137.
   MR. KAMIN.  Well, arguably.  I mean, let’s put it this way—our job is to present an internally coherent forecast to you.  And it’s one in which, basically, market expectations interactwith monetary policy.  If we think that markets are going to respond to a monetary policy path that they do not anticipate, that should have implications for the dollar.  Those changes in the dollar should feed back to the real economy and, in turn, to monetary policy.  It sounds very circular, and that’s because it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no specific contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their job of presenting a forecast that considers how market expectations and monetary policy interact. They also mention the potential feedback loop between changes in the dollar, the real economy, and monetary policy. The speaker acknowledges that this explanation may sound circular, but there is no direct contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 138.
 MR. BULLARD.  No, I understand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard states that he understands something.


Passage number 139.
 MR. KAMIN.  And that’s why, basically, we need to produce a forecast that takes into account all of the different reactions of the variables to everything else, and what we deliver is what happens after the market has settled down and we’ve converged in our projection to a consistent set of projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the process of producing a forecast that considers the reactions of variables to one another, and the goal is to deliver a projection after the market has settled down and a consistent set of projections has been reached.


Passage number 140.
 MR. BULLARD.  I guess another way to do it would be to take a market-based forecast of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating one possible method for forecasting the dollar.


Passage number 141.
 MR. KAMIN.  We could do that.  I think that’s the IMF strategy, in terms of some of its projections.  We can do that.  That would mean that as we think about monetary policies as we go forward and consider changes in those monetary policies and their effect on the economy, then, by assuming a market path for the dollar, which is invariant to our monetary policy, we’re basically shutting down a transmission channel of monetary policy.  And that should lead, I think, to a less reliable forecast of the economy, or at least one in which you would have to think more about, “This is what the path of the economy will be if the dollar is fixed according to the market path.  What will it be if we think the dollar responds to monetary policy.”  In some sense, it would make your job more complicated in interpreting our forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any significant disagreement or contention. Instead, it is a discussion of potential strategies and their implications.


Passage number 142.
 MR. BULLARD.  I guess what I’d like to stress to the Committee is that, when we look at these dollar exchange-rate forecasts, they are forecasts made on the basis of the Committee actually following a Taylor (1999) rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their desire to emphasize a point to the committee, without any indication of disagreement or contention with anyone else's views or ideas.


Passage number 143.
   MR. LAUBACH. An inertial Taylor (1999) rule.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a rule without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting statement.


Passage number 144.
 MR. BULLARD. I have one more question on the “Understanding Movements in the Dollar” exhibit, panel 3, “Dollar Response to Monetary Policy Surprises.” Is the staff rule of thumb a fitted regression line or is that just a line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question asking for clarification on whether the staff rule of thumb is a fitted regression line or just a line. It does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 145.
 MR. DOYLE. That particular line is just a line. We have shown the Committee, I think in the chart show in June, what the fitted line has been historically and what it’s been more recently.  Since 2010, that line is steeper line.  If you go back historically, the line is shallower.  There’s a lot of uncertainty depending on the time period you choose to look at.  And what we’ve done, I think, over the past year is move that rule of thumb up away from the longer historical period toward a more recent experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining that there is uncertainty depending on the time period chosen to look at, and that they have adjusted their "rule of thumb" based on more recent experience.


Passage number 146.
 MR. KAMIN. But the rule of thumb is informed by regressions that we run of exchange rates on changes in interest rates during, before, and after FOMC events.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is presenting a statement made by Mr. Kamin regarding the rule of thumb. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 147.
 MR. BULLARD.  It’s informed, but it’s not really based on these data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the information shared is informed but not entirely based on data.


Passage number 148.
 MR. KAMIN.  It actually is based on these data, because these are all the FOMC dates since 2010.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating a fact about data without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 149.
 MR. DOYLE.  That’s right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "That's right" indicates agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 150.
 MR. KAMIN.  And that, in fact, comprises our sample.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 151.
 MR. BULLARD.  So it is a fitted line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a fact about a fitted line.


Passage number 152.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes. Brian.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 153.
 MR. DOYLE.  No. Using this period, a fitted line would actually be steeper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a straightforward explanation and does not show any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 154.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So if it was a fitted regression line, then there would be some confidence bounds surrounding it. It looks to me like the red dot is actually within those bounds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply describes the observation of the red dot being within the confidence bounds of a fitted regression line.


Passage number 155.
   MR. DOYLE. The red dot is certainly within the confidence bounds.  I mean, the confidence bounds would actually be outside of the presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Doyle is explaining that the red dot is within the confidence bounds and clarifying that the confidence bounds would be outside of the presentation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 156.
 MR. BULLARD.  You’ve spent a lot of time in the presentation saying, “Well, this was outsized, looked outsized” or something, but it’s not really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is expressing disagreement with the speaker's statement that something "looked outsized," suggesting that it is not really the case.


Passage number 157.
 MR. DOYLE.  It’s outsized relative to just the point estimate of the rule of thumb.  But it is true, the confidence bounds are huge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the size of the confidence bounds, which is not a matter of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 158.
 MR. BULLARD.  Just look at these blue dots here.  You’ve got a lot that are just as big as the red dot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply pointing out that there are many blue dots that are similar in size to the red dot.


Passage number 159.
 MR. POTTER.  The dollar did move a lot, a few days after the election.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the movement of the dollar after the election.


Passage number 160.
 MR. BULLARD.  No, I understand the dollar moved a lot after the election, but not really that much outside of other events or other surprises that have happened.  That’s what this would say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating his understanding of the movement of the dollar after the election and other events.


Passage number 161.
 MR. DOYLE.  All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 162.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Any further questions.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The individuals are simply acknowledging the statements and asking for further questions.


Passage number 163.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  Just a brief, partial defense of the staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It mentions a defense of the staff, but there is no indication of any opposing or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 164.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not provided, so we cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 165.
 WILLIAMS.  Watch your wallet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply advises someone to be cautious about their wallet.


Passage number 166.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  This is a man-bites-dog story here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 167.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  President Bullard was inviting us to compare the net effect of fiscal policy with the staff’s forecast error. But I think that a part of the staff’s forecast error that’s attributable to shocks that occur in the economy after the forecast is written is irrelevant to the question of the difference between two alternative futures, with and without some assumed intervention. Perhaps some error in that estimation of that difference might be attributable to  uncertainty about coefficients, perhaps model uncertainty.  But, surely, the forecast error attributable to shocks that are realized is irrelevant to that.  So I think it’s an open question as to whether this is within error bands or outside of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and discussing different factors that could contribute to forecast error.


Passage number 168.
 MR. BULLARD.  What would you say about model uncertainty, President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a question asked by Mr. Bullard.


Passage number 169.
 MR. LACKER.  Model uncertainty.  Models are uncertain.  [Laughter] That’s a blank check, right. I mean, unless you actually calculate it with a certain set of models.  And I’m not sure they ever show us those things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing uncertainty about models in a joking manner.


Passage number 170.
 MR. BULLARD.  My statement was that we can’t tell with very much accuracy what the improvement would be, and I guess I stand by that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Seeing no more questions, I suggest we begin our economic go-round, have a few presentations, and then take the coffee break later on.  Let’s start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements made by Mr. Bullard and Chair Yellen do not contradict each other or present opposing views. They are simply discussing the accuracy of predicting improvements in an unspecified context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  There have been substantial changes in financial markets since our previous meeting.  The 10-year Treasury yield has increased more than 60 basis points, the dollar has appreciated, and the stock market has reached new highs. I must admit, however, that despite all the excitement in financial markets since the presidential election, my economic forecast has responded with more restraint, in part reflecting my skepticism that fiscal and regulatory policies are likely to be as transformative as some of the markets seem to be anticipating.  Like the Tealbook, I expect the economy to significantly overshoot full employment.  In my forecast, the unemployment rate declines to 4.2 percent by 2019, well below my estimate of the natural rate of unemployment of 4.7 percent.  This occurs despite my assumption of an increase in the federal funds rate at this meeting and about four more per year over the forecast horizon.  If I took literally the fiscal policy as announced by theincoming Administration, it would call for much more monetary policy tightening.  However, reflecting my skepticism about the speed of adopting new fiscal policies and the uncertainty regarding the magnitude of fiscal policies that will actually be passed by the Congress, I continue to assume a relatively gradual increase in the federal funds rate.  Should my skepticism prove wrong, we will need to tighten more quickly. Because of the overshooting of full employment in my forecast, I was quite interested in the staff memos discussing earlier periods of overshooting.  My own conclusion after reading the memos is that significantly overshooting full employment in the United States almost always results in adverse outcomes. Because there is uncertainty about the exact value of the natural rate, there is merit in probing how low the natural rate might be.  At the same time, it is important to weigh the potential costs of an unemployment rate that falls well below all of our estimates of what is sustainable in the long run.  The countervailing costs and benefits are the reason it can be useful to probe the lower natural rate of unemployment, but remaining more than ½ percentage point below our best guess of the natural rate for a prolonged period of time would be more like a plunge than a careful probe. My forecast envisions a very gradual decline in the unemployment rate, reaching 4½ percent by the end of 2017.  However, with the unemployment rate for November already at 4.6 percent, there is considerable risk that we will overshoot full employment by even more than I forecast by the end of next year.  If it becomes clearer during the course of the year that this is occurring, I would expect monetary policy to need to tighten more quickly. It is worth noting that there is increasing evidence of tight labor markets. The share of the unemployed who have been unemployed for less than 27 weeks is now near historical lows.  In contrast, the share of unemployed workers who have been unemployed longer than 27 weeksremains fairly elevated. The general scarcity of workers should encourage employers to hire those who have experienced long-duration unemployment.  In support of that notion, we have seen some increase in the probability of reemployment for long-duration workers, although such hires likely come with additional training costs. In view of the general tightening of labor markets, employers are likely to bid more aggressively for those workers with the appropriate skill set. Indeed, there is already evidence— for example, the wage increases apparent in the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker—that labor costs are starting to rise.  Anecdotally, employers in our region increasingly complain about a shortage of workers.  This is certainly consistent with the low unemployment rates in many parts of New England, with the unemployment rate in Massachusetts now at 3.3 percent and in New Hampshire now at 2.8 percent.  These employers increasingly mention a shortage of workers limiting growth opportunities for their firms.  Consistent with the perception of tightening labor markets and the data in the Wage Growth Tracker, these firms are increasingly talking about offering higher wages and increasing their budgets for workforce development. In sum, my forecast involves an assumption of the same withdrawal of stimulus as the Tealbook. The recent increase in longer-term rates and the dollar appreciation are already doing some of our work for us.  Even so, there is a significant risk that fiscal policy will be even more expansionary than I have assumed. As a consequence, I see the risks associated with my GDP forecast as weighted to the upside and the unemployment rate weighted to the downside.  Although there is a great deal of uncertainty concerning fiscal policy, even with an unaltered post-election fiscal policy assumption, my forecast has the unemployment rate falling well below its full-employment rate and inflation somewhat overshooting our inflation target by the end of   the forecast, albeit with a very different outlook for longer-term rates and the dollar.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, expresses skepticism about the transformative impact of fiscal and regulatory policies, stating that he does not believe they will be as significant as the markets anticipate. He also raises concerns about the potential adverse outcomes of significantly overshooting full employment and warns that if his skepticism about fiscal policies proves wrong, there may be a need for more rapid monetary policy tightening. Additionally, he highlights the increasing evidence of tight labor markets and employers bidding more aggressively for workers with the appropriate skill set, indicating that there is inflationary pressure building. Overall, Mr. Rosengren's views suggest disagreement with the prevailing optimism in financial markets and a cautious stance on the potential risks and challenges ahead.


Passage number 172.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 173.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the past couple of months, labor markets and the path of inflation have continued to progress pretty much as anticipated in many forecasts, including that of the Tealbook, and I found that fact in and of itself to be significant. With respect to inflation, the stabilization of prices in 2016 that was anticipated at the end of last year by many around this table has been realized.  As expected, the effects of the big energy price decreases are tailing off, and unlike a number of occasions over the past several years when one factor holding down inflation faded only to be replaced by another, it does not appear that any new disinflationary impulse is currently in play. I’m a little less sure as to whether the effects of a strengthened dollar will also recede, as there seems to me some risk of   further strengthening.  But, even if that happens, I doubt it would be of the magnitude of the earlier episodes. And, actually, I now see the risks to inflation as slightly to the upside—with the possibility that the production cuts announced by international oil producers will hold, and with some chance that fiscal policy in the next year or two will become significantly more stimulative. With respect to labor markets, I have found that our focus on slack over the past couple of years—slack that was not reflected in the unemployment rate as such—has served us well and has served the country and the economy well.  But, as I said at the previous FOMC meeting, I thought we might be getting within sight of the point at which labor market slack had been largely taken up.  Data in the intervening two months have reinforced that view.  As one of our staff economists nicely put it, “Nearly all labor market indicators are either strengthening or are already strong.”  Some of the strong numbers obviously include job creation, which, although at a slightly lower level, continues to be substantially above the number needed to create a net increase in employment relative to the labor force.  Job openings continue to be high, and layoffs continue to be low.  Some numbers, which are already good, are strengthening even further, such as first-time claims.  Now, although wages stalled in the November report, this seems to me the classic case of not wanting to read too much into one data point, particularly against the backdrop of several previous months’ indications of some improvement in wages generally. With respect to indicators of slack, the unemployment rate has finally declined, and obviously it declined by a substantial amount.  I don’t think the magnitude of this decrease is going to hold fully, as the staff projection has suggested, but some of it is very likely persistent, breaking the year-long streak of significant labor market improvement unaccompanied by a decline in the unemployment rate. Other indicators of slack, such as part-time for economic reasons and the share of the long-term unemployed, have continued their gradual improvement. The decrease in the labor force participation rate in the November report is consistent with, though certainly doesn’t firmly establish, the possibility I mentioned at the previous meeting that the labor force participation rate has returned to our best estimate of its trend and, at least on the basis of past experience, may thus not be expected to increase above that level in anything but a transitory fashion.  Of course, we’ve adjusted our estimates of trend over the past several years and may again, so I don’t want to place too much weight on this factor, but it is something concrete suggesting that slack reduction may be nearly complete. With respect to wages, I’ll just note in passing again that I continue to regard the labor market as a surrogate for output constraints rather than relying on a direct Phillips-curve unemployment–inflation relationship, but I still do find wages to be relevant. Here, I do want to note my uneasiness with explanations of wage increases tied too predominantly, in the short to medium term, to productivity limitations.  I think that this approach tends to underplay the fact that labor prices, like other prices, are set at the intersection of a demand curve and a supply curve, and although the demand-curve shape is determined in significant part, though not exclusively, by productivity considerations, the supply curve is not.  And I think too much focus on productivity also tends to make the causation one way, whereas my sense is that productivity improvements sometimes come precisely because of upward pressure on wages that motivate firms to invest in productivity-enhancing technologies or production techniques. So as you can tell, in general, my observation for this FOMC meeting is “the shoe that didn’t drop,” which is to say that things have kind of continued as expected.  And at least with respect to labor markets, as I suggested last time, I think we’re now well within the point at which the elimination of slack is in view.  The second point I was going to make at some length was the uncertainty attending the outlook, but I’m going to truncate my comments substantially because Governor Fischer made most of those points.  If I can do this for purposes of the minutes, I would just second everything Governor Fischer said about the fiscal situation, the fact that there are other policies being discussed, and how there are upside and downside risks.  It was for that reason, incidentally, that I regard fiscal policy as an upside risk of somewhat indeterminate magnitude, but I did not incorporate any assumed changes into my baseline outlook.  And my view is that for purposes of our policymaking, we will have plenty of time over subsequent meetings to incorporate likely effects of a range of policies as they become more concrete. And, finally, Madam Chair, to add my two cents’ worth to people’s comments on the Aaronson et al. memo, I have to say my interpretation of Stephanie Aaronson’s briefing and the related staff memo was that the strongest conclusion was that the most important factor is luck. That is to say, if you are in a circumstance in which you are trying to either execute a soft landing or deal with inflation, the strong conclusion was that there’s likely to be some sort of shock that you haven’t anticipated.  And then the question is:  Is it a shock taking you in the direction you would want it to take you or is it reinforcing the direction that you’re trying to reverse. I don’t know that that actually provides an enormous amount of policy guidance.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, is providing an analysis of labor markets and inflation that aligns with his previous expectations and the forecasts of others. He also agrees with Governor Fischer's points on the uncertainty of the outlook.


Passage number 174.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In my remarks today, I’m going to cover pre- and post-election sentiment of District contacts, anecdotal feedback received from contacts on the state of the economy, and my forecast. My District’s directors and contacts notably changed their tune on economic prospects from pre-election to post-election.  The election’s results seem to have produced a pickup in optimism based on expectations of an unwinding of regulation, lower corporate and individual taxes, and fiscal stimulus. Most contacts confirmed ongoing tightening of labor markets.  Both employers and staffing agencies reported they continue to struggle to fill positions.  We heard that low-wage workers are increasingly difficult to recruit in certain urban and resort locations because of shortages of affordable housing.  Staffing agency contacts indicated that many employers are  willing to take longer to fill positions rather than significantly raise starting wages.  In order to fill vacancies for low-skilled positions, some firms said they have eased job specs and verification requirements such as drug tests. We heard opinion to the effect that firms may still be holding the line on starting wages to preserve their salary structures but are, in effect, incurring the costs of labor shortages by way of reduced worker quality and increased training costs.  A further point on wage pressures:  Anecdotal reports indicated that the overall rate of merit programs remained stable in the 2½ to 3 percent range.  However, the Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker that measures average wage growth of the same individuals accelerated to a pace just under 4 percent in the latest November reading.  This is close to pre-recession readings. The labor market looks about as tight as it was before the recession. Regarding my forecast and SEP submission, my real GDP growth forecast is little changed from the previous SEP and from the outlook that I put forward during most of this year. I had real GDP growing at close to 2 percent per annum over the forecast horizon and for the longer run.  However, my risk assessment associated with that outlook has shifted to the upside.  The upside risk I perceive reflects accelerating business fixed investment and does incorporate upside risks resulting from changes in fiscal policy.  Like Governor Tarullo and others, my baseline projection does not incorporate fiscal policy effects.  My thinking is that it’s too early to tell the size, timing, and characteristics of any fiscal package.  And those details, obviously, matter a lot. Regarding business fixed investment, my baseline forecast continues to anticipate solid BFI growth over the forecast horizon.  Previously, I was worried about my BFI assumption being too optimistic and, therefore, treated this business fixed investment baseline assumption as carrying downside risk.  At the time of earlier forecasts, my assumption regarding BFI growth was not much supported by incoming data and was not getting much support in the form of anecdotal inputs received from business contacts.  However, in the most recent intermeeting cycle, we heard indications of accelerating capital spending intentions from a number of contacts.  Most contacts cited market demand and revenue growth as the drivers of their revisions to cap-ex plans.  In that vein, taking into consideration the likelihood that the economy is arguably near full employment, analysis performed by my staff points out that in earlier periods in which the unemployment rate reached or fell below its natural rate, there has been a sizable pickup in the pace of business fixed investment.  This evidence buoys my confidence in the view that BFI growth will accelerate. My baseline forecast also sees headline and core PCE inflation reaching rates consistent with the Committee’s target in 2017 and holding near target thereafter.  Consistent with treating the economic growth effect of fiscal stimulus as an upside risk, I see some upside risk for inflation. Even though I believe an agnostic view of the economic effect of expected fiscal stimulus is the right position at this time in a baseline forecast, it’s my view that the possibility of fiscal stimulus reduces the need to think about running a high-pressure economy, dependent solely on monetary policy.  My thought process is that we appear to be very close to meeting our policy objectives, there is not much remaining resource slack, and there is reason to be confident that we will be closing in on our inflation objective relatively soon.  With a prospect of substantial fiscal stimulus, I am inclined to be somewhat cautious in weighing the degree of monetary accommodation.  I will add that an upside scenario resulting from new fiscal measures could present communications challenges for the Committee, even in the near term, in my opinion.  And I’ll expand on this thought in the next round.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing information and analysis without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 175.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Economic conditions in much of the 10th District remain a bit soft as employment growth lags the nation as a whole.  The outlook for the agricultural sector continues to be negative despite the boost in demand from abroad for soybeans, which made an outsized contribution to third-quarter GDP.  Some of the headwinds in other sectors of the regional economy, however, look to be dissipating.  Our manufacturing- and service-sector surveys both show signs of improvement, and District energy firms appear to have adjusted to lower oil prices.  One report pointed to familiar telltale signs of boom times in the Denver real estate market.  The online Denver Business Journal has resumed a feature called “Crane Watch,” watching the number of cranes across the sky. In general, our directors and other labor and business contacts noted more optimism as they anticipate and assess the effects of potential fiscal policy changes. A notable exception was health care and nonprofits, for which our contacts expressed heightened uncertainty and concern about such changes.  Unlike the Tealbook, I did not incorporate assumptions about potential fiscal policy changes into my SEP, on account of the considerable uncertainty about the nature and timing of any such changes.  As a result, my outlook for the national economy is little changed and I continue to assume GDP growth near 2 percent over the next few years.  Of course, the prospects of tax cuts and more fiscal spending seem likely to pose upside risks to my GDP growth and inflation forecasts over the next few years. I expect further improvement in the labor market to support household spending and economic activity.  The Kansas City Federal Reserve’s labor market conditions index shows thatboth the level of activity and the momentum in the labor market increased last month.  Consumer confidence remains high and has continued to increase over the past few weeks.  In addition, the personal saving rate remains high by historical standards, even as housing and equity market wealth post near-record highs. Like others, I appreciated the Board staff memos on overshooting full employment and the various approaches they examined for determining economic slack.  And I would offer just a couple of observations from their analysis. First, in assessing labor market slack, I’d be interested if geography is an important aspect for this discussion.  For example, as I looked at states in my own District, the unemployment rate in New Mexico has never really recovered since the crisis—it’s lower, but only modestly, and still well above pre-crisis levels.  For this particular geography, I see the issues as structural and complex. For a state like Oklahoma, the unemployment rate increased a full percentage point over the past year.  The issue here reflects a sectoral shock—namely, to energy—which has resulted in some reallocation in labor and capital.  I see this shock as largely cyclical and unlikely to generate longer-term structural issues.  Finally, Colorado’s unemployment rate remains near historically low levels and likely below its state-specific natural rate of unemployment.  These three examples highlight the difficulty of gauging overall slack, as each local labor market faces a different set of issues. A second observation on these memos goes back to a question from our previous meeting about historical experience in undershooting the natural rate of employment.  Here, I found the staff’s broad conclusions of the memos did not necessarily diminish my own concerns about this strategy.  Namely, it poses risks, it has uncertain benefits, and, even as policy is calibrated to achieve a soft landing, it requires, as Governor Tarullo and the staff noted, a bit of luck.Regarding inflation, I continue to view current rates of inflation as consistent with our mandate for price stability and with PCE inflation continuing to make progress toward the Committee’s 2 percent objective.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly provides information and observations about economic conditions in the 10th District and the speaker's outlook.


Passage number 176.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The economy has made further progress toward our objectives since the November meeting.  Core inflation has ticked up; the headline unemployment rate has declined; and GDP growth has picked up since midyear, which should support continued further tightening in labor markets and progress toward 2 percent inflation. The November jobs report confirms that the labor market continues to tighten, albeit at a slower pace than over the past few years.  Over the past 12 months, the unemployment rate has now declined 0.4 percentage point compared with an average annual rate of 0.9 percentage points over the preceding four years, which reflects both a welcome outperformance of labor force participation relative to trend as well as a slower pace of job creation. We are seeing rising real wages and improving job prospects.  Surveys indicate that households are finally seeing jobs as plentiful, and firms are finding it harder to fill positions—results that have typically been seen at or above full employment.  The unemployment rate at 4.6 percent is now a bit below most estimates of the natural rate and seems to be on a path to reach the low 4s. There is some evidence now of emerging supply-side constraints, particularly in surveys of jobs hard to get and hard to fill.  On the other hand, wages and compensation more broadly have yet to show more than a gradual halting increase. The interesting and excellent staff memo on undershooting the natural rate finds limited evidence on the question of whether such an undershooting should be expected to have highly persistent or even permanent positive supply-side effects.  The evidence is limited for one  reason:  Because undershoots are rare. The record, however, is clear that prolonged high unemployment can have adverse supply-side effects as workers lose skills and attachment to the labor force. From 2009 through 2013, labor force participation suffered a deep cyclical decline.  The exact levels of the natural rate and the trend participation rate are always uncertain.  That uncertainty is even higher than usual, in view of the unique characteristics of this cycle. So, as long as inflation is below target, economic growth is barely above trend, and wage increases are moderate, we have time and space to allow the unemployment rate to decline a bit further without too much risk of getting “behind the curve.” I assume that this will be happening in a context of a rising policy rate and gradually tightening financial conditions.  There will be time to react if we see upside surprises in economic growth or inflation.  A modest undershoot will also help ensure that inflation does move up to our 2 percent target. The section of the undershooting memo addressing the Phillips curve was quite interesting in this regard.  It does not seem likely to me that the inflation dynamics of the 1970s—with high persistence and a steep Phillips curve—are likely to reemerge unless the Committee manages to convince the public that we are okay with inflation moving well above target and staying there.  But we have reached the point at which inflation risks are balanced, and I am open to the idea that a sustained period of time well below the natural rate could risk undesirably high inflation.  That will be a risk to watch. The recent increase in market-based measures of inflation compensation is a welcome development.  Expectations remain below our target of 2 percent after accounting for the wedge between CPI and PCE inflation.  In addition, these readings are still below where they were in early 2014 or during a pre-crisis period when inflation was close to our target.  All told, the move up in inflation compensation supports confidence that inflation expectations are well anchored.As hoped, economic growth has picked up during the second half of the year.  With solid increases in PDFP, real GDP is poised to expand at a moderate pace.  Consumption accounts for the lion’s share of the domestic demand growth and will likely post moderate gains, thanks to solid increases in income.  The pace of business investment remains a concern, as nonresidential investment has not increased, on net, in two years, and that weak performance is undoubtedly contributing to the poor productivity outcomes. Fiscal policy seems set to take a more accommodative turn, and I find the staff’s deployment of a hypothetical tax cut amounting to 1 percent of GDP to be a reasonable placeholder.  A fiscal policy initiative of that nature would, at a minimum, provide a near-term insurance policy against downside risks, including weak economic growth, low inflation, and global risk events. I did assume such a tax cut in my baseline, but I didn’t take it into real outcomes.  I just took it as an insurance policy or a reason for greater confidence in the baseline. In sum, we are essentially at full employment.  The economy is expanding moderately and there is poised to be a more expansionary fiscal stance, which is likely to put upward pressure on output growth, employment, and inflation while also reducing downside risks.  A somewhat tighter monetary policy is likely to be needed.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement regarding the current state of the economy and the potential actions that may be taken in response.


Passage number 177.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Before the recent OPEC agreement, we had been expecting that global oil production and consumption would get into rough balance by the first half of 2017.  On the basis of that analysis, we had expected record excess inventory levels would begin to decline by mid-2017, and we believed that the price of oil, while volatile, would continue to firm. Obviously, the recent OPEC agreement, which called for a cut in crude oil production of approximately 1.2 million barrels per day and would reduce output to approximately 32 million barrels per day during the first half of 2017, will have an effect on our forecast.  There are also hopes—which look like they’re materializing—for an additional 600,000 barrels a day by non-OPEC countries, half of that coming from Russia.  If this agreement is actually complied with—something that many doubt—it will accelerate this entire balancing process. Even before this, the rig count had begun gradually increasing during the past few months, and we believe that with a price of oil between $55 and $65 per barrel, the rig count could increase substantially.  We’re now on the precipice of that, and you could see substantial cap-ex flowing into this sector. If you look ahead, though, over the next three to five years, our view at the Dallas Federal Reserve is that if there’s a price risk in the oil market, it is likely to be to the upside.  This is primarily because of the lack of new investment and long-lived oil production projects over the past few years.  In the medium term, new supply is going to have tocome from increased production from shale, which has a very short decline curve.  Our forecast also incorporates our expectation that global oil demand will continue to grow, on average, to 1.3 million barrels a day in 2017. In terms of the District, due to the stabilization of the oil sector as well as continued diversification of the Texas economy, Texas job growth has improved from less than 1 percent in the first half of 2016.  We now expect job growth in excess of 2 percent in the second half of 2016 and a similar rate of job growth in 2017.  I would note, as many others have, that respondents to our most recent business outlook survey reported a significant uptick in their assessments of current conditions and the outlook, commenting on a more business-friendly environment for taxes and regulation.  At this point, we would say that risks to the District economic growth forecasts are to the upside. Regarding the nation, as many of you have discussed, we are making progress toward reaching our full-employment goal.  I find myself increasingly focusing on measures of employment among prime-age workers, which continue to lag.  And I’ve particularly been focusing again on the correlations between employment levels, participation, and levels of educational attainment.  Analysis of levels of educational attainment versus participation and employment make me believe that even with beefed-up focus on vocational training as well as other programs that improve educational attainment levels, the labor force participation rate is likely to decline over the next 10 years to below 61 percent primarily due to demographic trends. Based on this, I believe that current rates of real GDP growth, though quite sluggish by historical standards, will certainly be sufficient to continue to take any slack out of the labor market and lower the unemployment rate. I’ll come back to that in a moment. Regarding inflation, the Dallas the year-over year rate for the trimmed mean has been running steadily at 1.7 percent so far in 2016.  It has now ticked up to 1.8 percent in the most recent reading, and this trend continues to give me confidence that we’re going to reach our 2 percent objective over the medium term, if not sooner. As I’ve talked about many times before, I’m continuing to work with my team to try to understand the effects of aging demographics, increasing levels of technology-enabled disruption, increased globalization, and particularly high ratios of government debt to GDP, which at a minimum appear to me at least not to be sustainable, even before considering new policies that may increase debt-to-GDP.  We’re certainly going to be highly vigilant in assessing the possible effects of significant potential changes to regulatory, fiscal, structural, and other government policies.  For the time being, like Governor Powell, I’ve factored in these possibilities as an insurance policy in our forecast.  Having said that, in discussions with our business contacts, we continue to see, as I said before, a sharp improvement in the level of optimism.  We’re going to have to see what is actually implemented in terms of policy, but I do believe that the probability of overshooting our full employment and inflation objectives has increased. Time will tell, but I’m certainly now much more forward leaning regarding this possibility. Two final comments. in view of all the discussion about trade and immigration, I thought I’d comment on those issues.  We obviously have a very strong relationship between the Dallas Federal Reserve and the Central Bank of Mexico, as well as with the economic and political leaders of that country, and we do a substantial amount of research on trade and immigration.  Let me share a couple of thoughts.   First, on trade, Texas is now the largest exporting state in the United States, and our largest trading partner is Mexico.  We estimate that trade between the United States and Mexico, measured in 2015 dollars, has grown from approximately $159 billion in 1994, which was around the time of NAFTA, to approximately $532 billion in 2015.  I see President Williams looking at me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis on various topics such as oil production, job growth, inflation, and trade. The speaker does mention potential risks and uncertainties, but there is no obvious dissent or disagreement presented.


Passage number 178.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or stating any opinions that could lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 179.
 WILLIAMS. We may need some fact checking on this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply suggests that fact-checking might be necessary.


Passage number 180.
 MR. KAPLAN.  We may debate that, yes. [Laughter]  Well, let me get to the other parts of our analysis.  Approximately 55 percent of U.S. trade with Mexico is imports to the United States, and approximately 45 percent is exports from the United States to Mexico.  Approximately 81 percent of Mexico’s exports, by our measure, went to the United States.  What is interesting to us and what we particularly focus on is that approximately 40 percent of U.S. imports from Mexico represents content that originates in the United States—that is, it’s the result of production partnerships, integrated logistics, and supply chains. In our view, these partnerships have improved Texas’s competitiveness, as well as U.S. competitiveness.  We believe that these arrangements have the effect of increasing employment in Texas as well as in the United States, and if these arrangements did not exist or were disrupted, we would likely lose some of these jobs to other countries, particularly in Asia. Because this aspect of trade is very critical to U.S. competitiveness, we’ll continue to focus heavily on it. Regarding immigration, we estimate that the United States is home to more immigrants from Mexico than any other nation, by our count approximately 12 million.  Mexican-born immigrants account for approximately 27 percent of all immigrants living in the United States and 55 percent of immigrants living in Texas.  Our research suggests that over the past two years, net immigration flows to the United States from Mexico have basically been close to zero.   Some people think those estimates are wrong, that they’ve been running negative.  And the reasons for that are improved economic conditions in Mexico, industrial reform, creation of a beefed-up social safety net, and smaller family size. We estimate that immigrants generally and their children have made up a substantial portion—in our estimation, more than 50 percent—of the growth in the U.S. labor force over the past 20 years.  Let me stop there.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 181.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’m looking at panel 2 here.  I’m trying to understand the graph.  This looks like there would be a surprise due to our announcement tomorrow because this suggests that there would be three rate increases, is that right. Am I reading this correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is simply seeking clarification and understanding of the graph.


Passage number 182.
 MR. LAUBACH. The first thing I would note is that these are based on—I’ll give the technical term—“risk-neutral probabilities,” that is, there is no term premium adjustment.  So the levels are little hard to interpret. The point I tried to make is that the expectations obtained using this measure seem to be in a place similar to where they were a year ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining that the levels are difficult to interpret due to the use of risk-neutral probabilities and that the expectations obtained using this measure are similar to those from a year ago.


Passage number 183.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, your comment was that in 2004, at the time of the tightening, they expected 200 basis points, eight moves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 184.
 MR. LAUBACH. Yes, if you take this exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 185.
 MR. BULLARD. And now they’re expecting 50 basis points, two moves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely states that they are expecting a certain number of basis points and moves.


Passage number 186.
 MR. LAUBACH.  According to this metric.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting viewpoints or statements. It simply introduces Mr. Laubach and mentions an unspecified metric.


Passage number 187.
 MR. BULLARD. And the SEP says three moves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is stating a fact or piece of information.


Passage number 188.
 MR. LAUBACH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 189.
 MR. FISCHER. They haven’t seen the December SEP. CHAIR YELLEN.  But, President Bullard, you’re saying it will be a surprise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are simply stating their observations and opinions.


Passage number 190.
 MR. BULLARD.  It would be a surprise.  That’s what I’m saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Bullard is expressing his view that something would be surprising, without any explicit sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 191.
 VICE CHAIR DUDLEY.  Last year we showed four, and it stayed at 50, though.  So it wasn’t like they moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 192.
 MR. EVANS.  And they were surprised; they came down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply describes a situation where someone was surprised.


Passage number 193.
MR. LAUBACH.  I’d like to reemphasize the difficulty about term premiums.  We are looking here at term premiums at the one-year-ahead horizon, basically. I think in 2004 we would have probably said these would be small and positive.  At this point, there is a great deal of uncertainty on this.  Nonetheless, both term structure models and surveys indicate that actually there are negative term premiums, even at short horizons.  That would mean that if you corrected for that, as I do in the upper-left panel, if you take those estimates at face value, you really would think that what you read here as 50 basis points might well be 75 or more.  So I’d be cautious in interpreting the level as meaning that their expectation is too high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the difficulty and uncertainty surrounding term premiums and cautioning against interpreting the level as meaning that the expectation is too high.


Passage number 194.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  I have one other question on the bottom-left panel, “Federal Funds Rate Paths under Optimal Control.”  The black line never goes below the green dotted line.  If I simulate this out 10 or 15 years, do they eventually cross, so that the effect is eventually neutral. Or is this just a permanent effect coming from fiscal policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification on the scenario being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 195.
 MR. LAUBACH. Eventually, they would converge.  They would not reverse the order, so the integral under the black line will be larger than the integral under the green dotted line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 
There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the statement "They would not reverse the order" contradicts the preceding statement "Eventually, they would converge." These two statements present opposing views on the order of convergence, indicating disagreement.


Passage number 196.
 MR. BULLARD.  I noted that it takes quite a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 197.
 MR. LAUBACH.  True. This is, again, the FRB/US model, with slow-moving dynamics and a lot of foresight built in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the FRB/US model.


Passage number 198.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage contains a conversation where Mr. Bullard thanks Chair Yellen and Chair Yellen responds. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage.


Passage number 199.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thomas, do you calculate what r* is at each point along these paths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question about a calculation.


Passage number 200.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Along which paths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints. It is a straightforward statement about paths that someone named Mr. Laubach is traveling along.


Passage number 201.
 MR. FISCHER.  Let’s look at the bottom left, at the fifth panel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 202.
 MR. LAUBACH. We can always take two paths and compute the difference in the real federal funds rate that would keep the output gap closed at a point in time.  For example, in Tealbook B, we reported this time around that, by that metric, r* has been revised up about 30 basis points from last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a scenario and discusses a metric without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 203.
 MR. FISCHER.  In this chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the full passage or context, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the mentioned chart.


Passage number 204.
 MR. LAUBACH. This here is a little different because here we are applying optimal control to two different baselines.  But basically the calculation is very similar, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the calculation is similar in two different scenarios.


Passage number 205.
 MR. FISCHER. Along these paths, are we at 2 percent inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Fischer, is simply asking a question.


Passage number 206.
 MR. LAUBACH. The deviation of inflation from baseline under any of these paths is very small—which means that inflation converges to 2 percent in a very similar way to how it does in the baseline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
The passage states that the deviation of inflation from the baseline is very small, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 207.
 MR. FISCHER.  And we’re at full employment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "And we're at full employment" is stated as a fact without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 208.
 MR. LAUBACH. Optimal control, as you know, with the equal weights loss function basically allows for much less undershooting of the unemployment rate than the baseline does.  So that’s what we show in Tealbook B—the standard loss function.  The reason why these paths are higher than in the Tealbook baseline is that optimal control is, if you want, fighting the unemployment undershooting much more strongly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply explains that optimal control with the equal weights loss function leads to less undershooting of the unemployment rate compared to the baseline. It also mentions that this is because optimal control is addressing the issue of unemployment undershooting more aggressively.


Passage number 209.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions.  Okay.  Seeing none, why don’t we adjourn and resume our deliberations at 9:00 a.m. [Meeting recessed]December 14 Session CHAIR YELLEN.  Let’s get started. Before we start our go-round, I’d first like to call on Thomas to follow up on a point from yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple exchange between individuals in a meeting, with one person asking for questions and the other person suggesting a time to reconvene.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 210.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Lacker asked yesterday about the consistency between the staff’s estimate of the unrealized gain position in the SOMA portfolio at the end of November, which was reported on page 57 of Tealbook B as $121 billion, and the data Simon showed in panel 14 of his handout.  As mentioned in Tealbook B, the number reported there was a preliminary estimate.  And, in the period since the Tealbook closed, we have received new data that show that the unrealized gain position at the end of November was $81 billion—$40 billion lower than the preliminary estimate recorded in Tealbook B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Laubach is explaining that there was a discrepancy between the staff's preliminary estimate of the unrealized gain position in the SOMA portfolio and the data Simon showed. The new data received after the Tealbook closed showed a lower unrealized gain position, which contradicts the preliminary estimate recorded in Tealbook B.


Passage number 211.
 MR. LACKER.  Great.  Thanks, I appreciate that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Let me next call on David Wilcox to discuss data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple conversation between two individuals in which there does not appear to be any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker expresses his appreciation, and Chair Yellen calls on another person to discuss data.


Passage number 212.
 MR. WILCOX.5  Thank you.  First, I’d like to call to your attention briefly the sheet of additional labor market statistics that are in front of you. Last night, President Kashkari usefully called to my own attention the fact that, through a series of inadvertent circumstances, we hadn’t provided information on a demographic breakdown until now.  With regard to unemployment rates by race or ethnicity, it’s interesting to note that the unemployment rates for blacks, Hispanics, and whites are all back, essentially, where they were in the fourth quarter of 2007.  However, in level terms, of course, there remain wide differences in unemployment rates across these groups. With regard to this morning’s retail sales release, our preliminary assessment is that the news is just a little softer than we had expected. The portion of retail sales that the BEA uses for 5 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 5).   estimating real PCE increased 0.2 percent in November, which was one-tenth less than we had expected, and there was a downward revision of one-tenth to this category of sales in October. All told, though, this is a small forecast error.  And, relative to our expectation, we would take about one-tenth off our estimate of real GDP growth in the fourth quarter, leaving our estimate of fourth-quarter GDP growth at about 1½ percent. CHAIR YELLEN. Are there any questions for David. [No response] Okay.  Then why don’t we begin our go-round on policy, starting with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and giving their assessment of the situation.


Passage number 213.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  The market fully expects an increase at this meeting, and our statement at the November meeting set the stage for an increase.  Failure to proceed to take action at this meeting would seriously undermine our efforts to communicate clearly our intentions and the rationale for policy action. As I noted yesterday, my SEP submission has four increases in the federal funds rate in 2017, giving a pattern quite similar to the Tealbook’s federal funds rate path for next year.  With the unemployment rate falling well below my estimate of full employment and inflation only somewhat below our 2 percent target, we should be indicating that the baseline case for monetary policy will be for normalizing at a gradual but more regular pace. At this time, my preferred path would involve tightening at every other meeting.  Indeed, while fiscal stimulus would have been much preferred earlier in the cycle, positive fiscal surprises will likely require us to normalize monetary policy even more quickly.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 214.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 215.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  As I noted yesterday, it seems likely that greater fiscal stimulus will boost aggregate demand and inflation toward the end of next year and beyond.  Of course, there remains a great deal of  uncertainty about the size, the composition and timing, and the effects of fiscal stimulus.  In addition, there are potential changes for trade, immigration, and regulatory policies. But all of that can be set aside.  Today’s decision stands on its own.  On the basis of past progress on our goals and the intermeeting data, there’s already compelling evidence in hand to support this move.  We’ve reached full employment with continued solid momentum, and we’re poised to run a hot labor market for the next couple of years at least.  Inflation has also picked up and is closing in on our target.  Against this background, the rate increase in alternative B is an appropriate small step in the process of removing monetary accommodation. In light of the uncertainty about future fiscal and other policy actions by the next Congress and the incoming Administration, we should stand pat for the time being in terms of the forward-guidance language in paragraph 4.  If fiscal policy ends up being appreciably more expansionary, at future meetings, we may need to modify the “only gradual” phrase describing the likely pace of rate increases.  In that regard, I found the proposed language in alternative C replacing “only gradual” with “additional gradual” unsatisfactory and potentially confusing, especially since “additional” may sound like a continuation of our practice of one rate hike per year.  This discussion of how best to modify the language can wait until we have greater clarity on fiscal and other policies next year.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. William expresses support for alternative B and provides reasoning for this support. He acknowledges uncertainty about fiscal stimulus and potential policy changes, but states that these factors should not affect the decision at hand. He also suggests that the language in paragraph 4 regarding forward guidance should remain unchanged for now. While he disagrees with the proposed language in alternative C, he does not argue against the concept of modifying the language in the future. Overall, there is a sense of agreement and rational explanation in this passage.


Passage number 216.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support an increase in the funds rate target and alternative B.  I expect that’ll be the consensus view, so I’m going to talk about the future path of policy.  The current draft of alternative B continues to predict only gradual increases in the federal funds rate.  I think there are now good reasons to question whether we should continue to have as much confidence that rate increases will be gradual.   For some time now, I’ve argued that we should pay heed to the fact that our policy benchmarks are so far above the current level of the funds rate target.  I applaud inclusion of the Taylor rule prescriptions in the handout yesterday and hope we can include Taylor rule calculations, such as appear in the Tealbook, in the Monetary Policy Report to the Congress next time we draft that.  Those benchmarks continue to rise, and increasing the funds rate target at a pace as gradual as two or three quarter points a year is unlikely to close the gap at a satisfactory rate, in my view. There’s little doubt we’re at full employment, and, as a result, I think it’s increasingly important for us to pick up the pace of tightening.  This argument is reinforced by the memo on unemployment-rate undershooting.  As I noted yesterday, in the only domestic episode featuring a soft landing, the FOMC raised the funds rate 300 basis points.  The four previous undershoots in the historical record resulted in inflation increasing, sometimes quite sharply.  I think it’s noteworthy that the 1994 episode has been identified as the first instance of preemptive rate increases. Another factor establishing our credibility in 1994, arguably, was that the new Administration at the time chose to respect the Fed’s monetary policy independence.  This was something of a break from the practice of previous Administrations, going back to Lyndon Johnson’s in 1965, of being willing to exert pressure on the Federal Reserve to adopt more stimulative policies. I thought Vice Chairman Dudley was right yesterday to point out that our risks are likely to involve compromises to our credibility, and that we’re not really modeling those in a coherent way.  Those are outside our usual modeling practice.  An Administration that’s willing to discard the 25-year-old precedent of White House respect for the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy independence strikes me as capable of contributing to a loss of credibility.  The abrupt shift in   circumstances since our November meeting suggests skepticism about gradualism as well. While the details of fiscal policy are obviously pretty uncertain, the indications are that fiscal policy will be, if anything, more expansionary, perhaps significantly more than we expected at the November meeting. There’s no question that greater fiscal stimulus implies higher real interest rates.  There was some discussion of that yesterday.  Indeed, in the Tealbook, the staff has marked up its assumed path of r*.  And if the fiscal policy outlook leads to expected higher real interest rates, which I think are clearly warranted, then our estimates of r* should increase.  That implies we’ll have an even larger policy gap to close over time, so we will need to move even more rapidly. The post-election movement in market readings on future inflation also argues for less gradual rate increases.  Of course, these market reactions aren’t independent of anticipated fiscal policy.  But our expectation that rate increases would be only gradual was grounded in part on low readings on inflation and inflation expectations and the sense that the downside risks were elevated.  Inflation has moved up over the course of the year, and, since the election, there’s been a significant increase in financial market measures of expected inflation.  As I noted yesterday, evidence from options and term premiums indicates that investors believe the downside risks to inflation are diminishing and the risks to the upside are becoming more salient.  It’s as if the inflation outlook is in the process of “coming about,” to use a nautical term. So I think a strong case can be made that we may soon need increases in our policy rate that do not qualify as gradual.  And, if so, I support President Williams’s suggestion that we start thinking about how to back away from the “gradual” language in our statement.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, expresses his support for an increase in the funds rate target and alternative B. He argues that there are good reasons to question the belief that rate increases will continue to be gradual and advocates for a faster pace of tightening. He also discusses the potential impact of fiscal policy on interest rates and inflation expectations. Overall, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 217.
  MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I favor alternative B.  As I tried to explain yesterday, my views on labor markets have evolved over the past several months because of what I’ve seen happening in labor markets.  I think a number of metrics assessed individually— and, certainly, labor market conditions as a whole—suggest that we’re fairly far along in the process of removing slack.  I think some slack probably does remain in the labor market, but, even after today’s rate increase, we will still have an accommodative monetary policy, which I think will appropriately continue to support further increases in jobs and wages. I’m a little less certain about the inflation target.  My SEP actually doesn’t get to 2 percent during the course of the next four years.  But, as I indicated yesterday, conditional on that projection, I think the risks are on the upside.  So I should say that I’m not today going along reluctantly. I actually am convinced that this is the right policy move. As we go forward, I think that, for now, a continued posture of gradualism is the right position for us to take. Continuing considerations include the fact that we are still relatively close to the effective lower bound.  And, as many of us have been saying for some time now, the resulting asymmetry in the tools available to us pushes me a little bit, at least, toward being cautious about rate increases, because anything that would increase the likelihood of a recession seems to me to present more problems. On external risks, I think President Williams said yesterday that there are some upside risks internationally, with a prospect of somewhat better economic growth in some countries. But those will be pretty incremental upside risks, if they are realized.  I think the downside risks that are out there would be risks of something substantially more negative—whether it be European banking problems, which produce stress in financial markets around the world; China facing significant problems because of its debt overhang; or any number of geopolitical  circumstances that could go negative over the course of the next year or so.  Those seem to me to pose negative risks of a magnitude that is substantially greater than the nontrivial likelihood of some upside surprises on underlying economic growth trends. Moreover, as Governor Fischer and others explained in some detail yesterday, the uncertainty on what will happen—not just with fiscal policy, but also with the policies of the incoming Administration and the Congress more generally—seems to me to counsel some patience before we decide that there’s going to be fiscal stimulus and therefore, in an anticipatory fashion, a need to act on it. With respect to the memo by Aaronson and others, I’ll just say again that I think a fair reading of that memo suggests only two strong conclusions: first, it depends a lot on underlying circumstances; and, second, it depends a lot on the luck of the external shock, if I can put it that way.  And I would have loved to have drawn the conclusions that I was leaning toward 6, 8, and 10 months ago.  I don’t think it fairly supports that.  I don’t think it supports conclusions in the other direction, either—that the risks of overshooting are high, and that we have to move in a very strong preemptive fashion. Having said all of that, I do think the decisions we’ll have before us could get more difficult fairly quickly. While the lower-bound and external risk considerations may remain, we may see a continued tightening of labor markets and may see some pickup in inflation, which just, in the internal considerations of the economy as we’re currently observing it, might counsel further rate increases.  And, obviously, if we see some clarification of policy directions that would suggest further stimulus, I do think the effort to balance those two sets of considerations will, for me at least, become more difficult and might—and I underline “might”—require at   some point the change in the language that President Williams was referring to.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a speech by Mr. Tarullo expressing his views and opinions on the current state of the labor market and the risks facing the economy.


Passage number 218.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  The unemployment rate will likely reach the Committee’s estimate of its longer-run level this quarter, and core PCE inflation has moved up.  With tightening labor market conditions and rising inflation, achieving a sustainable pace of employment growth and stable prices requires gradually raising the federal funds rate. Soft landings are uncommon.  In the few successful examples noted by the Board staff’s analysis, monetary policy acted preemptively, beginning to tighten before the unemployment rate fell below the natural level.  Today the unemployment rate has already reached most estimates of the natural rate, with a negative real federal funds rate and extremely gradual moves to normalize monetary policy. As we look to our policy choices next year, the risk that a more expansionary fiscal policy could necessitate a faster-than-expected pace of policy tightening warrants consideration in two ways, I think.  First, thinking about the March SEP, I wonder if we should consider adopting a common assumption for fiscal policy.  This could help the public interpret the projections and could make it easier to explain changes in the SEP at the press conference. Along these lines, adding some measure of uncertainty, as the subcommittee on communications discussed in its recent memo, might also be helpful. Second, we might have to reframe our strategies regarding the balance sheet.  Under current fiscal policy, we project a gradual path of the federal funds rate and have associated it with a large balance sheet.  However, a higher path would bring forward the time when policynormalization is well under way.  To better manage expectations, the Committee might clarify what “well under way” means.  In my view, we will be well under way when the target range of the funds rate reaches between 1 and 1¼ percent. The views of other participants could be captured by including a question in the next SEP about the appropriate level of the federal funds rate to cease reinvestments.  This would be similar to the previous special question about the date at which participants judged that an increase in the funds rate would first become appropriate. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B, sharing their analysis of the current economic situation, and suggesting possible considerations for future policy choices.


Passage number 219.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Reflecting my view that there remains, essentially, no slack in the labor market and the observation that inflation continues to move closer to target, I am very supportive of alternative B. Financial markets are expecting an increase in rates and have essentially priced in a removal of policy accommodation. Regarding the forward-guidance language, I worry that markets have come to interpret “gradual” as meaning one or perhaps two rate hikes per year. A look at the federal funds futures market lends some credence to my concern, and I think it would be useful to start contemplating a different characterization of future policy, as others have said.  In light of the overall weakness of trend growth that I alluded to yesterday, as well as the increased economic uncertainty, I am in favor of removing accommodation quite gradually.  But I am worried that our language may suggest that this means fewer rate hikes than many of us view as appropriate.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Harker is expressing his support for alternative B and his concern about the interpretation of "gradual" rate hikes. He also mentions his preference for removing accommodation gradually and his worry about the language suggesting fewer rate hikes.


Passage number 220.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I think a 25 basis point move today is appropriate in light of the continued gains in labor markets, the modestimprovement in the inflation outlook, and our communications that virtually promised a rate increase this year unless there was a clear softening in economic activity. I also believe it best that we continue to communicate our view that conditions are likely to evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the funds rate.  Paragraph 4, as written, still works for me. Although I believe the odds of returning to the effective lower bound have diminished somewhat, these risks are still notable and likely to remain so for some time.  So the zero-lower-bound risk management still argues for a shallow policy rate path and instilling strong confidence that the FOMC will live up to our symmetric inflation objective. As I mentioned yesterday, my current appropriate policy rate path has two 25 basis point increases in 2017.  I hope, as we move through next year, that private-sector fundamentals will remain sound and we will have a better idea about the fiscal policy picture.  And, down the road, we could see changes in the outlook that would dictate a steeper path of rates that I would readily support, but that’s for future meetings.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and explains their reasoning behind this support. They also mention their views on the appropriate policy rate path and their hopes for the future.


Passage number 221.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  It’s December, and it’s an FOMC meeting.  Am I the only one who has a sense of déjà vu around the table.  [Laughter] In light of the progress made toward our goals and the medium-run outlook as well as the risks associated with the outlook, I support a 25 basis point increase of the federal funds rate target at this meeting, and I believe economic developments make a compelling case for this change even apart from a higher likelihood of some fiscal policy stimulus to come. I can support alternative B as written.  At this point, it seems sensible to make few changes in the statement.  Indeed, on that score, I’d make one suggestion.  In the penultimate line in paragraph 1, why not just add the word “considerably” rather than also changing “but remain low” to “but still are low”. So that part of the sentence would read “Market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up considerably but remain low.” In paragraph 3, I am interpreting the change from “further improvement” to “further strengthening” as a change from a normative locution to a positive one.  That makes sense at this point, with the unemployment rate near, or even below, many estimates of the full-employment rate.  This language acknowledges that if the labor market gets too overheated, this shouldn’t be interpreted as an improvement.  But I do think this change is pretty subtle, so I’m not sure how it’ll be interpreted. As I said, I understand the argument for making few changes in the statement today, but I do think there are looming policy and communications challenges we’ll need to confront sooner rather than later.  Like some others, I think we do need to find a way to step back from the “gradual path” language.  As I recall, the language was introduced to signal that, when normalization started, we didn’t anticipate raising rates at each and every meeting, as we did from mid-2004 to mid-2006.  That’s still true, but I don’t think “gradual” is necessarily being interpreted in the same way anymore.  Indeed, the issue has been that the market has been anticipating a much shallower path of policy than we are.  If the public’s new interpretation of “gradual” is one hike per year, as we did for the past two years, then the path we anticipate is no longer gradual. Moreover, there are a number of risks that, if realized, might entail a different policy rate path from that we currently anticipate.  I suspect that over the next two years, we may need to change our forecasts and our anticipated policy rate path more frequently than we’ve done in the past couple of years. For one thing, some clarity concerning fiscal and other economic policies will likely be forthcoming.  We will need to incorporate that information into our outlook for themedium run. We’ll also need to assess what, if any, effect these policy changes might have on longer-run structural aspects of the economy, including productivity growth and the equilibrium interest rate. Like others, I found the Board staff’s memo on soft landings quite interesting.  They were able to find a couple of examples, but the common characteristics were, one, that monetary policy was preemptive and began to tighten before the unemployment rate fell below real-time estimates of the natural rate; and, two, that the shocks that hit the economy once it slowed were either small or beneficial. The unemployment rate is now below most estimates of the natural rate.  So, arguably, it is difficult to characterize our current policy stance as necessarily preemptive, and I don’t think we can or should count on positive shocks.  This suggests we need to remain vigilant against falling “behind the curve.” We may need to be less inertial than we’ve been.  We need to be open to 50 basis point increases if necessary and to ending reinvestments sooner than currently anticipated. At the same time, there are downside risks, too, including the prospect that financial market participants’ expectations could swiftly shift if they’re disappointed by the set of policies coming from the Administration and the Congress, as well as the possibility of increased geopolitical tensions. The aim is not to offset fiscal policy.  Instead, the aim is to position monetary policy to achieve our dual-mandate goals.  This necessarily means taking into account how the economic environment, including fiscal policy, is changing to the extent that those changes affect our ability to achieve our goals.  For us, it seems important to me that we continue to de-emphasize discussion of short-run fluctuations in our communications and emphasize that our policy choices are driven by our assessment of what policy is appropriate to achieve our dual-mandate goals.  If I’m right that our anticipated policy rate path may need to change more often, then we face a challenge in communicating that these changes are being driven by a systematic assessment of progress relative to our goals and not because we are reacting to short-run fluctuations in the data and behaving in a discretionary manner without a framework, of which we are increasingly being accused. It’ll be helpful for us to continue to work toward clarifying the degree of uncertainty regarding our current assessment of the likely future path of policy, in view of the uncertainty associated with the forecast and the inevitable shocks that will hit the economy. Now, because I’ve stopped reading and watching the news [laughter]—that happened about a month ago—I have some time on my hands, so I’ve been reading a bit of Federal Reserve history.  Let me continue by pointing out something that former Chairman Alan Greenspan once said about monetary policy:  “There is no alternative to basing actions on forecasts, at least implicitly.  It means that often we need to tighten or ease before the need for action is evident to the public at large, and that policy may have to reverse course from time to time as the underlying forces acting on the economy shift.  This process is not easy to get right at all times, and it is often difficult to convey to the American people, whose support is essential to our mission.” Greenspan made these remarks 20 years ago, almost to the day, and they strike me as just as relevant today as they were then. Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for a 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate. They also make suggestions for slight changes in the statement and discuss potential challenges and risks that may need to be addressed in the future. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict in their remarks.


Passage number 222.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I believe that it’s appropriate for the Committee to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting, and I support alternative B as written.   Employment growth continues strong, unemployment is at or below the natural rate, and output is expanding moderately and above potential.  Inflation is gradually increasing a little faster than forecast.  Market-based measures of inflation expectations have moved up, and we haven’t been this close to our dual-mandate target since the mid-2000s and, before that, the mid-1990s. I revised up my SEP path of the federal funds target slightly, with three increases next year instead of two.  That seems to me to be justified by the strengthening of the unemployment gap and the performance of inflation. The expectation of more accommodative fiscal policy should also support economic growth and ensure against weaker outcomes. My SEP path is still a gradual one that accommodates an extended period of unemployment in the mid- and low 4s, a bit below current estimates of the natural rate—what I would call a warm labor market. I see this as appropriate, and, in fact, I had hoped that we would get to this point.  But getting here now means that the risks are two sided.  Depending on their size and other characteristics, fiscal easing measures could put further downward pressure on unemployment and upward pressure on inflation and economic growth. We’ve also had extraordinary changes in asset prices and significant improvements in survey measures of business and household confidence, and it may well be that all of these factors come together to make a case for a faster pace of tightening and appropriate language changes in the statement.  That case is yet to be made, but it’s certainly plausible that it may be made.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 223.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the policy action in alternative B and the suggested statement with its minimal changes in guidance. In view of   uncertainty about the timing of the next step, I think it would be a good idea not to provide much forward guidance at this stage.  Lying low is, in my opinion, the right communications posture coming out of this meeting. However, as I prefaced in my comments in the economics go-round, there could be communications dilemmas building.  At some point over the coming months, the Committee will likely have to consider alternative scenarios along the lines of the “Larger Fiscal Stimulus” scenarios presented in the Tealbook. There are, of course, many “what-ifs” at this point, but, with a little more clarity, I’m thinking it would be a good idea to discuss and anticipate how the Committee might respond under various circumstances.  A steeper path of the policy rate, at least steeper than reflected in this meeting’s SEP, may be called for because of realized or projected fiscal policy effects.  There is a realistic chance a steeper path of the policy rate will be interpreted, perhaps appropriately, as offsetting fiscal policy.  Much could be made of this seemingly adversarial stance of policy. The Chair commented yesterday on how she plans to deal with questions in the press conference.  For my part, I think it would be wise to get ahead of this contingency and to make efforts to explain the FOMC’s and monetary policy’s relationship to fiscal policy. In light of the difficulty that the Committee has experienced with crafting a statement that adequately captures the consensus thinking about future policy, this anticipatory communication probably would best be done in speeches and the Chair’s subsequent press conferences. As I leave the Committee, I’d like to offer one more piece of free advice for your future assessments of the economy.  It seems to me that a lesson of the recent electoral cycle and the outcome of the election is the public’s differential experiencing of the economy across geography, the urban–rural spectrum, and cohorts defined by educational attainment.  I applaud the addition of the content in the staff briefing for these meetings that shows employment and unemployment differences by ethnicity, as we got this morning.  It strikes me that this reporting can go further in order to ensure the Committee has a good grasp of the ground-level effects of its policies in several dimensions. This is not to suggest that monetary policy can or should take on distributional questions—it’s just to suggest that knowing more about the texture of economic experience across the population would be constructive.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 224.
 MR. FISCHER.  She said, “I will. . . note that many proposals for taxes and spending are currently being discussed, but there is considerable uncertainty about what the Congress may eventually pass, and that we do not intend to act preemptively based on guesses about future policy. . . .  Moreover, I will stress that fiscal policy is just one of many factors that influence real activity and inflation and, thus, the course of monetary policy over time.  Instead I hope we will stress that we intend to carry out the task that the Congress has assigned to us, the pursuit of maximum employment and price stability, and we’ll adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in response to all of the factors that affect the economic outlook.”  Thank you, Madam Chair.  And thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. Thank you very much.  And, Governor Fischer, regarding the questions that you posed, did you want to have a response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Mr. Fischer is in agreement with the position of Chair Yellen.


Passage number 225.
MR. FISCHER.  I think they’re questions we need to discuss at more length as we think through the policymaking process and what relationship there is between what’s in Tealbook B and what we actually decide. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer is suggesting further discussion on certain questions, and Chair Yellen acknowledges his point.


Passage number 226.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  I continue to believe that removal of accommodation should be done gradually. I submitted three increases in the federal funds rate in my SEP submission for 2017.  Having said that, I think the risk of undershooting our unemployment objective and overshooting our inflation goals has increased.  And if this materialized, it’s going to have implications for monetary policy in 2017, including not just the federal funds rate, but also decisions about how we manage our balance sheet. As we head into 2017, I intend to be patient and careful not to prejudge what nonmonetary policies might be enacted, instead allowing these policies to unfold and assessing them as the process moves forward.  I am struck by the breadth of the potential policy actions that could happen in the next year—changes to the Affordable Care Act; changes to taxes, both individual and corporate; changes to infrastructure spending policy; regulatory changes; changes in fiscal policy management decisions, including decisions involving potentially terming out Treasury maturities; and changes in trade policy, immigration policy, and foreign policy generally.  I think the ultimate mix and timing of these policy actions may lead to some unpredictable and surprising outcomes. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both Mr. Kaplan and Chair Yellen express their support for alternative B and discuss potential risks and policy actions for the future, but there is no disagreement between them.


Passage number 227.
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The past few months have seen important progress toward our goals.  The labor market has continued to strengthen, and maximum employment is in sight. The 12-month change in core PCE prices has moved up noticeably over the past year, to 1.7 percent most recently, as the effects of past dollar appreciation and oil price declines have faded.  Although further progress is needed if our 2 percent target is to remain credible following eight years of falling short, importantly, measures of inflation compensation have also improved of late.  These are all welcome signs that are consistent with a modest removal of policy accommodation. Even with a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate, monetary policy will remain accommodative. This is appropriate because of how flat the Phillips curve has been and the fact that inflation is still below our target against a backdrop of persistent underperformance, as well as risk-management considerations in the vicinity of the effective lower bound.  While the neutral rate remains low, the ability of monetary policy to respond to shocks will be asymmetric. As a result, we need to remain alert to downside risks, such as those I discussed yesterday arising from foreign economies. The persistent underperformance of inflation, the low neutral rate, the presence of downside risks associated with developments abroad, and risk-management considerations in the vicinity of the lower bound together counsel a gradual approach for the time being. However, the advent of unified government could herald a very significant shift in the policy mix. While it’s premature to assess with any precision the size, composition, or duration of these fiscal policy changes, it seems prudent to put some probability on a moderate increase in fiscal deficits starting late next year. At a minimum, it poses upside risks to aggregate demand and makes the overall risks more balanced.The change in the fiscal policy outlook could have important implications for monetary policy, including for reinvestment policy.  Moreover, the observed elevated sensitivity of the dollar to any anticipated divergence could reasonably lead us to expect the exchange rate to continue to do some of this work preemptively.  I support alternative B. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. BRAINARD is discussing progress toward their goals and the need for a gradual approach to monetary policy. She also mentions the potential implications of fiscal policy changes. CHAIR YELLEN thanks her for her input.


Passage number 228.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I’ve been highlighting three metrics that I’ve been focused on in looking at how the economy is unfolding: core PCE inflation, inflation expectations, and the headline unemployment rate.  Since we last met, we’ve seen positive developments in two of those three—some upward movement in market-based inflation expectations and a decline in the headline unemployment rate, signaling a tightening labor market.  In this context, I support raising the federal funds rate today. I will continue to monitor inflation, inflation expectations, and unemployment closely.  In particular, I’m looking for evidence to see whether the labor force participation story of the past year or so has run its course or whether there’s more “room to run.” I also want to see the rise in inflation expectations translate into actual higher inflation, because, as Governor Brainard just noted, we are still below our inflation target, and we have a symmetric target, not a ceiling.  And the strengthening dollar, as the Governor said, is going to make achieving our inflation target a little bit harder. Now, as many of us have said, in the future, nonmonetary policy is unusually uncertain.  Dramatic changes seem possible, but we don’t know how they’re going to affect the economy.  The biggest challenge we have, as I see it, is how we communicate about the future.  As others have said, I think we should focus on our dual mandate and communicate a rationale that our policy choices are going to come back to achieving those objectives.  People may not find thatvery satisfying, because the truth is, we don’t know a lot about how the future is going to unfold. But it is what it is.  We can’t promise something that we don’t have. In the new year, we’re going to know a lot more, and that will inform our decisions. I want to add one comment.  Several folks around the table made a comment about the word “gradual” and whether that word is what markets are anchoring their expectations to.  I don’t see it that way, because the SEP has been much more hawkish over the past several years and markets have been basically ignoring that.  I have a hard time seeing them ignoring the SEP but then anchoring to the word “gradual.”  I think markets are rendering their own judgments about the future path of policy and how they see the economy evolving.  Language obviously matters, but I don’t think that one word, “gradual,” explains the markets’ outlook.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing support for alternative B and discussing their metrics and observations regarding the economy. They also discuss the challenges of communicating about the future and the word "gradual," but there is no disagreement or argument.


Passage number 229.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  I support alternative B as written.  A few months ago, I thought that our first rate hike in a year might be an opportunity for a major “refresh” of the statement.  But I changed my mind about that after the election, because of concerns that a major rewrite might be misconstrued as motivated by the election outcome or taken as a major shift in policy direction.  We don’t want the statement to be viewed in that way, so I think a statement with minimal changes, except for the decision to raise the federal funds rate target, seems appropriate to me. The major focus coming out of this meeting is going to be how the statement has changed in terms of language and how the SEP numbers have evolved since the September FOMC meeting.  The minimal changes in the statement language should be reassuring to people that the election outcome has not yet provoked a radical rethink of the policy outlook.  In terms of the SEP, I expect that market participants will be mainly focused on what happens to the medianfederal funds rate path.  The path did show two hikes in 2017 and three hikes in 2018 at the September meeting, and people are generally not expecting the path to move up very much at all at this point. I think the fact that the path has moved up slightly may be a slight surprise to people, but I think the movements are small enough that it’s not going to be a big event for market participants. Before I finish, I had a couple of further thoughts.  I want to build on this issue of the reinvestment of our Treasury and agency MBS portfolio.  My thinking for some time has been that the timing of stopping or beginning to taper down our reinvestment should be motivated by the risk of an early return to the effective lower bound. That implies that if we were to become more optimistic that that’s less likely, then we might decide to begin this process at a lower federal funds rate target.  In other words, I had two variables in my timing function:  distance from the lower bound—the level of the federal funds rate—and the risk of a near-term economic downturn.  So if we do get significant fiscal stimulus in the years ahead, in my mind, this would bring the reinvestment decision potentially much closer in terms of time, because we might lower the federal funds rate at which we felt comfortable beginning to end reinvestment.  We might get to that given federal funds rate earlier in time. So I think it really is time for the staff and the Committee to start to do the prep work on how we might actually end reinvestment.  There are a lot of issues here—tapering versus stopping, how long a taper should be, how to treat MBS versus Treasury securities, et cetera.  So I think I would very much encourage the staff to get going on this, because I can imagine that, under a feasible set of circumstances, we could be having this conversation maybe by the middle of next year.  I also encourage the staff in this work to give us their views on, how do we match the equivalence of ending reinvestment or tapering reinvestment with federal funds rate changes— say, some sort of notion of equivalency.  I know that’s going to be very difficult to do with any great precision, because it’s not just the decision to change the reinvestment path.  It’s also the fact that this is viewed as another major regime shift, one similar to the regime shift that we made a year ago.  But we still need to have a rough estimate so we can figure out how we should trade off these two things. Finally, before I conclude, because we have plenty of time, I’ve been thinking a lot about the election outcome and what we should think about it.  I’m very much in the camp of thinking that the generally free labor of goods and services in the global economy has been hugely beneficial to hundreds of millions of people, in lifting them out of poverty. But, at the same time, I think the election result shows that there are a lot of people in the United States that have been left behind by globalization.  We’ve had weak productivity growth, so the pie is not growing very fast.  We’ve had a decline in the labor share of income over the past 20 or 30 years.  We’ve had an increase in the skew of income distribution, and we’ve had poor income mobility.  When you put those four things together, there are a lot of people who actually haven’t benefited from globalization. I think this is important, because monetary policy can’t really do that much about this.  We can try to keep the economy at maximum sustainable employment and price stability, but we really fundamentally can’t do much about these things.  And I think we need to talk about them a little bit more, because if the country doesn’t make progress in helping more people benefit from globalization, the support for globalization and for trade is going to fracture—maybe it already is  starting to fracture—and, with that, we’ll lose a lot, I think, as a country and a society.  So I think it’s something that we collectively need to talk about. In this vein, Raj Chetty and a whole bunch of other authors published a paper last week that I think is really interesting. Basically, what they did is, they looked at how the year of your birth affects your likelihood of earning more than your parents, based on the income decile of your parents.  What they found is that if you were born in 1940, your chances of doing better than your parents were really good.  But as you move down the cohorts from 1940, ’50, ’60, ’70, and ’80, the chances of outdoing your parents decline markedly.  So, for example, if you were born in 1980, it looks like you’re not going to do as well as your parents if your parents were at 50 percent of the income distribution.  I really encourage you to look at this paper.  I think it’s really very interesting empirical work, but it also underscores a little bit what we just saw in terms of the election outcome. Finally, I just want to bookend the Chair’s comments about our colleague President Lockhart, who’s stepping down.  You’ve been a terrific colleague on this Committee.  It just shows that the diversity of this Committee benefits all of us—your background as a banker and your international experience.  You’ve shown great care and skill as a colleague.  You’re a very collegial person to work with.  I’m going to miss you, and I wish you all the best of luck in your new endeavors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker expressing their thoughts and opinions on various topics.


Passage number 230.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply shows that Mr. Lockhart is expressing gratitude towards someone named Bill.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 231.
 MR. FISCHER.  Could I raise a question.  Bill, I think there’s an important question about whether it’s globalization or modernization that lies behind what’s happened to relative incomes.  And I’m not sure that it’s globalization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage because Mr. Fischer raises a question and expresses uncertainty about whether globalization or modernization is responsible for the changes in relative incomes.


Passage number 232.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think there are a lot of factors.  I’m using that as a shorthand, so I don’t disagree that it’s more complicated than that.  But, clearly, the support for globalization in the United States is really in danger, and I guess that’s why I emphasize the globalization aspect of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although the passage presents some ambiguity in the beginning, there is no clear contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges that there are multiple factors at play and agrees that the issue is more complex than their initial statement suggests. They then express concern about the support for globalization in the United States, which is based on their emphasis on the globalization aspect.


Passage number 233.
 MR. FISCHER.  And, second, what will be the effect of the signal that we are starting to roll off the portfolio, just by itself. We know how much of an addition to the supply of assets that the market has to absorb.  But we’re also sending a signal, which is, we think the economy is strong enough to enable us to do this.  That’ll reduce the effect to some extent, won’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question and discusses the potential effects of the signal being sent by rolling off the portfolio.


Passage number 234.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think the market would take it as a judgment that we’re more confident that the economy has sufficient momentum that we’re not going to go back to the effective lower bound in the very near future. Our original motivation for not ending the reinvestment was, we wanted to get a little bit of room away from the lower bound, and we wanted to have some confidence that we weren’t going to go back to the lower bound in the very short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It presents a personal opinion and explains the reasoning behind a decision related to the reinvestment in the market. There is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 235.
 MR. FISCHER. Right. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Now, I did hear considerable support for alternative B as written, but I also heard a suggestion from President Mester, and I want to put that in front of you and make sure I understood it properly.  At the end of the first paragraph of alternative B— President Mester, please correct me if I didn’t get this right—President Mester suggested changing the words where it says “but still are low,” to “but remain low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are discussing and trying to understand President Mester's suggestion, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 236.
” MS. MESTER.  Yes.  And leave the “considerably” in there.  So, basically, just add a word, as opposed to changing it. CHAIR YELLEN.  So, essentially, the sentence would be more black ink than we currently have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants are discussing a minor adjustment to a sentence, adding a word without changing it significantly.


Passage number 237.
 MS. MESTER.  Yes. CHAIR YELLEN.  You would be taking the old sentence and just adding the word “considerably,” so it would read “Market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up considerably but remain low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Ms. Mester and Chair Yellen appear to be in agreement that market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up but remain low.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 238.
” VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don’t think this is a big deal one way or the other, but I guess when I originally thought about this question, I thought that, on the one hand, you’re saying something is moving.  On the other hand, you’re saying something is remaining, and that seems a little bit in opposition to one another.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two opposing ideas: something is moving and something is remaining, which suggests conflicting perspectives or opinions.


Passage number 239.
 MS. MESTER. Oh, I thought they were synonyms, but I defer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, no contention or disagreement is expressed. MS. Mester is simply expressing her understanding that two words were synonymous, but then defers to another person's knowledge or perspective.


Passage number 240.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. And that’s why I was more in the camp of “still are low.”  I guess I favor the way it’s written now, because if you say something has moved and then say something remains, was it at rest, or is it moving.  It just seems a little contradictory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal preference and explaining their reasoning, but there is no direct disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 241.
 MS. MESTER.  I think of “remain” and “still are” as synonyms, but I’m happy to defer and leave it the way it is. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there strong views about this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers express a willingness to defer and leave the sentence as it is.


Passage number 242.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don’t think it matters. CHAIR YELLEN.  Should we leave it the way it is then.  Okay. Now, because it has been a year since our previous policy action, I thought it might be helpful if I remind you of the procedure we follow for Board decisions on interest rates on reserves and discount rates taken in association with FOMC monetary policy decisions. First, the FOMC will vote as usual on the monetary policy statement and the directive to the Desk. Second, the Board only, and not the FOMC, will vote on corresponding changes to the interest rates on reserves.  And, finally, the Board only will vote on changes to discount rates.  So let’s now first vote on the FOMC statement and directive, and let me ask Brian to make clear what it is we’re voting on and to call the roll.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward explanation of the procedure for voting on interest rates and discount rates.


Passage number 243.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This vote will be on the policy statement for alternative B as given on pages 6 and 7 of Thomas Laubach’s briefing materials—that is, without any change from what was included in those briefing materials.  It will also include the directive to the Desk as that is included in the draft implementation note, which is on pages 10 and 11 of those briefing materials.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating what will be included in the vote and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 244.
 Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard Yes President Bullard Yes Governor Fischer Yes President George Yes President Mester Yes Governor Powell Yes President Rosengren Yes Governor Tarullo Yes MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  As I mentioned, the next vote will be a vote of the Board of Governors only and will be on an increase, to 75 basis points from 50 basis points, in the interest rates paid on required and excess reserve balances, effective December 15, 2016.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The individuals listed are all in agreement with each other.


Passage number 245.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  And a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer moves and Chair Yellen seconds the motion.


Passage number 246.
 MR. TARULLO.  Second.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Without objection.  Okay.  The final vote will also be a vote of the Board of Governors only and will cover three discount rate actions, so bear with me. First, it will be to approve the requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco to increase the primary credit rate to 1¼ percent from 1 percent, effective December 15, 2016. Second, it will also encompass approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 1¼ percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Bank, effective on the later of December 15, 2016, and the date such Reserve Bank informs the secretary of the Board of such a request.  The secretary of the Board would be authorized to inform such Reserve Bank of the approval of the Board of Governors on such notification by the Reserve Bank. Finally, this vote will also encompass approval by the Board of Governors of the renewal by all 12 Federal Reserve Banks of the existing formulas for calculating the rates applicable to discounts and advances under the secondary and seasonal credit programs.  As specified by the formula for the secondary credit rate, the secondary credit rate would be set 50 basis points above the primary credit rate.  And, as specified by the formula for the seasonal credit rate, the seasonal credit rate would continue to be reset every two weeks as the average of the daily effective federal funds rate and the rate on three-month CDs over the previous 14 days, rounded to the nearest 5 basis points.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply explaining the details of a vote that needs to take place.


Passage number 247.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  A second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


