Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection. Our first agenda topic this morning is a special session on the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability.  I’d like to start off by thanking Mike Kiley and Egon Zakrajšek of the Board’s staff, Anna Paulson of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and Geoff Tootell of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.  These individuals formed the steering committee that solicited contributions on this topic from across the System and selected the four memos we received as background for today’s discussion.  I also, of course, want to thank the staff that produced and contributed to these background documents.  And so with that, let me turn things over to Jeff Fuhrer, who is going to begin the staff presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that individuals formed a steering committee, solicited contributions, and selected memos for discussion. The passage also expresses gratitude towards those involved in the process.


Passage number 2.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A question for Jeff.  Just to go back to your very first exhibit, exhibit 2.  Back in the ’70s there was an event called “Bankhaus Herstatt” that involved missed payments.  And it may have been hyperbole, but at the time, there was concern that the payment system would break down, and it would create a financial instability event.  Did you consider payments in thinking about these sort of high-level definitions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 3.
 MR. FUHRER.  There’s a bit written about that.  We did not spend much time in our memo discussing the possibility of payment-system disruptions, but there are folks who are worried about that.  To date in the United States, I think, that has not been a terrific problem, and around the world, while there are some examples, that has not been nearly as prominent a problem as the accumulation of debt with rising asset prices.  But it’s a fair point, that that is another possible margin of vulnerability. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Other questions for the presenters.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Fuhrer acknowledges that there are some concerns about payment-system disruptions, but also mentions that, to date, it has not been a significant problem in the United States or globally. This is followed by Chair Yellen thanking him, suggesting agreement or acknowledgement of his points.


Passage number 4.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Jeff in his presentation talked about monetary policy being the “third resort.”  I would just be interested if each of the paper-givers agree that “third resort” rather than “never” would be your answer.  And if “third resort” would be your answer, what is the most likely scenario in which you think that third resort would actually apply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Rosengren is simply asking the paper-givers their opinion on whether they agree with the statement about monetary policy being the "third resort" and what scenarios they think would justify it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 5.
 MR. FUHRER.  Somehow I knew Eric was going to ask that question.  [Laughter]  I think one word that I didn’t use during my presentation but is essential to keep in mind is “humility,” in that none of us, I will submit, know exactly how macroprudential tools work, whether circumstances might arise in which monetary policy was the best option available, and how that would work during such an episode of financial instability. My imagination is fertile enough that I can imagine circumstances in which either we have chosen not to or are unable to pursue what we call our first choice—that is, use cyclical time-varying macroprudential tools—and yet we have identified what we think are troublesome buildups of financial instability.  And if we are constrained in that way, it is conceivable that we would use monetary policy to address it, with due concern to the issues that are raised in the paper and in the briefing.  First, critically, freighting monetary policy with an additional objective that may be competing with its other objectives—we already have tradeoffs to make within the dual mandate—is not to be done lightly.  And the second is—until research overturns this result, if it is found to do so—the possibility for collateral damage or the possibility that modest movements in monetary policy instruments will have little or no effect on the very strong incentives that build up in a financial boom.  Those considerations are to be taken seriously, but if we are so constrained, I can imagine that that’s a resort—not never, but a last resort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker introduces the idea of using monetary policy as a last resort to address financial instability, which may be seen as a point of contention or disagreement. This is supported by the phrases "freighting monetary policy with an additional objective that may be competing with its other objectives" and "the possibility for collateral damage or the possibility that modest movements in monetary policy instruments will have little or no effect on the very strong incentives that build up in a financial boom." These statements suggest that there are potential negative consequences or limitations to using monetary policy in this way.


Passage number 6.
 MR. ADRIAN.  Lars Svensson’s cost-benefit analysis has had a big effect on many people’s thinking on this topic, and one of the things that I learned from reviewing Svensson’s work is that the relative size of the costs and the benefits depends on the magnitude of the shock.  And so what he basically shows is that, when you think that the crisis is very, very large, then actually the costs are relatively higher than the benefits.  But if you think that the crisis is not as large—think about a crisis on the order of an unemployment increase of 5 percentage points versus a crisis on the order of an unemployment increase of 2 or 3 percentage points or something like that—this cost-benefit calculation can flip around.  So, intuitively, the cost is sort of first order.  The distortion of leaning against the wind relative to the dual-mandate objectives today is a first-order cost while the benefit is second order, but when the magnitude of the crisis is not as large, the benefit can actually be larger than the cost. One point I would make is that this is important in the context of the magnitude of prudential regulation.  If prudential regulation is inadequate, you would think that the tail risk is very large, and hence you don’t want to use monetary policy.  But if prudential policy is actually at a more stringent level so that the tail risk of the financial crisis is smaller, the cost-benefit analysis actually tells you that leaning against the wind is relatively more beneficial, which is somewhat counterintuitive, but that comes directly out of this analysis. The second point is, our memo basically shows that there’s a tight interlinkage between monetary policy transmission and financial stability topics.  I think that taking these interlinkages seriously in our thinking about macro models is very important to really understand threats to the downside risks of the dual mandate, along lines similar to the memo that Jae Sim described.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is explaining the findings of Lars Svensson's cost-benefit analysis and discussing the implications of the analysis.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 7.
 MR. SIM.  I don’t have completely different views from those of the first two speakers, but I have several points to raise for consideration.  I think it’s possible that the monetary policy interest rate becomes the first, second, or even third resort, but it’s not crystal clear in which direction to use monetary policy to ensure financial stability. Let me remind you that from the second half of 2004 to the second half of 2006, the Federal Reserve increased the policy rate 450 basis points.  Now, there is some empirical evidence that the increase decelerated the expansion of the balance sheet of the commercial banking sector.  However, there is some evidence that the deceleration in the expansion of commercial banks’ balance sheet caused lending activity to migrate to the unregulated shadow banking sector.  So it is not always clear that the use of an increase in the monetary policy rate will always bring financial stability. Another reason to think about the use of monetary policy is that, during the period from 2004 to 2006, the increase in interest rates created huge interest rate differentials between different continents, between Europe and the United States and between Japan and the United States.  That really accelerated capital inflow to the U.S. market.  There may be some situations in which you may want to lower the interest rate to fight carry traders whose behavior may enhance financial stability.  So it is not always one direction. Another point that I want to make is that, in a situation like the current one, raising the interest rate because of financial stability concerns may weaken the credibility of your commitment to the 2 percent inflation target.  That was a substantial concern in Sweden a few years ago. My last point is that there can be a situation in which monetary policy can be an important tool to achieve financial stability.  That is, when the economy reacts to a shock in a history-dependent way—for instance, if the response of the economy to a given size of the shock depends on the credit history of the economy—then there may be a stronger case for leaning-against-the-wind monetary policy to reduce the tail risk.  However, that should be empirically tested before it is brought into the actual policy arena. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Further questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker raises several points that may be in contention with the views of the first two speakers. For example, the speaker argues that using an increase in the monetary policy rate may not always bring financial stability, and that there may be situations where lowering the interest rate could be beneficial. Additionally, the speaker suggests that raising the interest rate for financial stability concerns may weaken the credibility of the inflation target. These points may be in disagreement with the views of the previous speakers.


Passage number 8.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes.  When you sit around discussing a crisis with veterans of crises, which I have done, they all have words of wisdom for you, and the wisdom is typically not “debt is a big problem,” it’s “the problem is leverage.”  Do you know how to differentiate between those two and tell us which one is more likely to be correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer is simply stating his experience and asking for clarification.


Passage number 9.
 MR. FUHRER.  I’ll take a stab at it.  I think the historical evidence says that, yes, leverage certainly matters.  So having really risky leverage ratios, borrowing a whole bunch against an asset whose price can fluctuate significantly, that is the problem.  I think that’s fair.  If the leverage ratios weren’t so troubling and there was some borrowing and the asset price moved, perhaps we wouldn’t get into quite as much trouble.  I think that’s a fair distinction to make.  That said, when assets prices are increasing rapidly, the historical evidence of the past eight centuries or possibly more is that concern for leverage ratios tends to go out the door because, after all, that ratio is going to look better, and the coverage of the asset price is going to look better next year and the year after and the year after.  That’s the historical experience, and we seemed very capable of getting ourselves into that kind of trouble.  But your distinction is fair, and if you were to observe that the leverage was not as severe, that might not portend as serious a problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the idea that leverage matters and acknowledges that when asset prices are increasing rapidly, concerns for leverage ratios tend to diminish.


Passage number 10.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don’t we begin our go-round.  There are some discussion questions that were circulated, but I look forward to your comments.  Let’s begin with Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The conversation is cordial and the participants appear to be on the same page as they are looking forward to hearing each other's comments on the discussion questions.


Passage number 11.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the Chair and the Vice Chairman for placing this topic on the agenda and the staff for their very thorough briefing papers on the subject.  I’ll only discuss the questions posed to us now and will discuss some more specific concerns in the financial stability discussion later in the agenda. To the first question, do we have the right tools or governance to address financial stability concerns.  As the staff papers discussed, financial instability has tended to occur when there is significant borrowing against an asset whose value has declined substantially.  Financial instability, both domestically and internationally, has been most commonly associated with real estate assets, either residential or commercial.  As a result, many emerging economies and, increasingly, many developed economies, have used loan-to-value and debt-to-income caps as their main macroprudential tools, as Mark’s paper discussed.  For example, in 2014, the Bank of England Financial Policy Committee set debt-to-income caps to address some of its concerns with escalating prices in real estate markets. The QS report that we will discuss later today does not address these most commonly used tools because the Congress has not given any regulatory body the authority to set such caps across all financial institutions in the United States.  Without a direct way to influence levered purchases of real estate across all financial institutions, the Federal Reserve is left with only tools that build resiliency to a real estate price decline over a subset of intermediaries, lending, and real estate markets. The tools that policymakers do have are subject to diffuse governance.  Because real estate loans are conducted by a wide variety of intermediaries, bank and nonbank, it is unclear that altering regulations that affect only banking organizations will be as effective as might be desired, in view of the potential for regulatory arbitrage.  And any changes, even for banking organizations, require concurrence among bank regulators that have historically not been focused on financial stability concerns.  As a result, there will likely be long delays in implementation and final actions that are heavily compromised compared with original intent.  A good example is the 2006 real estate guidance, which took two years to negotiate and was substantially watered down when it was finally issued.  The result was a rather timid response to a period of significantly heightened risk to financial stability.  So my answer to the first question, in short, is “no.” Question two, should financial stability goals affect monetary policy deliberations.  Monetary policy tools, both interest rates and our balance sheet, should be focused on our dual mandate.  However, even this narrow focus can be distorted by actions of others.  For example, both in the United States and most other developed countries, economic policies have been overreliant on monetary policy tools.  This is not by choice.  Fiscal authorities have chosen to react little to the shocks to the global economy, which has forced monetary policy to extremes to meet its legislated mandates.  Had fiscal policy been more aggressively deployed, we might not have seen so many countries at historically low interest rates for such an extended period. Ideally, financial stability concerns would be addressed with supervisory or macroprudential tools, but their effectiveness and our ability to react speedily to building pressures are highly uncertain.  Diffuse governance makes their deployment even more difficult.  Hence, if macroprudential tools were not used to offset increasing risks of financial instability, I would be left with a dilemma, not unlike the problem we have faced with fiscal policy.  The Congress has given the FOMC only the ability to influence interest rates on the balance sheet.  If serious financial stability concerns were not being addressed by those who do have financial stability tools to deploy, I would have to consider using monetary policy to address any financial stability concern that could adversely influence the policy of employment and inflation over time. We might, thus, be forced to address building instability with either somewhat higher interest rates or reducing our balance sheet somewhat more aggressively.  One can certainly argue that a more effective structure is provided by the Bank of England, in which monetary policy, supervisory policy, and financial stability policy are more integrated, and a more comprehensive flow of information occurs between different areas of the bank.  Such a structure would likely make the need for using monetary policy to address financial stability concerns much less likely.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing their thoughts and opinions on the topic, without any opposing viewpoints stated.


Passage number 12.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’d like to start by thanking the authors of the four papers and all of the other staff who have worked on this project, which was designed—and, on the basis of what the first two speakers said, successfully—to make members of the FOMC think about important policy questions related to financial stability.  And I’d also like to thank the people who provided the expositions today.  The slides are really very, very good.  If I’d only known they were coming, I wouldn’t have had to read the memos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  That’s the problem with good in-class presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a problem with good in-class presentations, which is not a subject of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 14.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First, I, too, want to thank the authors and the project managers for preparing such a solid set of memos and briefings.  I found them very helpful, and they give us a lot of food for thought.  As the memos articulate, there are a lot of interdependencies between the financial system and the real economy.  Moreover, the research and modeling that helps guide our thinking about these interconnections is still being developed.  But the world waits for no one, and it won’t wait for policymakers, so we need to come to some decisions about how we would proceed, in view of our responsibilities for ensuring our dual-mandate monetary policy goals and for promoting financial stability.  I view today’s discussion as a first step toward that. I would like to suggest that the Committee set itself the goal of working toward a statement articulating the way it will consider financial stability in the context of our statutory responsibilities.  We know from hard experience that getting the needed consensus among participants to produce such a statement can be difficult to achieve.  But even if we end up not publishing something, either as part of our longer-run monetary policy strategy statement or separately, I think working toward such a goal will help drive us to some conclusions. Now, rather than answer the specific questions posed in the staff memo, which I guess, according to President Evans and Governor Tarullo, means I am not a rookie, I am going to make five broad points. Point one, the FOMC cares about financial stability to the extent it affects the health of the real economy.  Minor disruptions or volatility in financial markets that represent the ebb and flow of a dynamic economy but do not threaten the health of the economy are not something the FOMC should respond to.  In general, the goals of monetary policy and financial stability are complementary, just like the two goals of our monetary policy dual mandate.  In this, I agree with Governor Tarullo.  However, at times, actions that could be taken to foster financial stability might be in conflict, at least in the short run, with those taken that promote our monetary policy goals, and we need to consider the tradeoffs.  In the United Kingdom, the Financial Services Act recognizes this potential tradeoff and explicitly says that the Financial Policy Committee is not authorized to act in a way that it feels is “likely to have a significant adverse effect on the capacity of the financial sector to contribute to the growth of the U.K. economy in the medium or long term.” Point two, our experience from the recent financial crisis underscored the importance of creating and maintaining a resilient financial system, one that lowers the probability of instability and that limits the damage when financial shocks arise.  The first memo discusses some of the tools that can be used, including higher capital requirements and liquidity requirements.  Living wills and a credible method for resolving failed institutions are very important tools for eliminating moral hazard, and work is being done to implement many of these types of resiliency tools. Point three, incentives matter in all of this—the incentives of the financial institutions, but also the incentives of regulators and policymakers.  There are considerable time inconsistency problems here.  To the extent possible, policymakers should take a systematic approach in applying financial stability policy rather than rely on discretion.  We can issue guidance, but if we aren’t willing to aggressively support it, then it becomes less effective.  The benefit of a systematic approach wasn’t covered in the memos, but it is related to the distinction between the static and cyclical macroprudential tools.  Static through-the-cycle tools promote resiliency because they are known and permanent.  But the cyclical macroprudential tools can be made systematic by laying out in advance the contingencies in which they would be invoked.  For example, we can write down a formula for a countercyclical capital buffer, and we can define an explicit trigger for contingent convertible bonds. Point four, any macroprudential action, whether it be by the FOMC or by another authority, must be communicated in a clear way to avoid creating a conflict with or causing confusion over actions taken to foster our monetary policy goals.  Careful thought should be given to the types of communications that we should use. Point five, following my reading of the literature and the memos, I think our first line of defense should be the macroprudential tools that are focused on increasing the resiliency of the financial system.  Capital liquidity, living wills, resolution—these are the structural tools. I believe the important work that Governor Tarullo and the staff are doing to implement Dodd-Frank is consistent with this.  I’m less convinced that we have enough knowledge and experience with the countercyclical tools to use them effectively at this point, but I think they are worth further study.  The complications of the financial system in the United States, including multiple regulators, does need to be considered, as they limit the speed with which certain tools can be wielded and potentially limit their coverage.  Taking an action that pushes risk away from one set of institutions to another doesn’t eliminate the risk.  It just lets it move around, potentially to a part of the financial system in which the risk is more difficult to monitor and to control. These considerations lead me to think that we should set the standards and the resiliency tools a tad higher than they would be if we had more confidence in the other tools and our ability to use them effectively.  It also leads me to believe that while I’d want to rely on the financial system’s structural resiliency tools first, and perhaps some of the cyclical macroprudential tools, to the extent they’d be effective, in a situation in which these tools prove to be inadequate and risks to financial instability continued to grow and spread more broadly throughout the financial system, monetary policy should be on the table as a possible defense.  I note, however, that in this case, the blurring between financial stability goals and monetary policy goals would be high. If we assess the risks of the financial instability to be great, achieving our dual-mandate goals would be in jeopardy as well.  And this is an illustration that, in most cases, the goals of price stability, maximum employment, and financial stability are complementary.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a speech where the speaker is expressing their views and opinions on the topic of financial stability and monetary policy.


Passage number 15.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 16.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’d also like to thank the staff for some excellent work.  I agree with much of what has been already said.  I’ll keep my remarks short. First and foremost, I don’t think financial stability concerns should be elevated to the level of a third pillar of the monetary policy mandate.  I share the view of the memos that systemically setting our policy instrument in reaction to financial indicators requires knowledge we don’t yet have, and the economic costs most likely outweigh any potential benefits.  Those economic costs, as stated before, could be fairly large, because it would likely take a very significant change of policy to reduce credit and asset prices.  Also, as we know, all run-ups in asset prices do not necessarily signal that something is amiss.  So it’s very possible that we could make systemic mistakes when trying to regularly employ policy toward affecting asset prices.  Basically, I am skeptical that we can navigate a stability-growth frontier in a reliable manner.  That said, and as others have said, there may indeed be instances when the Committee is fairly confident that it can identify financial imbalances.  In those cases, a monetary policy response may be warranted, but I believe such cases would be infrequent and should be handled on a case-by-case basis. Macroprudential policy should be our tool of choice, especially when considering systemic risk.  I believe our current expansion of regulatory powers has made the banking system more resilient.  And should new risky behavior ensue, we have the abilities in this sphere, albeit imperfect, to avert it.  A recent case in point is the March 2013 guidance to curb risky lending in the leveraged loan market.  It is true that it took some time for leveraged loans to begin contracting in 2014, but it appears that macroprudential intervention was an important element in changing behavior.  But just because regulatory interventions do not work instantaneously, that should not be used as a rationale for substituting monetary policy, because monetary policy is unlikely to result in instantaneous responses either.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. The speaker acknowledges agreement with some points made, but also expresses skepticism and offers an alternative approach.


Passage number 17.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you very much, Madam Chair.  The discussion so far has been really excellent, and the papers prepared to inform us were quite excellent as well.  I think the discussion is timely.  If, as current research suggests, we’re in a world in which the equilibrium rate of interest is depressed for a prolonged period of time, these kinds of tradeoffs between the setting of monetary policy appropriate for achieving full employment and our inflation target and the risks of financial imbalances associated with a so-called risk channel of monetary policy are likely to be more common.  In fact, we are seeing that in some foreign economies. I think there are a few conclusions that these papers suggest, as do external research and close observation of several foreign jurisdictions.  The research does support the reality that we’re observing, which is that there can be an important effect on monetary policy through changes in risk premiums and risk-taking in financial markets and, of course, beyond. It’s difficult enough, though, to get monetary policy settings just right for the specific inflation and employment objectives that we operate under.  If we further burden our single policy instrument, powerful as it is, with a third objective related to credit intermediation, our challenge will become even more complicated.  The conclusion of some of the research in this area hints at the complexity as it suggests that the efficacy of such an expanded objective function will depend on the source of the shock, which is likely to be unobservable.  And, of course, several people have mentioned the work by Lars Svensson that just points out that, under many conditions, the benefits arising from adjusting monetary policy to address credit growth are likely to be outweighed by the greater cost in terms of higher unemployment and lower inflation, which magnifies the cost of a possible crisis.  On the other hand, I think the research that was presented today does raise some important questions, and I hope that we will return to this because the research agenda is highly dynamic.  It leads me, though, to the same conclusion that many have drawn, that it is highly desirable to have time-varying, sector-specific macroprudential tools that operate more directly on the incentives of firms and households to take on excessive leverage in particular asset classes.  That bring us squarely to consideration of our own institutional environment and the adequacy of our authorities in this regard. To start, I think it’s worth pointing out that we are in a much better position than we were pre-crisis in terms of the authorities that we have and the rigor with which we are exercising them, and, in fact, there have been very important structural innovations.  The Committee on Financial Stability has been created here at the Board with overlapping membership with the Committee on Bank Supervision, and of course overlapping membership with the monetary policy committee, the FOMC.  More broadly, because regulatory authorities in the United States are fragmented, the Financial Stability Oversight Council has brought all of those regulatory authorities together for the first time.  We have and are exercising a greatly expanded set of both micro and macroprudential tools that have greatly increased the structural resilience of the banking institutions that are at the core of our system.  We have implemented greatly enhanced requirements that have resulted in much more and higher-quality capital throughout the banking system, and we’ve put in place on top of that a set of very stringent macroprudential capital and liquidity requirements that are tailored to the systemic footprint of the largest firms. Of course, these are through-the-cycle safeguards, meaning that they impose structurally higher standards that are better suited to building resilience than to leaning against the buildup of risks.  In fact, because of the institutional environment we sit in, we probably put greater emphasis and build even greater resilience than we would if we had a very complete set of macroprudential tools.  They are generally cumbersome to tailor to sector-specific risks.  Beyond this, our capital and liquidity stress tests provide critical capabilities to tailor scenarios in each annual cycle to ensure that the largest institutions have capital buffers that are relatively robust to specific risks that we may see building, for instance, on CRE or on leveraged lending.  In addition, when the risks of financial stability increase overall, the Board, in consultation with other banking regulators, will temporarily increase the amount of capital that the large banks are required to hold in order to build resilience and to restrain undue risk-taking on a cyclical basis.  This does ensure that we will systematically and routinely have to consider a quantitative and qualitative set of indicators and vote on whether to impose those buffers.  This is important, I think, as a signaling device, and it puts a lot of responsibility on us, which is new.  Of course, on the other hand, it is slow to implement and, again, not sector-specific. So all of those things, I think, should give us some confidence that we do have a set of additional tools.  Nonetheless, I remain uneasy for the specific risk that we’ve highlighted here with regard to housing bubbles in particular—which appear, historically, to be the most deeply damaging sources of periodic financial crises.  Given our current authorities, the banking agencies could, perhaps, impose higher risk rates on mortgage loans with particular characteristics either directly or through expectations for the stress test, but it would require upwards of a year to adjust.  Moreover, as others have noted, it would be narrow in its scope of application, because a large share of mortgage lending is undertaken by nonbanks, and it may prove ineffective at times when bank regulatory capital comfortably exceeds the required thresholds. In this arena, our authorities fall short of other jurisdictions that have deployed time-varying, sector-specific macroprudential policies to cool their housing bubbles.  We noted earlier that financial authorities in the United Kingdom, Sweden, Switzerland, and New Zealand, among others, have confronted rapidly rising residential housing prices in precisely the kinds of environments when there were compelling reasons not to use the policy rate as the first line of defense.  Many responded by tightening restrictions on borrowing through loan-to-value or debt-to-income caps—in some cases, in concert with disincentives for lenders, and in many cases, in an escalating pattern.  And, indeed, the research that the IMF has undertaken, among others, has shown that macroprudential measures imposed directly on borrowers can have greater and more immediate efficacy than restraints imposed on lending. In our environment, responsibilities for financial stability, on the one hand, are largely separated from those for consumer credit protection, which the CFPB does have across both banks and nonbank lenders, for instance, through imposing LTV caps through their QM rules.  So these authorities exist, but they are fragmented.  In order to get agreement across regulators, it may take an unduly slow and cumbersome process working through the FSOC.  That should give us some pause.  Under these circumstances, as I think others have also concluded, monetary policy might, by default, carry a greater burden as a second line of defense. All of that said, I think the research that we should be undertaking should include not just the possible tradeoffs involved in using monetary policy to address the buildup of risks in the credit system, but also contemplate the authorities that we have and do not have and the tradeoffs in the possible setting of those authorities.  Again, in circumstances in which we have more authorities to build structural resilience, there may be tradeoffs at keeping those settings higher through the cycle as compensation for not having a full set of macroprudential authorities.  And it’s something that I think we would benefit from specific research on.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is providing an overview of different perspectives and research findings, but does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 18.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, want to thank the staff members who participated in teeing up this conversation.  Before wading into this topic by reading the materials, I had some general predispositions on the issues highlighted in the memos.  My views going in were, first, that the use of monetary policy tools ought not to be the preferred approach to addressing a buildup in financial stability risks; second, that continuing refinement and implementation of macroprudential tools and programs, although imperfect in a number of dimensions and no guarantee that tail risk will be avoided, still represent the best practical alternative; third, that a resilience-oriented policy and supervision focus will likely have a greater payoff than an emphasis on prevention; and, finally, that sharply raising the policy rate or initiating sizable asset sales in an attempt to prick an asset bubble or to discourage credit expansion and growing leverage or to discourage types of risk-taking or even to correct a perceived economic imbalance is likely to entail undesirable, even unacceptable, costs and consequences. Those were my views before thinking about this.  The staff memos did not really move me much fromthose views, although the discussion this morning may do so.  My thinking actually kind of fits Governor Tarullo’s caricature of most monetary policymakers.  But the memos did serve to deepen my understanding of the challenges and uncertainties involved. I understand today’s session to be largely a high-level discussion asking for an initial response.  I’ll just make a few comments in response to the questions posed.  Are macroprudential tools enough “most of the time.”  Yes, I think macroprudential tools should be sufficient, and by that I mean more advisable as a first resort in most circumstances.  And “most circumstances” in my mind, in my imagination, are likely to be ambiguous and not clearly far advanced.  That said, I don’t think mobilization of monetary policy tools should be ruled out, if only because we can’t anticipate all circumstances.  On the question of any distinction between tools through-the-cycle or structural tools versus tools for cyclical buildups of risks, I start with an opinion that risk-taking accretes over time with sustained benign conditions.  Said differently, our policy success sows the seeds of financial instability.  And this suggests to me that systemic risk vigilance probably should be pro-cyclical and the application of macroprudential tools, at least for cyclical purposes, may have to be time variant.  As I said earlier, I see macroprudential tools that promote resilience as an important complement.  Do the dispersion and fragmentation of regulatory responsibility and the attendant coordination challenges affect my views of macroprudential tools.  Yes, this reality reduces the probability of effective action.  Unfortunately, this is not a problem likely to be remedied in the foreseeable future.  It’s a problem I simply think has to be worked on as best we can.  And it goes without saying that the Federal Reserve still holds powerful cards in formulating macroprudential policy and its implementation. Would I support using monetary policy tools for financial stability purposes if the dual-mandate objectives had to be subordinated—this is the way I understood the question—and, if so, under what conditions and how likely are they.  My view is, only in very extreme circumstances.  If the Committee had full or very high conviction that the risks of severe financial instability were approaching an untenable state, I could imagine tolerating some higher unemployment or deviation from our inflation target for a time in the interest of avoiding a much more costly development.  In these rare cases, using monetary policy to promote financial stability would be consistent with, not contrary to, achieving the dual mandate over the medium-term horizon.  What constitutes an untenable state is subjective but could be informed, I believe, by comparisons with earlier episodes of incipient instability; attention to quantifiable benchmarks for debt buildup and aggregate leverage, for example; and, possibly, recognition of widespread unsound practices and behavior.  Nonetheless, the existence of a sizable, evolving, and opaque shadow banking system in this country makes arriving at such judgments extremely challenging.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker, Mr. Lockhart, expressing his views and opinions on various topics related to monetary policy and financial stability.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 19.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Because I might be one of the last speakers between you folks and lunch, I’ll be brief.  I construed the discussion topic as the narrow question of the way in which the setting of monetary policy instruments should vary with the financial stability considerations, or observations of conditions, rather than the broader question of appropriate public policy in relation to financial stability.  I agree that the state of understanding is relatively limited, and so my comments are basically two suggestions for further research. The staff’s focus is almost entirely on the buildup, or boom, phase, in which financial conditions are evolving in a way that might lead to future distress.  I agree with the staff’s memo that highlighted the difficulty of determining whether some observed developments represent inefficient departures from healthy market functioning.  I agree, therefore, that humility should be our watchword.  For me, this is a powerful argument for central banks to stick to their price-stability knitting, because responding to sectoral developments per se runs the risk of entangling us in distributional politics.  Besides, the economic basis for doing so seems not obvious to me in many circumstances. For me, this is also a powerful argument for more research on how we should know, in real time, what the appropriate response should be.  And here I guess I differ from President Bullard about what we knew in 2005 or 2006.  Maybe there was agreement on overvaluation of housing, but exactly how that would play out and exactly how different approaches to monetary policy would affect that were, I think, quite uncertain.  And I contrast this kind of research on how we should know with what I see as the bulk of research that has been cited for us, in which the policymaker is absolutely sure of the model he’s in:  He’s in the model that the modeler wrote down.  As a result, it’s just a matter of deciding what to do about what he knows, as opposed to having to sort through different theories, different models, different estimates, and then different understandings of how to proceed. In the other direction from leaning against booms, there appears to be little controversy that, as one paper put it, “monetary policy should be used to stabilize the economy and financial markets in the wake of a financial crash”—in other words, respond to a full-blown recession.  But I’d like to suggest that there’s a third case that deserves attention as well:  instances in which financial market turbulence arises but does not end up leading to a full-fledged crash and thus ultimately proves transitory.  Examples would include the stock market break of 1987 and the LTCM–Russian debt default crisis in 1998–99.  It’s natural at such times to make monetary policy more accommodative out of concern for the downside risks—that is, the increase in the probability of adverse outcomes for economic growth and inflation.  And I view that as the standard monetary policy response to information about the prospects for the fundamental things we care about—employment and inflation—not an additional reaction to financial stability.  But even if the financial market turbulence settles down without causing a recession, it’s common at times like that for monetary policy to remain more accommodative for some time. Clearly, though, it can’t be optimal for the monetary policy reaction to be permanent in the sense that the policy rate path is forever deflected downward by a one-time ratchet effect in response to every instance of financial market tumult.  Even short of a strictly permanent reaction, I believe what happened in 1998–99 illustrates that there’s a very real risk that when monetary policy remains more accommodative for too long and sets off a response, it could leave us substantially “behind the curve.”  So I think this portion of the monetary policy reaction function to financial-stability considerations deserves attention from researchers as well.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Mr. Lacker agrees with some points made by the staff, but disagrees with President Bullard and suggests further research is needed. Additionally, he suggests that there is a third case that deserves attention, which may present a disagreement with the current understanding of monetary policy.


Passage number 20.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, thank the staff and have found today’s conversation useful in refining our expectations for the role of financial stability in policy decisions.  I would just say, the tools we have available in the United States today strike me as the ones we inevitably come back to after crises, a matter of basic supervisory and financial concepts related to capital adequacy, risk diversification, and limits on interbank and market exposures.  The challenge remains, I think, in gaining confidence that such tools are calibrated in a way that keeps up with the dynamic financial system as it innovates and evolves.  And, of course, that confidence depends on understanding whether we can reliably detect the buildup of unhealthy financial pressures and then deploy the appropriate tool before it’s too late.  I think today’s discussion suggests we probably should continue to talk more about that. I would not draw stark distinctions between through-the-cycle risks and those that are more cyclical.  Adequate capitalization, low-to-moderate leverage, appropriate risk-taking, and strong liquidity within a robust microprudential supervisory framework, I think, is a good foundation for fostering financial stability.  And I think our stress-testing approaches have certainly strengthened that framework. As it relates to the stance of monetary policy to pursue financial stability goals, the tabletop exercise led by President Rosengren’s committee last year considered the role of monetary policy relative to financial stability goals.  As I did then, I continue to think that monetary policy is the wrong tool for responding to financial imbalances, and that it is too broad an instrument to effectively incorporate a specific financial stability mandate.  That said, the pursuit of other macroeconomic objectives cannot ignore the important influence of the stance of policy.  And keeping rates low for long periods with an eye only toward achieving our dual mandate over the medium term can facilitate conditions that encourage risk-taking or misallocations. Policymakers certainly bear responsibility for carefully calibrating the cost and benefits of such policy settings.  However, raising interest rates seems an extreme response to the possibility of an imbalance and risks slowing the entire economy in an attempt to address a specific segment.  For this reason, I prefer to lean on more targeted tools, which coordinate with and complement monetary policy objectives.  And I think it would be worthwhile for us to think about a plan that would respond to a future financial stability scenario.  I like Governor Brainard’s ideas about considering the tradeoffs that might be associated with that as we go forward with this thinking.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. George, is expressing her thoughts and ideas about financial stability and monetary policy. She shares her perspective and highlights areas where further discussion and consideration may be beneficial.


Passage number 21.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am generally in the camp that the costs of using monetary policy exceed the benefits.  I don’t want to say “never,” but I think it’s unlikely I’d find myself in a situation in which that’d be the tool I would be going toward first.  A couple of people around the table have used the word “humility.”  I think that’s probably the most important word to remind ourselves of in these types of situations. You know, Governor Tarullo mentioned an exercise.  We ran a similar exercise in Minneapolis in which I asked our staff, with the benefit of perfect hindsight, to tell me when the FOMC should have raised rates in the past 100 years to deal with a bubble.  And we couldn’t reach agreement, whether it was the Great Depression or the Great Recession or the tech bubble.  If we couldn’t reach agreement when having perfect hindsight, I’m skeptical that we’re going to reach agreement on a go-forward basis.  And I think about two examples.  One is, since the crisis, we’ve all been laser-focused on financial-stability risks, and I don’t know anybody who saw the price of oil going from $150 per barrel to $30.  That’s a heck of an economic shock, and we all missed it.  Now, I don’t know if it was a bubble, and I don’t know if monetary policy should have been deployed to do anything about it—probably not.  But just that example says that while we were looking, we still missed it.  That’s how hard these things are to identify. Then I go back to 2003.  Where do bubbles come from.  They come from widespread delusions.  We all know that societies are prone to mass delusion.  And I think the bubble we experienced in the 2000s was a housing bubble—that we believed home prices would only go up.  It’s so difficult for an individual regulator to stand up to the country and say, “Hey, you’re all wrong.  We know better.  You’re all wrong about where home prices are going.”  And it’s even harder to then say that we’re going to put the country in a recession, we feel so strongly about that.  So I think that some of the other macroprudential tools, even if they’re imperfect, could be more credible tools that we could reach for rather than saying, “We know better, and, as a result, we’re going to put the whole country into a recession.” So I would like to see us further explore what tools we have available.  One of the memos mentioned the idea of a shelf registration of certain policy tools.  I know countercyclical capital buffers are an example of that.  I would love to see us explore—I just don’t know the answer—how much power there is in shelf-registering potential tools that we could use at a future date.  I’d like to learn more about that. And, finally, I also see the benefit of potentially using the bully pulpit.  The hardest part about all of this is for us to have confidence that it really is a bubble, and that we really should do something about it.  If we really had confidence that there was a bubble and we should do something about it, if we spoke out about it with enough conviction long enough, I think we could have an effect on markets even if we don’t have a specific policy instrument at our disposal.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement among the participants in the discussion, as they all recognize the difficulty of identifying and addressing bubbles in the economy. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 22.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  And thank you to the authors of these papers and the team that worked on this project. When I think about financial stability, I tend to separate structural issues from cyclical issues, specifically cyclical excesses, such as market valuation, the level of risk-taking.  And in thinking about structural issues, I try to focus on five in particular, and should note that we’ve made good progress on many of these.  Number one, do we have enough capital adequacy in our financial institutions, both banks and large nonbanks.  Number two, is there liquidity of capital in a stress scenario.  That is, can a balance sheet be “monetized” to provide capital.  I think our stress testing has gone a long way here. The third one, which was extremely problematic in the last crisis, is the level of interconnectedness in the financial system.  This is harder to track because usually counterparty transactions are netted.  But we found in the last crisis that there were a significant number of counterparty transactions that caused a domino effect.  By some estimates, there was as much as $80 to $90 trillion notional amount of CDS versus about $10 trillion of debt issued globally.  AIG was obviously an example of a party that had a substantial number of counterparty transactions.  We need to track this so that you don’t have one weak institution potentially threatening others. The fourth thing I watch is mismatches between asset liquidity and either duration or capital structure, which include redemption provisions.  For example, recently we’ve talked more about these high-yield mutual funds, which have relatively illiquid assets but offer daily liquidity.  That’s a good example of a structural issue that creates a financial instability.  It may not be big enough to create a systemic risk, but I view that as a structural issue. And the fifth issue that I try to track is the overall debt relative to GDP in the economy by sector:  household sector, financial sector, nonfinancial businesses, and then the government.  For example, what we found looking at the last crisis was that there was an extraordinarily high level of debt in the household sector relative to GDP, but it didn’t look that significant because of asset values in the household sector, particularly home prices. Those are the five things that I still think, even sitting here today, we should keep track of.  It strikes me that, yes, all of these structural issues lend themselves to macroprudential tools as a first line of defense.  But they also require regulation from other entities outside the Fed, plus fiscal oversight, and that, through the FSOC and others, requires good coordination among agencies. As a second line of defense, I do believe that monetary policy does need to be cognizant of cyclical excesses.  Cyclical excesses can be dangerous because they amplify or expose structural faults.  And monetary policy, as a second line of defense, can certainly help damp some of these cyclical excesses. I think we have made great progress in the United States through CCAR, stress tests, and all the good work that has been done to address many of these structural issues.  But the last issue that I’ll mention is that I’m conscious of the fact that many structural faults exist outside the United States in places like China, and those risks threaten to spill over to other countries.  We saw some evidence of an episode of this during the first four months of this year, when you saw structural faults in China threaten to create some destabilization in the rest of the world.  When that happened, I thought it was a very appropriate time for monetary policy to act, in this case by not acting.  And I think that helped cushion instability that was created from outside the United States.  As we go forward, we need to keep in mind that some structural issues may be as likely to occur outside the United States, and we’re going to find ourselves dealing with them without any, or very few, statutory tools.  In that regard, I believe that we will have to consider monetary policy as a second line of defense.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating his thoughts and observations on financial stability and the need for regulation and coordination among agencies.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On these issues, I have for some time generally accepted the conventional wisdom that called for macroprudential tools as the primary line of defense and for monetary policy to be used rarely.  But at the same time, I am quite uncomfortable with the implications of that recommendation and whether we really have an understanding of why that is the right approach.  And part of that discomfort is just having been familiar with work by Jeremy Stein and many others, including some of you around the table, which calls those things into question for various reasons.  I would say these excellent memos and today’s discussion have, I hope, moved me closer to clarity, but certainly not all the way there. As these papers and the wider literature illustrate, many of the fundamental questions concerning the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability remain unsettled.  There’s significant uncertainty about our ability to identify threats ex ante and how to think about the tradeoff between type I and type II errors.  The effectiveness of our macroprudential tools is untested.  It’s not clear whether and under what circumstances monetary policy is likely to reduce threats to financial stability without imposing too high a cost.  All of this suggests to me that, as President Mester suggested, the road to achieving an addition to the consensus statement in which we were all agreeing on the relationship between monetary policy and macroprudential and financial stability could well be a long and challenging one. Although I regard the question as somewhat unsettled, my working view is that regulation, including macroprudential policies, should be the primary line of defense against financial instability.  In the United States, increasing the system’s overall resiliency with through-the-cycle policies seems like our best available tool for addressing these risks.  Higher capital ratios, larger holdings of liquid assets, and the near elimination of “runnable” bank debt have made the banking system and our overall financial system safer.  If these measures had been in place before the financial crisis, I feel fairly sure that the consequences would have been much less severe. The efficacy of time-varying tools remains questionable.  CCAR could be used in a targeted and reasonably timely way if financial-stability risks pertain primarily to the banking system.  But the interagency process is slow and will remain so, inadequately addressing problems even in cases in which there is direct authority to do so.  I don’t expect that to change.  There are also important sectors of the financial system in which transparency and the reach of macroprudential tools are limited, and I don’t expect that to change either. All that said, some of the research comes very close to saying that monetary policy is simply the wrong tool and highly unlikely to ever play a constructive role in addressing threats to financial stability.  And I am uncomfortable—like, it sounds, others around the table are—with categorical statements about what one will or will not do in a crisis.  Several have noted that humility is an appropriate watchword here.  I think Mike Tyson actually said it so much more colorfully when he noted that everyone has a plan until they get punched in the mouth.  [Laughter]  In unusual circumstances, therefore, I could be open to using monetary policy to address financial stability threats.  There would be an obvious tension between moving early before the evidence is clear and waiting too long for clarity.  And, of course, the earlier the intervention, the less clear it would be that higher rates would actually reduce the already very low probability of a financial crisis. Despite these challenges, though, there are two key features of the U.S. context that call for keeping one’s mind open and that I don’t think are adequately faced by the literature.  First, as many have mentioned, the U.S. institutional setting is very challenging for macroprudential policy, with our unwieldy regulatory apparatus and vibrant shadow banking sector.  Second, while this is not my baseline, it’s plausible to me that rates will have to remain very low for a very long time to achieve stable prices and full employment, but that such low rates will drive excessive credit growth and create irresistible upward pressure on asset prices, including real estate prices.  I’m thinking of a situation in which a broad range of asset prices are moving up well beyond what fundamentals would justify; where the other tools we have don’t seem to be addressing the problem or have failed to do so; and where low interest rates are pushing up asset prices and driving credit to excessive levels, probably over many years, and thus are a principal cause of the threat.  Recalling that we have had two major real estate blowups in the past 25 years, I would not rule out a policy of leaning against the wind in such a case as one tool among many.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and discomfort with the conventional wisdom and recommending regulation as the primary line of defense against financial instability, while acknowledging that some research suggests monetary policy may not be a constructive tool in addressing financial stability threats.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 24.
 MR. DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First, I want to thank the staff for their thoughtful memos.  I thought that how you framed the discussion was great. While I agree that macroprudential policy measures are the primary instruments through which policy “should,” with quotes around it, promote financial stability, I view the institutional constraints in the United States as making this very difficult to operationalize in practice.  I think that the diffusion of responsibility among many different regulatory agencies and the differences in mandates across these agencies are very important constraints.  In my own experience, a number of regulatory agencies do not seem to give much weight, if any, to broad financial stability objectives.  In particular, they do not appear to place much emphasis on the effect of how the behavior of any particular firm generates externalities that affect other firms and the broader financial system.  Thus, rules and regulations tend to have a microprudential focus and a consumer and investor protection focus rather than being oriented toward mitigating risks to the broader financial system. There’s also a meaningful coordination problem, which suggests that implementing macroprudential tools in a timely way would be very difficult to do in practice.  Yes, we do have the FSOC.  But the reality is that the individual agencies guard their prerogatives, and the fact that the FSOC is chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury—part of the executive branch—can introduce a political element in the pursuit of its responsibilities.  So under the U.S. institutional setup, I think tools that work automatically through-the-cycle might be more effective than those that would have to be implemented on a more discretionary basis.  But such automatic tools are difficult to design and calibrate in a world in which the threats in the future are likely to differ significantly from those in the past.  When you think about the different bubbles we’ve had over the past 30 or 40 years, they’re all very, very different.  And I imagine that one set of tools that would work very well over the cycle for one set of bubbles might not be totally adequate for another. As a result, I don’t view macroprudential policies as being at a level of maturity in the United States that we would likely be able to deploy them very successfully to achieve our financial stability objectives.  That said, I do think a number of policies that have up to now been primarily microprudential in nature, such as CCAR, CLAR, and supervisory guidance, could also be used to achieve macroprudential objectives.  I suspect that having a CCAR stress test include a significant stress to one particular asset class or activity that we were concerned about from a financial stability perspective—take commercial real estate lending as an example—could influence the credit provision to that sector by driving up the shadow price of capital for that activity. This suggests to me that we should do more work in three areas:  First, work with other regulatory agencies to sensitize them to the importance of financial stability and to broaden our collective macroprudential toolkit; second, continue to develop how our microprudential instruments could be adapted to pursue macroprudential objectives; and, third, explore in what circumstances monetary policy might play a role.  Can it be used effectively to fill in the cracks, or are its financial stability effects likely to be very limited relative to the consequences to broad macroeconomic activity.  And what’s the cost-benefit tradeoff here. With respect to monetary policy, I have to admit some skepticism about its efficacy to achieve financial stability objectives.  As I see it, in most cases the benefits of a tighter monetary policy in curbing excess in a particular sector are likely to be outweighed by the costs in terms of greater deviations from the Committee’s medium-term employment and inflation objectives.  But I think this conclusion depends on the particular circumstances.  For example, how big the sector is and how sensitive it is to monetary policy probably matter in terms of that cost-benefit tradeoff.  If the sector that is out of balance is large—think residential housing—and that sector is very sensitive to interest rates, then I would think the benefits of monetary policy would likely be higher. Also, monetary policy might be useful in terms of signaling our concern.  One thing we didn’t talk about very much today was expectations, and I think expectations do matter.  And if the central bank protested against how a sector was evolving, this might result in meaningful changes in behavior beyond those just generated by the change in the prospective path of short-term interest rates.  In monetary policy, we really have a very well developed theory of how these expectations tend to influence behavior.  We don’t really seem to have that same work developed on the macroprudential side yet.  I recall how the Carter Administration’s implementation of credit controls in the spring of 1980—and one could argue that was a macroprudential measure—had a very powerful effect well before the controls actually were binding.  Now, this was not a particularly successful experiment, as it worked a lot more effectively than they imagined.  But it does, I think, underscore the importance of expectations. So the bottom line for me is, I wouldn’t rule out using monetary policy to achieve financial stability objectives, but I certainly would try to use microprudential and macroprudential tools first to the extent that that was feasible.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the current institutional setup in the United States and their skepticism about the efficacy of monetary policy in achieving financial stability objectives. They also suggest exploring other policy options and developing a broader macroprudential toolkit.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 25.
 MR. TARULLO.  It’s maybe a bit unfair to have the first word and then try to have one of the last words, but I did want to make a couple of observations about the tenor of the conversation. First, I guess I don’t agree with those who say that we understand how monetary policy works really well, we just don’t understand how macroprudential policies work.  I’ve spent seven years here being surprised at how much uncertainty there actually is on the transmission mechanisms for monetary policy.  And I keep coming back to our reliance on inflation expectations—something that’s undertheorized, undocumented, and hard to pin down empirically.  So while there’s certainly more work to be done, I just don’t think it’s as radical a distinction as some have suggested. A corollary to that—and this is what I thought Stan and I were trying to get at early on, without success—is, in thinking about the idea, it’s not just popping bubbles.  The popping bubbles thing is an enormous problem.  If you get to the point at which you have the bubble and you’re going to try to use monetary policy to pop it, then the sort of thing Charlie was talking about is absolutely going to ensue.  But, presumably, monetary policy, and how it operates and what effects it has, differs across conditions of countries as well as within particular economies as those economies and their financial systems evolve.  And I think we at least have to be somewhat open to the possibility that the ways in which our economy and financial system have evolved are such that it’s not just a Hippocratic Oath thing in which you can’t use monetary policy to do something about financial stability because you may do harm.  It may be, and I underscore may be, that monetary policy itself is creating some of the problem.  And I think we just, intellectually, need to be a bit more open to that. You know, there are many times in the past two years when I’ve missed having Jeremy on this corridor.  Today is way high up on my list of times when I wish Jeremy were here to give what I regard as his very powerful, somewhat alternative view of the way in which monetary policy operates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Tarullo, expresses disagreement with the idea that we understand how monetary policy works well and that the uncertainty lies in macroprudential policies. He believes that there is actually a lot of uncertainty about the transmission mechanisms of monetary policy and highlights the reliance on inflation expectations as an example. Therefore, he argues that the distinction between understanding monetary policy and macroprudential policies is not as radical as some suggest. He also suggests that it may be possible that monetary policy itself is creating some of the problems in the economy and financial system.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 26.
 MR. EVANS.  Can I ask you just a clarifying question about what you’re talking about.  Because I thought that the premise of what I was talking about was, you’re about to make a monetary policy decision on the basis of how you think the economy is going, and then all of a sudden somebody says, “Wait a minute.  Financial stability is more of a problem.”  Then you do something different, and that’s presumably going to push you away from what you thought you were trying to achieve.  That’s the context.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is expressing his understanding of the situation and suggesting that a change in focus towards financial stability could lead to a divergence from the original goal of making a monetary policy decision based on the state of the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
  The MSCI EM equity index rose 6.8 percent, extending its strong year-to-date performance despite the January financial market volatility.  The global search for yield also benefited EM assets, as illustrated by Argentina’s return to the international bond market after a 15-year absence. Despite the continued stabilization and recovery in risk assets over the period, concerns regarding longer-running global themes persist.  Market contacts continued to question the monetary policy efficacy of the Bank of Japan and, to a lesser extent, the European Central Bank.  Foreign exchange markets continue to send the strongest signal:  Since these two central banks added incremental accommodation in January and March, respectively, both the euro and yen have appreciated notably versus the dollar, as shown in the bottom-left panel.  In fact, despite the combined force of the yen’s recent sharp appreciation, expectations for the BOJ to add accommodation, and mounting expectations for intervention to weaken the currency, net positioning by speculative investors for further yen appreciation has reached its highest level since the 1990s.  For both the BOJ and ECB, market commentary continues to question the ability of available tools to realize their policy objectives.  Indeed, five-year, five-year inflation swap rates in the euro area and Japan have fallen since the two central banks announced their respective large easing measures, and banks have continued to struggle in the low-growth and negative interest rate environment. Elsewhere, a new global risk came into focus—the U.K. referendum vote on European Union membership on June 23.  The outcome is currently seen as a close call by market participants.  As shown in the bottom-right panel, market participants seem to be pricing in substantial event risk in the foreign exchange market:  The relative cost of protection against a large sterling depreciation against the dollar rose discretely as the related option expiration date spanned the referendum date.  More directly relevant to U.S. monetary policy, several market participants have suggested the referendum could present an obstacle to any desire by the FOMC to tighten policy in June, due to the possibility of widespread volatility in European financial markets following a “leave” vote in the referendum and amid a perceived increased responsiveness of monetary policy to global developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The passage discusses market commentary that questions the ability of the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank to realize their policy objectives. It also mentions concerns about the outcome of the U.K. referendum vote on European Union membership and how it could present an obstacle to U.S. monetary policy tightening in June. These points indicate a disagreement or lack of consensus among market participants.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I just want to say that I applaud the Desk staff for undertaking a rigorous look at how we manage the foreign exchange reserves we find ourselves with.  They’ve grounded their approach in what seems like a reasonably sensible set of principles, and I think that should protect us from undue criticism regarding stewardship of these funds.  I think that’s important. I want to point out, though, that the magnitude of the estimate of the funding needs just highlights what an anachronistic arrangement these funds represent.  I find it hard to believe that anyone believes a $6 billion intervention in the euro-dollar market would make a meaningful difference and would leave some imprint.  This is trivial in relation to the size of U.S. reserve account balances or European reserve account balances.  And under current operating procedures when we set the IOER rate, it’s hard to see how monetary conditions would change in the United States.  So it would be exactly like the old regime in which sterilized foreign exchange interventions were basically meaningless.  Now, the only real effect it could have is if it signaled something about the future course of monetary policy.  But because the Treasury is acknowledged to be in the lead and have the authority over U.S. dollar policy, it’s sort of problematic for the independence of our monetary policy if we’re perceived to be bending future monetary policy at the behest of the Treasury’s desires about dollar policy. In Richmond we’ve complained about these arrangements for a couple of decades now.  We don’t expect a lot of action soon.  [Laughter]  But at some point we need to start educating policymakers and the public about these arrangements, that the operations really are anachronistic and don’t really do any good, and maybe convince them we could eliminate the funds, give the money back to the Treasury, or do something else with them.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker (Mr. Lacker) disagrees with the approach taken by the Desk staff in managing foreign exchange reserves, calling it anachronistic and suggesting that the funds should be eliminated or used for something else.


Passage number 29.
 MR. POTTER.  Just to support President Lacker’s point a little bit, if we used the whole portfolio tomorrow, it would be less than 2 percent of the daily flow in euro and yen with the dollar cross.  So there’s some evidence to support what you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 30.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Manager.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  Fair enough.  But it’s also been little used.  And my sense is that when it has been used—and, if I’m not mistaken, the last time we intervened was following the Japanese earthquake.  And it was a coordinated, small intervention by the G-7.  Our participation was centrally symbolic to support the Japanese.  And these do seem like symbolic amounts to me.  In that sense, I take your point.  But sometimes symbolism and coordination do make a difference.  And we’re not forced to follow the Treasury.  We typically have gone along with them.  But, aside from that, has there been any intervention at all over the past 20 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing the use of intervention in the past and sharing their perspectives on its symbolic value. There is no indication of disagreement or argument.


Passage number 31.
 MR. POTTER.  The last intervention before that was September 2000, when we purchased euros in conjunction with other central banks and the U.S. Treasury.  That was a time when there were some doubts about the euro.  Its exchange-rate value was down in the mid-80s, and we got together and tried to convince people with a signal—not about future monetary policy, but I think that we were happy to acquire euros.  So those are the two most recent interventions.  If you go back to the 1980s, they’re much larger.  I have an example of the equivalent of $80 billion over a few days when it was announced that Chairman Volcker would not be reappointed, I believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about past interventions and their reasons.


Passage number 32.
 MR. LACKER.  “Symbolic” is a good word for it. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there other comments or questions on anything that Simon and Lorie covered.  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing nothing, I am going to ask for separate votes on the NAFA arrangement and the liquidity swap agreements.  Let’s start with the NAFA arrangement, our standing swap lines with Canada and Mexico.  Do I have a motion to approve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are discussing separate votes on the NAFA arrangement and the liquidity swap agreements, and there is no response or objection to this proposal.


Passage number 33.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Are there any comments on those.  [No response]  Okay, then I’m going to ask for a vote.  This is only for voters.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Okay.  So the NAFA arrangement is approved.  Let’s move along to the liquidity swap agreements.  Do I have a motion to approve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker asks for comments and there are none. They then ask for a vote and there is no opposition. The NAFA arrangement is approved unanimously.


Passage number 34.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  And then again, any comments on these.  [No response]  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed.  [No response]  Okay, great.  And, finally, I need a vote to ratify domestic market operations.  Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage shows agreement and consensus among the participants.


Passage number 35.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  All in favor.  [Chorus of ayes]  Okay, great.  So then we’re going to move now into our go-round on the economic and financial situation.  I’d like to call on Bill Wascher to begin the briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The members are in agreement and moving forward with the briefing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Steve referred to markets as largely having shrugged off Brexit risks.  This is consonant with what I’ve heard directly from some market actors.  But Simon, in his presentation, noted a fairly significant increase in demand for protection against pound depreciation against the dollar, apparently with an eye toward the upcoming referendum.  How do I reconcile those two observations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo mentions that some market actors have largely shrugged off Brexit risks, while Simon noted an increase in demand for protection against pound depreciation. This contrast in their observations suggests a disagreement or difference in opinion on the impact of Brexit on the market.


Passage number 37.
 MR. KAMIN.  Right.  I will say that I pondered whether I should use that phrase, and I received support from my colleagues to do so, with one exception, which is in FX markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It only mentions that the phrase was pondered and received support from colleagues, with one exception in FX markets.


Passage number 38.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage consists of a statement by Mr. Tarullo, and there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 39.
 MR. KAMIN.  In FX markets, they expect that the bad vote—that is, to leave—would indeed push down the pound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the expectation that the "bad vote" (to leave) would push down the pound in FX markets.


Passage number 40.
 MR. POTTER.  But it might be the right thing to happen.  If they leave, maybe the pound has to depreciate because that’s the right pricing response.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a possibility or potential outcome without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 41.
 MR. TARULLO.  So that’s what I was going to ask—whether that suggested markets were thinking that the medium-term economic prospects of the United Kingdom don’t look so great with Brexit.  But there aren’t as many immediate financial-stability-type concerns—that is, funding of the banks and things like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by MR. TARULLO, who is seeking clarification or confirmation regarding the market's perception of the medium-term economic prospects of the United Kingdom with Brexit. There is no expression of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 42.
 MR. POTTER.  Possibly, but there’s a wide bid-ask on where the sterling might end up on June 24.  The event risk is big.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that there is uncertainty about the outcome of the sterling on June 24th but does not challenge or argue against any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 43.
 MR. FISCHER.  Hasn’t there been a substantial depreciation of the pound sterling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question about the depreciation of the pound sterling.


Passage number 44.
 MR. POTTER.  There has been a substantial depreciation leading into this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is stating a fact about a substantial depreciation, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 45.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, in recent months, it’s more that it has not risen against the dollar as much as other currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states a fact about the currency not rising as much against the dollar compared to other currencies.


Passage number 46.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, it’s pricing in some probability of Brexit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply acknowledges that there is a certain level of uncertainty or risk associated with the possibility of Brexit. It does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 47.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply confirms the statement made before it.


Passage number 48.
 MR. POTTER.  It got down to about 140.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical value without any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 49.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And so it’s declined, and if the vote is to stay, the pound will likely rally.  And if the vote is to leave, the pound will probably slough a lot.  And, currently, it reflects some weighted average of those two outcomes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents two possible outcomes and their potential effects on the pound, without taking a stance or expressing disagreement.


Passage number 50.
 MR. KAMIN.  But I’ve heard no comments to the effect of, well, it might lower the pound, but it would not have other adverse effects.  I think a lot of market observers expect that if there was a leave vote, it could create disruptive ramifications.  And it’s a bit of a mystery as to why it has not affected other markets much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kamin expressing his observations and thoughts on the potential effects of a leave vote on the pound and other markets.


Passage number 51.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  I guess that was the question I was asking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Tarullo is simply acknowledging that the question asked is what he was asking.


Passage number 52.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It doesn’t seem to be priced into other European markets, in which people think that there could be some ramifications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that there may be price discrepancies in other European markets due to people's belief in potential consequences. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 53.
 MR. POTTER.  So the cost of protecting in other markets against it has not risen as much.  That could be because there’s no spillover, or it could be mispriced.  We don’t know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Potter is simply stating that the reason for the cost of protecting in other markets not rising as much could be due to either the absence of spillover or mispricing, but he acknowledges that the exact reason is unknown.


Passage number 54.
 MR. TARULLO.  But even if you hypothesize, Simon, that the overnight change in the pound would be much bigger than is anticipated by the hedging that has taken place to date, and, therefore, there could be some effects on, for example, British financial institutions, shouldn’t that be reflected in at least some increase in funding costs for those institutions now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply discussing the potential effects of a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 55.
 MR. KAMIN.  Right, if it were considered material.  In fact, funding spreads in Britain have gone up about 5 basis points, so not very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about funding spreads in Britain without any contradictory statements or opposing views being presented.


Passage number 56.
 MR. TARULLO.  So they believe the polls right now, basically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that "they" (unspecified individuals) believe the polls at the present time.


Passage number 57.
 MR. POTTER.  But you have to be a little bit careful.  The Bank of England has said that it will supply liquidity and it will put in extra auctions, so we don’t know whether that is reducing the affect.  I think CDS for large U.K. banks might have moved up a little bit since last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating some information and expressing uncertainty about the impact of certain actions.


Passage number 58.
 MR. KAMIN.  They have moved up, but not very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any opposing viewpoints or contradictory information.


Passage number 59.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals, Mr. Tarullo and Chair Yellen, seem to be in agreement based on the one-word responses provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 60.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to follow up on this, I thought that even if they voted to get out, this would trigger a round of negotiations.  Even for financial institutions, at least immediately, their situations would not change for up to two years.  And beyond that, it’s not that clear exactly what their situation would be.  So the market might price in only a small change for Brexit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, believes that the market might only price in a small change for Brexit, while others may hold a different opinion.


Passage number 61.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it wouldn’t be a good outcome for the U.K. economy, because there would be tremendous uncertainty over that period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a potential consequence without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 62.
 MR. BULLARD.  All true.  But this is just a reason why markets might say, “Well, I’m not sure how to price Barclays.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Bullard is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 63.
” MR. KAMIN.  I think the thinking underlying the adverse ramifications for a leave vote would be that, after the vote to leave, they’d then start a negotiation period that could be two years or longer, and that the uncertainty over the model of U.K. linkage to the European economy that would result from that would be sufficient to put a lot of downdrafts both in markets and in real-side spending and confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the potential adverse ramifications of a leave vote in terms of the negotiation period and the uncertainty it may cause in the UK's linkage to the European economy.


Passage number 64.
 MR. BULLARD.  Certainly true.  But my only point would be that’s a very slow-moving process.  We’ve got negotiations going on all over the world all the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Bullard is simply making a point about negotiations being a slow-moving process.


Passage number 65.
 MR. POTTER.  But there are capital inflows the United Kingdom relies on, and Governor Carney in particular has pointed that out as a potential strain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter is stating a fact that Governor Carney has pointed out the potential strain caused by capital inflows.


Passage number 66.
 MR. BULLARD.  Absolutely. CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 67.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage is not provided.


Passage number 68.
 WILLIAMS.  So this is for Bill Wascher.  Ready.  Okay.  [Laughter]  It’s no surprise I’m going to revisit a topic.  As Governor Powell and I noted at our March meeting, productivity growth has been surprisingly bad for the past five years, averaging about ½ percent.  Tealbook puts it at minus 2.2 percent in the first quarter.  It’s a huge negative.  Yet in the Tealbook forecast, productivity growth pops back up to 2 percent in the current quarter and stays strong for the rest of the year.  So my question, as it was in March:  What makes you continue to expect that we are on the verge of this extraordinary reversal in productivity growth.  I’m usually accused of being optimistic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply restating a previous question and expressing their usual optimism.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
 MR. WASCHER.  Some of the pickup reflects a technical issue with hours.  I hate to bring this up, but we’ve been surprised on the upside by the strength in the component of hours that isn’t captured by the payroll survey, and that’s been holding productivity down.  We don’t project it being wound back, but we aren’t expecting it to continue, and we get a pickup in productivity growth on that technical reason.  More broadly, our view is that as the economy improves and investment picks up, we’ll start to see some gradual improvement in productivity—only to, maybe, 1¼ percent, so it’s certainly not high relative to the post-2005 era.  In fact, I think the average over that 10-year period is about 1¼ percent.  So we’re not expecting a huge pickup in productivity. I guess the other thing I would say is that we’re also nervous about it, and we see downside risks.  There was an alternative view box in the Tealbook that I thought made a strong case that we might not see a pickup like we have in the forecast.  And along with that alternative view box, we included a couple of alternative simulations that illustrate how the economy might respond to a weaker productivity path.  So in the baseline forecast, we have retained our assumption that productivity will move back up to a modest 1¼ percent pace, but I certainly agree that there are downside risks to that, in light of what we’ve seen over the past five years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the statement that there is a technical issue with hours that isn't captured by the payroll survey, which has been holding productivity down. The speaker mentions that there is an alternative view in the Tealbook that argues against a pickup in productivity like what is forecasted. This indicates a difference of opinion or uncertainty about the future trajectory of productivity.


Passage number 70.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage or the context provided.


Passage number 71.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.  Thank you very much. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The exchange between Williams and Chair Yellen seems polite and cooperative.


Passage number 72.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for Nellie.  On your exhibit 1, the chart on the lower right, the corporate business sector looks like it might be overextended.  Does it matter if the corporate business credit-to-GDP is going up because they’re voluntarily changing their capital structure by buying back shares, as opposed to going off on some sort of investment spending binge. I don’t know the answer myself.  I’m just wondering what your thoughts are on that, because it seems that what’s happening in the corporate sector is, people have looked at the cost of credit, they’ve decided the optimal capital structure is different from what it was before, and they’ve moved to that different capital structure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply posing a question and expressing their curiosity about the topic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
 MS. LIANG.  What we can try to look at is, what underwriting standards look like, as opposed to how well they’re using the funds they raise.  This chart reflects the concern we have raised since 2013:  the rise in debt in the high-yield bond market and the leveraged loans, in which we had been starting to see very loose underwriting standards.  I think at this point, with oil prices having fallen and credit growth in the sector having really started to slow, though there are a few defaults, there’s some easing of imbalances.  Our sense is, this debt ratio won’t continue to rise.  But it has risen, and at this point is that the divergence with household is quite unusual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage indicates that there is a divergence or disagreement between the rise in debt in the high-yield bond market and leveraged loans and the potential easing of imbalances due to falling oil prices and slowed credit growth in the sector. This suggests that there is contention or disagreement regarding the impact of these factors on the debt ratio.


Passage number 74.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Because profits are actually pretty high relative to their past levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply states a fact that profits are high relative to their past levels.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
 MS. LIANG.  The earnings per share growth estimates are coming down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker states that earnings per share growth estimates are coming down, suggesting a decrease or revision in the projected growth.


Passage number 76.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of a polite exchange.


Passage number 77.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have a question for Bill Wascher.  Looking at the forecast summary, chart 3, real GDP, how should I interpret the confidence bounds there.  You’ve got a confidence interval that is a 70 percent confidence interval and the March Tealbook looks like it was outside the confidence interval for first-quarter GDP.  Is that how I should interpret this.  That sounds like we got extraordinarily bad news during the interim, which couldn’t have happened on the basis of historical forecast errors.  That’s how I would interpret this figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. 


Passage number 78.
 MR. RUDD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Rudd without providing any information or discussion that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 79.
  So, President Bullard, if I may— MR. BULLARD.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement. It is a simple acknowledgement of President Bullard's response.


Passage number 80.
 MR. RUDD.  We would have started the confidence interval earlier last round because we would have put it around our forecast, so when the confidence interval would have expanded last round, it would have been maybe two quarters earlier.  So the March forecast wasn’t outside the March confidence interval.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. Instead, it presents a hypothetical scenario and explains how the confidence interval would have been impacted.


Passage number 81.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the response "Yes" provided by Mr. Bullard. However, without additional context, it is not possible to determine the specific nature of the disagreement or who it involves.


Passage number 82.
 MR. WASCHER.  But nonetheless, Q1 was surprisingly weak.  I don’t know how it would have compared to the confidence interval in March because we don’t have that, but it was a pretty big downward revision to our estimate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing the speaker's uncertainty about comparing the current situation to a past one because of missing data. There is no clear disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 83.
 MR. BULLARD.  I see.  So if I put the two-step-ahead confidence bound mentally around the red line, I would get inside the black line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply explaining a method of visualizing a two-step-ahead confidence bound.


Passage number 84.
 MR. WASCHER.  Yes, maybe that would give you a better sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement by MR. WASCHER.


Passage number 85.
 MR. RUDD.  So even if you look closely, I think that you might be slightly outside it and that the Q1 confidence interval last round was probably ¾ percent on the low end.  As Bill said, it’s something we weren’t expecting, and it was unexpectedly large.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and acknowledges that it was unexpected.


Passage number 86.
 MR. BULLARD.  You know, it would be interesting to me if you could provide in future meetings a kind of index of how surprising the news was in between meetings from the perspective of real GDP.  Maybe you do that in other places.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Bullard, is simply expressing interest in having additional information included in future meetings.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 87.
 MR. POTTER.  Didn’t you have a box in the Tealbook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "didn't" implies that the speaker, Mr. Potter, is contradicting or challenging the idea of the person having a box in the Tealbook.


Passage number 88.
 MR. WASCHER.  That’s just a retrospective of forecasters going back, but that’s not about a particular quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the retrospective of forecasters and it is not indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 89.
 MR. BULLARD.  Because it’s kind of informative to say, “Well, the news was pretty bad” or “kind of bad” or “about what we expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Bullard is simply discussing the level of quality of the news.


Passage number 90.
” MR. WASCHER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 91.
 MR. WILCOX.  Isn’t that what this confidence interval does.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement about confidence intervals. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 92.
 MR. BULLARD.  Well, evidently, not quite, because the interval around the red line would be actually bigger if you put that on this chart. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Any other questions.  [No response]  Then we have an opportunity now to comment on financial stability, and I have four people who have indicated a desire to do so.  Let me start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange between Mr. Bullard and Chair Yellen, followed by Chair Yellen allowing others to comment on financial stability.


Passage number 93.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the staff’s report and the comprehensive discussion of emerging risks in commercial real estate, including possible actions that could be taken.  In fact, this discussion is not unlike the discussion of emerging risks in the COP financial-stability tabletop exercise that was prepared roughly a year ago.  Unfortunately, one of the most serious concerns in that tabletop exercise was a continued rise in commercial real estate prices and a relatively low interest rate environment.  Since the tabletop, commercial real estate prices over the past year have tracked the simulation quite closely.  Over the past seven years, multifamily commercial real estate prices have roughly doubled, with the prices of other categories of real estate also rising quite rapidly, as was shown in the QS report.  Commercial real estate is a significant asset class for many leveraged intermediaries, and thus a quick price reversal could have serious repercussions.  I personally witnessed this in New England when a significant percentage of banks failed or were deeply troubled as a result of falling commercial real estate prices in the late 1980s, with significant spillovers to the broader economy. Starting with this morning’s conversation, many people have suggested that if confronted with a buildup in financial stability risks, we should use supervisory and macroprudential tools as our first line of defense.  I agree.  The challenge is finding the appropriate tool and calibration of that tool for such a response. The commercial real estate presentation illustrates the challenge quite well.  Many of the high-price commercial real estate properties in Boston are supported by financing from a mix of large banks, many of which are foreign banks, foreign investors, and large nonbank intermediaries.  However, large domestic banks still maintain a relatively modest overall exposure to commercial real estate.  Smaller domestic banks with assets in the $1 billion to $10 billion range have significant exposure to commercial real estate in small multifamily and strip mall projects, but these are banking organizations with respect to which we traditionally have a relatively light supervisory touch, unless the banks are state member banks. If we believe that exuberance in commercial real estate risks a more significant reversal of price and thus raises safety and soundness concerns for these medium-sized banks, we can address these concerns with traditional tools.  In particular, the 2006 real estate guidance, which was greatly watered down from its original formulation, could be strengthened.  That guidance could revisit the multifamily concentrations and consider more-binding thresholds of a kind similar to what had been done with leveraged lending.  In addition, we could announce increased frequency of exams and more-thorough holding company exams for those banks and holding companies already outside the parameters of the current guidance. Although strengthening the guidance will likely require perhaps torturous interactions with our fellow supervisors, the likely long delays in this process suggest that we should start the process relatively soon.  Increasing the depth and frequency of holding company exams would send a strong signal of our concern.  More-aggressive examinations would also have costs, as they would require significantly more resources than we have budgeted and would likely be viewed unfavorably by other regulators unless the primary regulator was also involved.  Nevertheless, I think we should be considering these measures. In the case of the larger banks, the concern is less a supervisory one, as the overall exposures are relatively low, than a financial-stability one.  In this case, the emphasis is on both signaling our concern and increasing the resiliency of the banking system to withstand a widespread price decline that causes collateral damage beyond that of the direct commercial real estate exposure.  One way to signal our concern and perhaps increase resiliency via additional capital buffering is to increase a more severe stress scenario in the CCAR exercise.  This in effect raises the cost of capital for large banks making commercial real estate loans, which has the benefit of providing large banks an incentive to reduce the risk through their direct exposure.  I think we should consider this for the next CCAR.  In addition, I view the rapid increase in commercial real estate prices as a sign of increased risk tolerance and possibly “reaching-for-yield” behavior.  Although the countercyclical capital buffer is a blunt instrument, it has the virtue of building more resilience into banks should a CRE crash occur.  I would consider increasing the buffer, which is currently at zero, to reflect the increased risk to financial stability, with commercial real estate highlighted as key evidence of that risk. What happens if nothing on the supervisory or macroprudential side is done.  I hope that’s not the case, and that regulatory agencies begin to take increasing actions in response to this risk.  The policy tools are vested in a variety of regulatory agencies, including the FSOC, the Board of Governors, and the other regulatory agencies, but not the FOMC.  Due to the cumbersome governance in the United States, many of these changes would require long lags in implementation.  In that case, were the risk to increase and no actions taken, I would be inclined to consider monetary policy tools, including more quickly shrinking our balance sheet or raising interest rates more quickly than we otherwise would, and highlighting through our formal communications that this, in part, reflects some of our financial stability concerns.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Rosengren, is expressing his agreement with the idea of using supervisory and macroprudential tools as the first line of defense in addressing financial stability risks. He goes on to discuss potential actions that could be taken to address the risks in the commercial real estate market.


Passage number 94.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think this QS presentation that Nellie made is a good opportunity to make the connection back to this morning’s conversation.   Looking at the volatile market conditions at the outset of the year, they provided a bit of a stress test that helped inform the QS assessment this quarter.  It was notable that U.S. financial firms and markets came through the elevated volatility in January and early February looking relatively resilient.  This highlights the critical importance of the buffers that have been built since the crisis in the banking system in response to the substantially tougher regulatory framework and heightened supervisory expectations. In addition, I thought it was interesting that the relatively smooth functioning of the corporate bond market in the face of very sharp increases in spreads was a particular focus, in light of ongoing concerns about liquidity transformation in mutual funds concentrated in the relatively illiquid assets in this sector, which have been highlighted by the FSOC.  The volatility underscores the importance of the reforms the SEC is proposing to ensure proper stress testing and that liquidity is well managed and available in anticipation of redemption surges as well as limits on leverage through derivatives. The other dimension that I thought deserved particular attention, as President Rosengren had mentioned, is the particular focus on valuation pressures in commercial real estate, in which there’s been rapid growth in lending, particularly in the multifamily segment and in which underwriting standards have been weakening and capitalization rates have been falling.  I think the discussions that we’ve had at the Board have very much emphasized the importance of ensuring that banks are vigilant to the risks associated with possible price declines in this segment of lending as well as interest rate increases.  The Board is undertaking or assessing a variety of actions in this arena, including the incorporation of these risks into CCAR scenarios and reinforcement of the guidance on CRE concentrations. One of the conclusions that was important in the work that was done by the QS staff is that a lot of the concentration sits in small banks, though they view it more as a microprudential than a macroprudential risk.  One of the interesting analyses that they shared was the potential value to top-down stress testing to help identify vulnerabilities in small banks and potentially help supervisory guidance, particularly when those vulnerabilities don’t correspond to higher CRE concentrations and thus would not have been caught necessarily by the concentration guidance. The conclusion I draw is simply that this framework and this QS is working, I think, the way that we would want it to work, and that insofar as the QS assessment called out risks to financial stability more generally that they believed would be best addressed by monetary policy, this would be precisely the kind of presentation that would help us move in that direction on the basis of the kind of framework that we talked about this morning.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 95.
 MR. FISCHER.  Nellie, I wanted to try to draw out an example in which we moved from assessment to actually doing something, which is leveraged lending.  What was it that went from recognizing the problem to getting out warnings out about it, actually warnings that seem to have been heeded.  How did that all work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking for an explanation of how a certain process worked, specifically going from recognizing a problem to issuing warnings about it.


Passage number 96.
 MS. LIANG.  So this was, I would say, probably in 2013.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement about a specific year.


Passage number 97.
 MR. FISCHER.  No, it was after 2013, because I remember it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not appear to contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of a personal memory.


Passage number 98.
 MS. LIANG.  Yes, well, it was 2011 when we started.  High-yield bond spreads were reaching near-historical lows, and we were seeing a weakening of underwriting standards in that sector.  Many of these transactions, like M&A transactions, require some combination of leveraged loans and high-yield bonds.  In the leveraged loan sector, we were seeing debt multiples rise pretty quickly, above six times—which is pretty high by historical standards, in terms of what is going to be repaid at some point.  So we were looking at both prices and standards and then debt growth for these loans that was starting to rise at an annual rate of somewhere between 10 to 15 percent a year.  At that point, there was some discussion of whether the banks were doing the underwriting of the leveraged loans and were they holding them.  That was the first discussion.  Would they be bearing future losses.  And, for the most part, while they were originating them, they were not holding them.  So there was just a lot of communication about this issue in the beginning. I think there’s a little history on the leveraged loans.  We actually wanted to start an update of the guidance in 2008, but by then the crisis had sort of started, so it was a little too late to get this guidance out.  And so it had kind of started on its own, and this was a timely way to get it out.  So, I think, just by the metrics we look at, we’re seeing that the debt of the underlying firms that were issuing the high-yield bonds and the leveraged loans also was rising quickly.  That combination suggested starting with communications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing factual information and discussing a topic without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 99.
 MR. FISCHER.  And was there interaction with the supervisors as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking if there was interaction with supervisors.


Passage number 100.
 MS. LIANG.  Oh, absolutely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any points of disagreement or contention. The phrase "Oh, absolutely" indicates agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 101.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes.  And Eric has talked about the commercial real estate capitalization rates.  On that or on anything else that’s in here, are there things we should be worrying about and beginning to focus on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks if there are concerns or areas of focus.


Passage number 102.
 MS. LIANG.  I think other than commercial real estate—and there we have done the assessments—we do not think at this point that it’s a broad financial stability concern.  The debt growth is not as sharp as it was in the high-yield sector or the corporate sector, but in view of these prices and incentives, absent shocks and the economy recovers, this is probably a place in which people will start to try to get credit, commercial real estate exposure.  So we would want to be paying attention to that.  Right now, as we said, it’s a small-bank issue.  The large banks have been stressed with pretty severe commercial real estate price declines on the order of 30 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's opinion and analysis of the situation regarding commercial real estate and debt growth.


Passage number 103.
 MR. TARULLO.  That’s in this year’s test too, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or disagreement. It simply states a question and an affirmation.


Passage number 104.
 MS. LIANG.  That is also in this year’s.  It was in last year’s test, and it is a similar sharp decline this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that there has been a sharp decline in something this year, similar to the decline that occurred last year. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 105.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a conversation between Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 106.
 MR. FISCHER.  Bill, how sure are you that this is anything but a banker’s attempt to prevent negative real interest rates.  And you said the loss of confidence.  Where is the loss of confidence coming from.  From the guys who don’t want this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not involve any explicit contention or disagreement. It consists of someone expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification about the motivations and source of a potential loss of confidence.


Passage number 107.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No.  I’m not so much focused on the bankers not liking negative interest rates because of the pressure on their net interest margins.  I’m more focused on the fact that I think households in particular view this as sort of a scary regime.  My own personal opinion is that there’s a subtle confidence channel here, that an environment in which you have to pay to hold cash in a bank is sort of unnerving.  I can’t prove that there’s that channel, but it certainly seems to me that the general reaction to negative interest rates in Europe and Japan has been more negative than what people anticipated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the author's personal opinion and observation.


Passage number 108.
 MR. FISCHER.  Well, but if you look at it more closely, you’ll see that the reaction came largely from Germany and from whatever is going on in Japan, which I don’t understand.  The ECB has sort of turned back a little bit from its statement that this won’t work if we have to go further.  The Swedes, to whom we listened at great length during the IMF meeting, are very happy with what they’ve got and believe they can do more.  So I don’t think we’re at the end of negative rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing their analysis and interpretation of the situation.


Passage number 109.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We may not be at the end, but I’m talking about people’s perception that there’s a diminishing margin of monetary policy in the toolkit, that’s all.  Because you saw in January and early February that the swing in sentiment was really powerfully negative, and I think that was part of what was driving it.  That’s just my personal opinion.  I hope I’m totally wrong. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I suggest we take a 15-minute break.  We’ll will get some coffee, and then we’ll start our economic go-round. [Coffee break] CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay, folks, let’s resume.  I think we can now begin our economic go-round.  And our first speaker is President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and hoping they are wrong, but there is no disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 110.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided a passage or context for me to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Could you please provide more information?


Passage number 111.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My positive outlook for the economy remains essentially unchanged since our previous meeting.  Better financial conditions and robust job growth have offset some disappointing spending data.  Overall, I expect 2016 to look a lot like 2015, with about 2 percent real GDP growth, sizable job gains, and a gradual decline in the unemployment rate.  I expect underlying measures of inflation to make the final few steps to our 2 percent goal over the next few years. As we discussed already today, I see the risks to the outlook as having come down a bit.  I’ll mention one in particular.  I was concerned about the high degree of uncertainty that was holding back, potentially, employment and investment regarding “Deflategate” and how that would be resolved.  [Laughter]  But now that the courts have finally resolved that issue to everyone’s satisfaction, I think that uncertainty has also stepped down.  So, overall, I see the risks to the outlook as roughly in balance. Of course, it’s that time of year when we all get together to discuss residual seasonality.  [Laughter]  First-quarter dips in real GDP growth have become the norm.  In the past, these weak first quarters have been followed by systematically stronger GDP growth later in the year, and so they provided little signal about the underlying momentum of the economy.  One underlying problem is that the BEA uses a bottom-up methodology, which seasonally adjusts the individual subcomponents of GDP instead of the aggregate number directly, and this approach allows small amounts of seasonal variation at a granular level when aggregated to affect the top-line numbers.  So, to correct this problem, my trusty staff took a top-down approach and applied a second round of seasonal adjustment to the published aggregates, and they estimate that real GDP after this second round of seasonal adjustment increased at a rate of more than 2 percent in the first quarter.  The higher number is better aligned with the strong labor market readings and is more consistent with my business contacts who report no recent drop-off in activity. The residual seasonality also reflects the PCE inflation data but to a much lesser extent, and it can be sidestepped by focusing on year-over-year comparisons.  The Tealbook indicates that core PCE inflation rose 1.6 percent from the first quarter of last year to the first quarter of this year, and that’s a jump of 0.3 percentage point from where it was a year ago.  A big part of this step-up reflects the dissipation of transitory factors that were holding core inflation down.  One notable example is the acceleration of prices for health-care services.  Medicaid physician payments were cut on a one-off basis in January 2015, something I mentioned last year, and that lowered health-care inflation and held down year-over-year aggregate core PCE inflation by a couple of tenths throughout last year.  Now that we’ve moved out of that 12-month window, price inflation for health-care services has been resuscitated, if you will, and it is again adding to core PCE inflation.  Unlike the Tealbook, I assume the increases in year-over-year inflation will not be unwound and continue to expect inflation to steadily move back toward our target of 2 percent over the next few years. In the labor market, there’s little doubt that things are good.  A wide range of labor market indicators, such as initial claims for unemployment insurance, job openings, quits rates, and perceptions of job availability and hiring difficulties, all point to a labor market at full employment.  Even labor force participation has rebounded, driven by inflow of workers ages 25 to 54 who are taking advantage of the strong job market. One discordant note in the otherwise strong labor market is the elevated number of long-term unemployed—that is, those who have been looking for a job for at least six months.  A number of studies have raised the possibility that this increase in long-term unemployment reflects particular characteristics of the long-term unemployed, such as outmoded or depreciated skills, and that these challenges may have persisted well into the recovery.  To investigate this hypothesis, my staff examined the underlying microdata to see why so many long-term unemployed have failed to escape either by finding a job or exiting the labor force.  This investigation finds that during the recession, job-finding rates declined uniformly for all types of unemployed individuals, suggesting, at least on that basis, that the long-term unemployed aren’t unique in that regard.  At the same time, the composition of unemployment also shifted toward individuals with a relatively low propensity to leave the labor force—for example, older workers who permanently lost their long-standing jobs.  These two patterns in combination boosted the share of workers who moved into long-term unemployment.  That is, the growing pool of long-term unemployed are primarily job seekers who are dedicated to staying in the labor force and are actively looking for jobs but are finding it difficult to land one.  They don’t appear to be individuals who have mismatched skills or other unfavorable characteristics.  In other words, from the perspective of our maximum-employment mandate, the long-term unemployed should be counted equally with the rest of the unemployed, and the overall unemployment rate remains a good summary measure of the health of the labor market. So what should we expect regarding the long-term unemployment rate.  My staff constructed a simulation of unemployment dynamics that incorporates unemployment escape rates for the various groups of the short- and long-term unemployed.  Their analysis suggests that the current elevated long-term unemployment rate reflects longer-term trends in the composition of the labor force and is not a sign of anything unusual in the labor market at this time.  These trends include demographic factors such as the aging workforce and the high labor force attachment of women—that is, the higher share of long-term unemployed is just part of the “new normal.” Finally, I appreciated the Tealbook alternative view box on the outlook for productivity growth.  We’ve been repeatedly surprised by weak productivity growth for the past five years, and if productivity growth doesn’t rebound sharply this year as assumed in the Tealbook, then the alternative scenario—consisting of weaker labor productivity and a stronger labor market—becomes a more likely outcome.  In that scenario, unemployment falls below 4 percent, and we overshoot our inflation goal.  As I mentioned last time, this is one of the prominent upside risks to the achievement of our goals that I see as balancing the downside risk arising from abroad.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Williams, is giving his positive outlook for the economy and discussing various factors that support his outlook. There is no mention of any opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 112.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  We find ourselves and the economy once more in an almost familiar place.  In March, we decided to wait on further developments because we were not sure whether it was the first six weeks of this year or the following four weeks that most closely represented the likely state of the economy in the weeks to come. At this stage, we appear to have returned approximately to the reality to which we have become accustomed for more than a year.  The labor market remains strong, perhaps a bit stronger than we had expected, as the labor force participation rate has increased for six months in a row.  But GDP growth remains woeful.  We can reconcile the behavior of the labor market and that of output by saying that productivity growth is very weak, which it is.  But it would be good if we understood why.  Those three points are more or less the position to which we were beginning to accustom ourselves at the end of 2015, but now there is an extra factor.  Aggregate demand growth seems to have weakened in the first few months of this year.  That can be accounted for in a variety of ways by saying there’s been a decline in productivity, by noting the decline in the volume of investment, which is both a decline in aggregate demand and a factor reducing productivity growth. Where are we now before we get into the details of how tough everything is.  Well, first, we’re very close to full employment.  Second, now that oil prices appear to have stabilized and the dollar has stopped depreciating—at least temporarily, perhaps—inflation is higher than it was most of last year, though lower than it was in January.  Core inflation is about 1.5 percent, which I regard as being in hailing distance of our target. The staff has begun to analyze the challenges posed by the slowing of growth.  There is, first, the fact that some of what we are seeing may simply be a result of the first-quarter blues, a disease that presents itself for what appears to be a severe slowdown in the first quarter.  Data revisions, at least over the past two years, then appear to reduce the reported first-quarter slowdown in the following months but to not totally dispose of it. Second, in the alternative view box, productivity acceleration will be more gradual, which President Williams just referred to.  On pages 22 and 23 of Tealbook A, Tomaz Cajner analyzes the consequence of the possibility that falling job reallocation associated with declining business dynamism appears to be pushing down productivity growth as it had after the year 2000.  The concluding paragraph of that box considered what would happen if productivity growth remains historically low for a long time.  I quote again:  “A protracted productivity slowdown would have much more serious macroeconomic consequences, including continued downward pressure on the equilibrium real interest rate, reduced incentives for labor force participation, rising fiscal imbalances, and slower improvements in living standards.”  One reaction would be to say, “Well, we know all of that.”  But knowing all of that doesn’t make it any better.  Another reaction would be to say that it would be useful to focus on discovering and arguing for productivity-enhancing policies more intensively than we have so far.  One doesn’t sense—at least I don’t sense—that there is a very active debate going on about what we need to do to get productivity to grow more rapidly. Well, not all that has happened since the beginning of the year is bad.  Foreign growth, especially in Canada but also in the euro zone, will probably be higher than it was last year.  The Chinese government has decided to try to maintain economic growth near 7 percent, albeit with the same debt-creating policies whose long-run sustainability is doubtful.  And it seems to have decided that it does not want a serious devaluation at this stage, which has calmed the unease about China’s policies that was part of the uncertainty in the first quarter of this year.  The dollar has weakened.  All those things are helpful for our growth, but the uncertainties of potential Brexit remain. So, what’s next.  Well, what’s next is we wait until tomorrow to decide on the policy recommendations that follow from the present conjuncture.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 113.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  It was a puzzling dichotomy between the spending and employment data in the first quarter.  The spending data were a disappointment.  The Tealbook expects the first-quarter real GDP growth rate to be only ½ percent, which is slow even with diminished assumptions about potential real GDP growth.  However, like the Tealbook, I am expecting the first quarter to be a lull rather than a trend, and one major reason is the continued strength evident in the labor market.  We all know the aggregate employment numbers have continued to expand rapidly.  Less-formal information reinforces those numbers.  When talking to officials at colleges around New England, they are reporting robust results for their seniors about to graduate and an increase in recruiting activities on college campuses.  However, it is not just those with high educational attainment that are enjoying the results of the tighter labor market.  The strong growth in the participation rate since September highlights that as the labor market has tightened, more people are moving from out of the labor force to being employed.  This also includes sectors of the labor market in which unemployment is elevated, such as minorities and those who have limited educational attainment. I’m fairly confident that spending will rebound.  Certainly, an important reason for the first-quarter weakness was low consumption growth.  Like the Tealbook, I expect consumption to rebound in the remainder of the year due to favorable trends in the stock market, housing prices, and income.  I also expect the recent weakness in business investment to abate.  Those factors alone could push spending growth above potential.  As it is unlikely that firms would continue to hire if they were expecting sales to weaken, I am placing more weight on the positive labor market data than on the first-quarter GDP lull.  Nor am I particularly worried that with proper monetary policy the labor market will get too tight.  My forecast calls for some further tightening of the labor market.  There are certainly advantages to allowing the labor market to tighten somewhat further.  Probing how low the natural rate of unemployment is currently will likely encourage more people to reenter the labor force, benefiting themselves and the overall economy. In terms of prices, I am now a bit more confident that we’re moving toward our 2 percent inflation target.  At the time of our December FOMC meeting, core PCE inflation had not yet shown a clear positive trend and had been fluctuating somewhat below 1½ percent over much of the year.  However, with core PCE inflation currently at 1.7 percent, there is more evidence of a positive trend.  This casual observation is confirmed by work by my staff that has used a monthly error correction model that includes the gap between core CPI and core PCE inflation, along with lagged changes in inflation rates, the unemployment gap, and the relative prices of oil and non-oil imports.  Using this model to conduct a dynamic simulation of the likely path of core PCE, they concluded that we are quite likely to see more progress in core PCE approaching our target.  Private-sector forecasters seem to be drawing a similar conclusion.  The Survey of Professional Forecasters, which provides forecasters’ probabilities of different core PCE inflation outcomes, is similarly showing forecasters placing modestly more weight on the FOMC moving closer to its target over the next two years. I would also note that the concerns about significant downside risk, as reflected in the financial market turbulence over the first several months of this year, have subsided.  Stock prices are higher.  Stock volatility is down.  Many interest rate spreads have narrowed, and many global financial markets have improved.  This is consistent not only with my baseline forecast but also with surveys that assess tail risk.  Neither the primary dealers nor participants in the Survey of Professional Forecasters see a particularly elevated risk of much higher unemployment rates in the next year and a half. I must admit that with modal private-sector forecasts expecting economic growth above its potential rate and, consequently, further tightening of labor markets, as well as surveys not indicating a particularly elevated tail risk, I find the pricing in the federal funds futures somewhat puzzling.  A divergence between our own views of the likely path of interest rates as reported in the March SEP and the market’s pricing of very few federal funds increases over the next two years or more raises the risk of a taper tantrum reaction when we do raise rates.  I will discuss how we should react to this risk in the policy discussion tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the current economic data and the speaker's views and forecasts on various aspects of the economy.


Passage number 114.
 MR. HARKER.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The exchange between Mr. Harker and Chair Yellen is polite and cooperative, indicating agreement or collaboration rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 115.
 MR. HARKER.  Just a quick question.  What do your economists think will be the effect, if any, of the Saudi sale of Aramco.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about the opinion of economists regarding the effect of the Saudi sale of Aramco.


Passage number 116.
 MR. KAPLAN.  We don’t think that alone is going to have a significant effect.  The thing we are watching more closely—although we don’t believe it’s going to happen— is whether Saudi Arabia and Russia are, as they have hinted, actually going to increase supply.  The privatization is part of an overall strategy for the Saudis to diversify away from oil.  It is one of many steps they’re going to take to try to redirect resources to other parts of their economy and be less dependent on oil.  So the sale is a natural evolution of that. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a dialogue between Mr. Kaplan and Chair Yellen, and there is no disagreement or contention present. They are discussing the potential impact of Saudi Arabia and Russia increasing oil supply, and Mr. Kaplan shares his opinion that it is unlikely to happen. Chair Yellen acknowledges his point and thanks him for his input.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 117.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The reports on economic activity from my business contacts were a bit more upbeat than in March.  Notably, no one expressed much concern that the first-quarter weakness in GDP would prove to be more than a transitory soft patch.  In my District, there continues to be a large contrast between conditions in industrial versus consumer-facing businesses.  Those producing industrial capital goods who have heavy international trade exposure are seeing weak demand.  Those facing the U.S. consumer are more positive. Some of the weakness in cap-ex is easy to explain by the strong dollar and low energy prices.  Other anecdotal reports are more challenging to square.  A couple of my directors and other contacts say that even with low interest rates and plenty of cash on hand, firms are choosing not to invest, and we heard that just a minute ago.  These firms clearly say that they are right-sized for the current level of demand, their outlook for continued slow growth, and the potential downside risks.  So it seems there’s another factor beyond the dollar and low commodity prices weighing on capital spending—namely, business caution.  Firms’ baseline sales expectations are modest, and they’re very attentive to what could go wrong. With regard to the economic picture, the first quarter obviously was quite weak.  My staff’s outlook is that economic growth will recover to average around 2½ percent over the rest of the year.  I can’t say that forecast is wrong.  I am not optimistic myself.  But if residual seasonality remains anywhere, it would seem to be in our collective early-year optimism, which is then followed by downward revisions to the outlook in the middle of the year.  I guess that’s seasonality too, isn’t it.  And I could see the same happening with this forecast, as realistically the risks are probably to the downside. With regard to inflation, the incoming data were consistent with our forecast of core PCE at 1.6 percent for the year, although we continue to see some downside risk associated with a potential decline in inflation expectations.  In any event, our Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago forecasts of economic growth and inflation are very similar to the Tealbook’s.  However, we do have a somewhat different view of labor market slack.  We think the labor force participation rate is still somewhat below trend, and this translates into a little more overall slack in labor markets than in the Tealbook. An important factor supporting our forecast is the continuation of the improvement in credit conditions that started in mid-February.  This improvement was a major theme among our financial market contacts this round.  Our contact who tracks small business lending reported a pickup in demand for credit in February after markedly negative reports in three of the previous five months.  Consistent with our real-side anecdotes, small business lending is strongest among consumer-facing firms and firms providing nontradable goods and services.  Our contacts at Ford noted that they received a lot of interest from banks in the renewal of their credit line syndicate, and that the spreads on their commercial paper and other debt were the narrowest in about a year.  Finally, in line with Simon’s report from the dealer survey, a number of financial contacts said that FOMC communication about risk management was a critical factor supporting the recent improvement in financial conditions.  In their opinion, the Fed’s willingness to lean against adverse tail risk has been an important stabilizing force. To sum up, on balance, the domestic fundamentals continue to be good.  My baseline scenario has economic growth recovering from its first-quarter soft patch and the recent improvements of inflation being maintained.  But downside risks remain, and our risk-management approach to guard against those risks continues to be a salient feature of appropriate policy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement or skepticism with the forecast and outlook for economic growth and inflation. They also mention potential downside risks and caution in business investment decisions, which may imply disagreement with a more optimistic or positive outlook.


Passage number 118.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Economic activity in the Third District continues to improve, and our manufacturers may be over the worst of the recent downturn in that sector.  Despite some backtracking in our Business Outlook Survey, there has been a significant increase in optimism among our manufacturing contacts.  Employment growth is strong, consumer spending is growing moderately, and commercial construction continues to grow at a slow but steady pace.  There is some evidence of increasing overall price pressures in the region.  But with regard to real estate, and with the exception of the Philadelphia metro area, house price appreciation still appears to be restrained. Our Manufacturing Business Outlook Survey edged back into negative territory with the April general activity index reported at minus 1.6.  Shipments significantly weakened, as did the employment subindex.  However, unlike previous reports, respondents are seeing price pressures developing for both prices paid and prices received.  In direct contrast to readings on current activity, manufacturers in the region have grown increasingly optimistic.  The diffusion index for future general activity has jumped 13.4 points to 42.2.  All the future subindexes reflect a rebound in optimism as well.  In contrast, a diversified manufacturing contact in the region indicated that 10 of his 12 business lines will report negative profits this quarter.  January was an exceptionally weak month, and although succeeding months are showing some improvement, that improvement has not been substantial.  For the year as a whole, most business lines are forecasting profitability, but his outlook is not overly optimistic.  So it is with a bit of cautious optimism that, all told, my take is that the area manufacturers have seen the worst of the slowdown. In a set of special questions directed at expenditures for both data and network security, physical security, and expenditures incurred for meeting regulatory burdens, we found that a significant majority of firms were increasing outlays on data and network protection as well as regulatory compliance, but that most were not facing increasing costs of providing for physical safety at the workplace.  One fairly frank respondent indicated that his firm didn’t mind the increased regulatory burden, as it acted as a barrier to entry and thwarted competition.   Nonmanufacturing activity in the District continues to grow modestly as reflected in our Nonmanufacturing Business Outlook Survey.  The headline activity index of 17.8 in March, while expansionary, is below its nonrecessionary average.  Like our manufacturers, area service providers remained relatively optimistic, with expectations of future activity fairly optimistic.  Some 68.5 percent of respondents reported increased expenditures on data and network security, 50 percent showed increases to enhanced physical security, and slightly more than half have increased spending in order to satisfy regulatory compliance.  In light of the responses in these categories, a reasonable conjecture might be that some of the productivity slowdown may be due to expenditures that, one could argue, produce little in the way of productive output.  They simply just protect what you have as opposed to growing output. Our Beige Book contacts reported a slight to modest improvement in economic conditions.  Homebuilders have reported an improvement in traffic, and a large builder reported an appreciable increase in backlogs.  Overall, construction activity continues at a slow but steady pace.  With the exception of the Philadelphia metro area, house prices, as I said, have not risen appreciably. Now, for the nation as a whole, economic activity appears to have softened significantly, although I agree with President Williams’s analysis of Q1 GDP.  We may be looking at two consecutive quarters of economic growth averaging in the neighborhood of 1 percent, but time will tell.  Labor markets, however, remain robust, but consumption appears to be more restrained.  And although I believe manufacturing is bottoming out, I do not anticipate a significant bounceback. My overall view and forecast of real economic activity are fairly consistent with that presented by the staff in the Tealbook.  However, my view on inflation is that we will see a path that returns to target somewhat faster than the glacial pace presented in the Tealbook, perhaps by the end of next year.  With unemployment falling below its natural rate and the significant price pressures resulting from various forms of legislation, I don’t believe price increases will be delayed for much longer.  Recent data on inflation as portrayed by core measures and various trimmed means reported by my colleagues, as well as the behavior of the dollar and oil prices, make me more assured that inflation will return to target.  And I see little evidence that inflation expectations have become unanchored.  That viewpoint drives me to favor statement language that would in no way preclude June from being a live meeting, but more on this tomorrow. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing an overview of economic activity in the Third District and the author's outlook on the economy and inflation.


Passage number 119.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  District economic growth continues to lag the nation as low agricultural and energy prices persist and financing conditions continue to tighten.  In the ag sector, not much has changed since our previous meeting, and agricultural sector bankers are buckling in for a bumpy year of unprofitable farm operations while they extend more credit secured by land. In energy, the rig count is at its lowest level since at least 1949, and oil inventories are at their highest level since 1930.  Stockpiles are expected to begin easing in 2016 as oil production declines intensify, which may provide a modest boost to prices.  But according to various Federal Reserve energy surveys, the average price needed for firms to remain profitable is $53 per barrel, down from $59 last fall, as firms focus on the best plays.  Still, firms, on average, do not expect this price to be reached until 2017.  Even when prices do rise, our contacts note they will not be able to ramp up activity in any meaningful way for several years because of the huge loss of skilled workers, depreciation of equipment, and tighter financing. In addition, natural gas prices remain unprofitable, and, thus, bankruptcies are rising for oil and gas companies in the region.  Some are relatively smooth Chapter 11s, but others, mostly small companies, are taking the Chapter 7 route.  As I watch the energy sector in my region, I think of a line of Hemingway in which one character says, “How did you go bankrupt.”  The other says, “Two ways.  Gradually, then suddenly.”  Coal producers have been particularly hard hit.  Three of the four large coal companies that operate in Wyoming, where 44 percent of U.S. coal is produced, have filed for bankruptcy.  Drastically reduced coal production is also negatively affecting the region’s rail industry.  However, beyond these commodity-based businesses, our business contacts remain relatively upbeat. For the national economy, my outlook is little changed despite a weaker-than-expected first quarter in which consumers held back and investment cuts intensified.  In terms of the consumer, the slowdown looks to be limited to goods purchases, which I view as somewhat reassuring because a more broad-based slowing, including services, might have pointed to more fundamental weakness.  Despite the decelerating spending growth, the pace of job gains has remained robust, still averaging more than 200,000 per month this year.  Financial conditions have also eased since March.  And, provided job growth and financial conditions remain stable, I expect consumer spending growth will come back.  One of our contacts in the apparel industry noted that, although profits were up and sales declined in the first quarter, she projected positive sales growth for the rest of the year.  That’s reassuring, as clothing and footwear was one of the weak categories of real PCE in February. Regarding housing, the moderate recovery appears to remain on track, though low inventories and rising prices suggest that construction of single-family homes has been a bit slow to respond to rising demand.  Looking ahead, I expect residential investment will continue to contribute to economic growth, though I see some risk to the outlook for multifamily construction.  Our directors report jitters as a large number of units are coming online across the region.  Longer term, the demographics remain favorable for multifamily construction, but right now we are seeing a rise in vacancies in some markets. An important aspect of the outlook is how the economy will continue to manage through the pivot away from manufacturing and energy activity to services.  One implication of this shift is for productivity growth.  My staff estimates that the relative decline in manufacturing and energy, which are significantly more productive than services industries, has cut overall productivity growth by about ¾ percentage point over the past year.  Although this offers an explanation for soft productivity growth the past few years, it doesn’t explain the longer downward trend in productivity growth.  Indeed, some portion of the recent weakness in productivity seems structural, and I don’t believe monetary policy can do much to change that.  This raises concerns similar to those highlighted in the Tealbook box offering an alternative view on the outlook for productivity. Finally, my outlook for inflation is little changed and has inflation near mandate-consistent levels throughout the forecast horizon.  The effects of the past dollar appreciation and oil price declines should diminish, particularly with the recent reversals in the dollar and oil prices.  The realized gains in inflation increase my confidence that, with continued improvement in economic activity, inflation will continue moving toward 2 percent over the forecast horizon.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It provides an overview of various economic conditions and outlooks without expressing conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 120.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not presented in order to express any particular opinion or disagreement. It is simply a statement of the initials "MR," which does not imply contention or disagreement.


Passage number 121.
 WILLIAMS.  You talked about our analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Williams, is simply referring to a previous analysis without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 122.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes, I’m talking about you all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement acknowledging the audience.


Passage number 123.
   MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no explicit indication of contention or disagreement in the passage as it is not clear what "MR" refers to without further context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 124.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes, let’s be transparent.  [Laughter]  But can I respond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement indicated by the laughter in response to Williams' statement about transparency.


Passage number 125.
 MR. TARULLO.  But I wasn’t going to talk about the 49ers and their prospects this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they were not going to talk about the prospects of the 49ers football team.


Passage number 126.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 127.
 WILLIAMS.  Oh, why did you even do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 128.
 MR. TARULLO.  Well, who started it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 129.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Since the passage is not provided, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 130.
 WILLIAMS.  Throw me off my game.  Okay.  I have an answer to the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement made by Williams.


Passage number 131.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement from Mr. Tarullo.


Passage number 132.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 133.
 WILLIAMS.  The question is a good one.  The question was how our own thinking evolved.  First of all, in 2015 the BEA actually did a pretty thorough analysis of this residual seasonality and wrote a white paper on it.  The BEA claimed that it had attacked most of the aspects of this, including PCE and QSS and other things.  And so we took on board that we were probably going to be rid of most of the residual seasonality in GDP.  But then Glenn Rudebusch and his colleagues redid the analysis and found, much to their surprise, that most of it was still there, at least in GDP.  That’s where we came up with the numbers I mentioned today.  So that was a bit of a surprise to us after the BEA had done this Manhattan Project, if you will, on this. My other comment is, I tend to focus on four-quarter changes in GDP, just like I do on PCE prices and other things, because I know there’s noise in the data.  In our view, GDP growth on a four-quarter basis hasn’t moved around very much.  It’s 2 to 2¼ percent, and as I said, I’m at 2 percent now.  I think it’s probably the easier way to avoid some of these issues on a four-quarter basis.  But the answer to your question is how our thinking evolved on that.  We actually thought that was probably going to go away, or at least mostly go away, and were somewhat surprised that it hasn’t. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining how their thinking evolved on the topic of residual seasonality in GDP.


Passage number 134.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Ninth District economy suffered a major shock last week with the death of Prince.  The good news is that this was not a destabilizing shock, but it really unified people across the District and the Bank celebrating his life and his music. In other economic news, the Ninth District continues to perform relatively well.  However, the global weakness in commodity prices is having a notable effect on oil, as we have heard, as well as on mining and agriculture.  Oil production in North Dakota is now down about 10 percent below its peak in December 2014, and a large bank in our District has increased its expected losses on oil business lending.  Other industries in the District are generally faring much better, and there are some emerging signs of labor tightening.  For example, a national retailer with a large local presence has just raised its minimum wage to $10 an hour, and anecdotal evidence suggests that other retailers are following suit. At the national level, the risk of recession seems to have declined somewhat since earlier in the year.  Although first-quarter economic growth has been very weak, as we have just discussed, a variety of leading indicators suggest a rebound ahead.  In particular, the stock market has risen, the VIX is low, and consumer confidence remains high. In the labor market, the rapid pace of hiring has continued, as we have discussed at length.  I personally think the continued rise in labor force participation is very welcome news and is very important, and I don’t have confidence that there is no more slack in the labor market.  I think that, if anything, we’ve learned that there is a lot that we don’t understand about what’s happening in the labor market.  And if we can continue to bring people into the labor market while the headline unemployment rate remains fixed, I personally think that we should allow that to continue.  And, on the other hand, weak productivity growth is troubling for all of us. Inflation and the inflation outlook also remain weak.  Oil and commodity prices are still low; the dollar remains strong.  Although some large employers are raising pay, this has yet to show up in aggregate wage measures, and measures of inflation expectations remain at extremely low levels. Looking overseas, the IMF has again downgraded its forecast for global economic growth in 2016.  In addition, global inflation remains very low, and, as a result, there is very little prospect of imminent monetary policy tightening in any developed economies. In summary, I am cautiously optimistic that moderate growth will continue in the U.S. economy.  I hope that continued improvement in the labor market will eventually bring inflation and inflation expectations back up to 2 percent.  But I have to admit that, as yet, I don’t see any concrete evidence that this is occurring.  I continue to agree with the Tealbook that risks to the outlook appear to be tilted to the downside.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 135.
 MR. KAMIN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today we received the advance report on U.S. trade.  Just to be clear:  The full report on March U.S. trade, including exports and imports of both goods and services, is going to come out next week.  But today’s release is the preview, based just on nominal merchandise exports and merchandise imports.  And these data are going to be used in the advance GDP release that will come out tomorrow. We were expecting that the trade balance for March would be a $47 billion deficit, which would have been the same as in February.  In the event, merchandise exports, which we expected would stay more or less the same, fell $2 billion, but merchandise imports fell about $8 billion, compared with a small rise that we were anticipating.  As a result, our estimate for the trade balance in March has fallen from $47 billion to $41 billion.  Assuming we don’t get any surprises either in trade prices, which we have not yet received, or in trade in services, which we have also not yet received, we would lower our estimate for the net export drag on U.S. GDP growth in Q1 from our current estimate of 0.7 percent to only 0.1 percent. CHAIR YELLEN.  Wow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a presentation of the advance trade report and its potential impact on GDP growth estimates. The "Wow" at the end could be interpreted as a reaction of surprise or appreciation by Chair Yellen, but it doesn't indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 136.
 MR. KAMIN.  So, in principle, if that full change in our net export estimate was passed through to U.S. GDP growth, it would actually raise our Q1 estimate of real GDP growth by 0.6 percentage point.  That’s what we know on the trade side, but Bill will expand on that a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about the potential effect of a change in net export estimate on US GDP growth.


Passage number 137.
 MR. WASCHER.  In terms of the components, what detail there is in the trade report suggested that there was a big drop in capital goods imports, which may mean that we would offset a little bit of the smaller drag arising from net exports by weakening our investment forecast a bit.  So I guess at this point, I’d say our Q1 estimate for GDP growth is going to be somewhere between ¾ percent and 1 percent, still up noticeably from the 0.4 percent that we had in the Tealbook. CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there any questions for Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement by Mr. Wascher followed by a request for questions.


Passage number 138.
 MR. FISCHER.  Doesn’t a decline in imports say something more than about capital goods.  It’s also about other demand, isn’t it. CHAIR YELLEN.  Consumer spending.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Fischer is asking a question, and Chair Yellen is responding by agreeing with him and adding more information.


Passage number 139.
 MR. WASCHER.  It could be.  Again, we have a lot of information on consumer spending, so we don’t take a lot of signal, on the basis of the trade data, for our consumer spending estimates for Q1 at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have a lot of information on consumer spending and therefore do not rely heavily on trade data for their consumer spending estimates for Q1.


Passage number 140.
 MR. KAMIN.  Of course, when the BEA writes in its guesses for services for March, we don’t expect any big changes, but it’s possible that they would surprise us, and the net export drag that would be in tomorrow’s GDP data might be a little different than we expect.  But right now, we think there’s clearly been a shortfall in our estimate, and that should show up. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, let’s begin our policy round.  I’d like to call on Thomas to start us off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a conversation between Mr. Kamin and Chair Yellen discussing the possibility of changes in GDP data and their expectations for future estimates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 141.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  It is appropriate to see whether the weakness in spending for the first quarter is reflecting more than a temporary pause in real GDP growth.  My expectation is that the second quarter will be stronger.  If the incoming data between now and the June meeting confirm that real GDP is growing at least as fast as potential GDP and labor markets are continuing to improve, then, in my view, it will be appropriate to raise the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. On account of my expectation that we will not move at this meeting and my assessment that it will be appropriate to move at the next meeting, I do have communications concerns.  My reading of alternative B is that it is unlikely to significantly increase market perceptions of the probability attached to a tightening in June.  If that is correct, the market probably has too low a probability regarding both a tightening in June and our likely policy rate path over the forecast horizon.  The market’s expectation that we may move only 75 basis points through 2018 reflects much more pessimism than I have about the economy and, in my view, risks a taper tantrum response as the market realizes that, while policy will be accommodative from our perspective, it will not be nearly as accommodative as financial markets currently expect.  If the incoming data over the next two months are consistent with the Tealbook forecast—and recognizing that we will not have another SEP to signal policy intentions—we will need to communicate more clearly before the June meeting about the likely path of policy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Let me say that I do have a speech that I’ve scheduled for June 6, which is the very last day before the blackout period.  I know that’s pretty close to the meeting, but I did schedule it in order to be able to communicate reasonably clearly if it becomes utterly evident that there’s a gap between market expectations and our likely behavior.  And I know others also will be speaking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Rosengren believes that the market has low expectations regarding a tightening of policy rates in June, and that these expectations are more pessimistic than his own view of the economy. He believes that the market's expectations need to be communicated more clearly before the June meeting. In contrast, Chair Yellen mentions her scheduled speech on June 6 that will help communicate if there is a gap between market expectations and the FOMC's likely behavior.


Passage number 142.
 MR. FISCHER.  Do you know which ones. CHAIR YELLEN.  Lots of people, I suspect.  [Laughter]  Now, Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It is a lighthearted exchange between Mr. Fischer and Chair Yellen.


Passage number 143.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  As Thomas indicated, the change in the language in paragraph 2 indicates a slight downgrading of concerns about the global economy.  As I said yesterday, that’s consistent with my own assessment of the risks that I think we can more or less get our arms around.  As I also said yesterday, I don’t quite see how to get our arms around the Brexit risk.  It’s closer to Knightian uncertainty than to some risk that we can do an assessment of.  Having said that, I don’t think it would be the wisest thing in the world to refer to that either directly or indirectly, so I’m okay with the language as it exists here.  My own position with respect to June is not a tilt toward raising rates, although I’m open-minded on the topic, and I think the virtue of this alternative as presented is that it maintains everyone’s optionality.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Mr. Tarullo is expressing his support for alternative B and providing his assessment of the risks related to the global economy and Brexit. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 144.
 MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As always, I found the comparisons in the Tealbook among the various policy rules very helpful.  In particular, the optimal control rule that places greater weight on deviations of inflation from its target than on unemployment running below its assumed natural rate has some intuitive appeal, both because we have some uncertainty about what the natural rate is in the wake of the crisis and because it’s hard to see the welfare costs associated with having unemployment run a bit low temporarily, as distinct, of course, from any possible implications that may have for inflation. I took two lessons from this analysis.  First, even with this policy rule that places greater weight on inflation, we have to work pretty hard to get inflation back up to its target, which it does not reach until 2018.  In fact, interestingly, this is the only policy rule that gets inflation back to 2 percent by 2018.  The slow rise in inflation is due in part to a very flat Phillips curve.  But even assuming nominal wage growth is four times more responsive to the unemployment gap than it currently appears to be—a setting that might be associated with a nonlinearity in the Phillips curve near the natural rate of unemployment—inflation doesn’t get back to 2 percent until 2018, with a policy rate path that is shallower than that in the March SEP. Of course, achieving our target on inflation under these scenarios requires that unemployment will run below what we currently believe to be its natural rate, and that inflation will run about one- to two-tenths above 2 percent from 2019 to 2020.  And, of course, the public would need to believe that the FOMC would tolerate such a modest overshoot due to the symmetry of our inflation target around 2 percent.  I think that’s an important thought exercise—remembering that, in 70 out of the 74 months since the beginning of 2010, the 12-month change in core PCE inflation has been below 2 percent and that we are indeed comfortable with being symmetric around the 2 percent target. Turning to today’s context, I see the intermeeting period as mixed.  On the one hand, financial market conditions have improved notably, but I believe this is in no small part a response to a perceived softening in the expected rate path in the United States and its spillback effects through pressures on China’s currency peg and, through that, to broader emerging market risks.  Oil appears to have reached an inflection point, and China’s stimulus, while it raises some questions about long-term sustainability, appears to be supporting near-term economic growth. Here at home, however, despite ongoing strength in the labor market, domestic spending indicators have disappointed for the second consecutive quarter, and there’s some concern that U.S. consumption may be softening despite important supports coming from income, the behavior of gasoline prices, and sentiment.  Importantly, the data suggest that the earlier improvement in core inflation may have been relatively short lived, and measures of inflation expectations and inflation compensation remain low. Progress in the labor market has continued.  Interestingly, the composition of that progress has changed with a shift toward the participation margin, suggesting a greater elasticity of labor supply than previously thought.  Wages have been subdued, and, as in March, there still appears to be just a little more slack remaining. The broad-based easing in financial markets has brightened the medium-term outlook a bit and made the balance of risks more favorable.  But it’s important to recognize how closely tied this improvement in financial conditions is to recent monetary policy communication, particularly including, I think, the downward shift in the policy rate path implied by the SEP, which has suggested an awareness on the part of this Committee of the risks posed by the global environment and the need to shape policy in accordance with those risks. With realized economic conditions relative to our goals, particularly inflation, little changed since March, and with the medium-term outlook also only modestly changed, especially after taking into account recent monetary policy communication, it seems appropriate to leave the federal funds rate at its current level.  At our next meeting we’ll have received two more labor market reports, two more PCE inflation reports, two estimates of first-quarter GDP growth, and some of the spending data relevant for assessing second-quarter GDP.  These data will be important for me in helping to determine whether the weakness that we’re seeing currently is likely to prove persistent as well as whether we’re seeing any improvement in progress on inflation and on, importantly, inflation expectations. This leaves me very comfortable with the wait-and-see approach that the Committee has adopted and that is captured in alternative B.  My preference is to reserve judgment about possible actions in June and to let the data do the talking.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, Ms. Brainard expresses her disagreement with a policy rule that places greater weight on deviations of inflation from its target than on unemployment running below its assumed natural rate. She argues that it is hard to see the welfare costs associated with having unemployment run a bit low temporarily.


Passage number 145.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I believe this would have been a fine meeting to raise the target federal funds rate.  Short-term real interest rates lie well below all of the benchmarks we use for evaluating where real rates ought to be—benchmarks derived from estimated policy rules that capture our successful past behavior and from estimates of the natural real rate, taking into account that real rates may have been trending downward.  Even under plausible assessments of the secular decline in real rates, we are more than 1 percentage point below where we need to be. One argument for keeping our policy rate low is that inflation is below our target.  But in recent months, we’ve seen various measures of underlying inflation rise toward 2 percent, and, as I said yesterday, I believe a broad firming trend is now evident, notwithstanding the March CPI.  The lag between policy actions and inflation responses leaves me expecting this trend to continue.  Of course, many of our benchmarks take into account the difference between current inflation and our objective.  Even with the remaining gap, they indicate that rates should be far higher. When we lifted off in December, we expected to close the gap between the actual policy rate and the levels indicated by our benchmarks at a gradual but deliberate pace.  Early in the first quarter, financial market developments at home and abroad raised prospects of downside risks to U.S. growth.  Those risks seemed to have diminished substantially by the time of our March meeting, but, nonetheless, we left rates unchanged and pulled down our rate projections.  Now that those risks have dissipated more conclusively and the U.S. economic outlook is in line with what we were projecting in December, we need to return policy toward the path we thought to be appropriate back then.  At this meeting, therefore, it would be appropriate for us to resume gradually pushing rates toward a more normal level. Yes, data dependence implies that when downside risks appear to rise, both the policy rate and the expected rate path should respond.  And if those risks subside, the policy rate path should respond accordingly in the opposite direction.  If not—if we delay raising rates in response to every episode of financial market heartburn but never correct course when the turmoil dies down—we will leave ourselves with a shortfall in rates that I fear we may not be able or willing to close fast enough when the time comes.  It looks like we’re at risk of doing just that in June if Brexit heartburn stays our hand.  I hope we can all agree that if we delay because of Brexit and then it turns out to be a manageable event, we don’t necessarily have to wait until September to see if we want to move again. If it is correct that monetary policy is too easy and has been for some time, then the stability of inflation expectations is a remarkable testament to our credibility.  The longer we deviate from our policy rate benchmarks, however, the more we draw from the reservoir of that credibility.  I cannot claim to know how or when we will reach its limits.  Indeed, the evolution of expectations, as Governor Tarullo noted yesterday, is hard to predict.  It is possible that even staying put through the end of the year would not test it, but I see it as a significant risk as long as we delay closing gaps to our benchmarks.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Lacker, believes that the target federal funds rate should be raised and provides reasons for his belief.


Passage number 146.
 MR. TARULLO.  Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Two-hander—Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Tarullo and Chair Yellen are mentioned without any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 147.
 MR. TARULLO.  President Lacker, because you did refer to me, can I ask, you’re worried about expectations becoming unanchored, in view of where inflation is right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is merely stating a question and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 148.
 MR. LACKER.  I’m not worried about them being unanchored tomorrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is stating that he is not worried about something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 149.
 MR. TARULLO.  But you’re worried that the approach to 2 percent may unanchor inflation expectations, while you weren’t worried that, for a number of years, the failure to reach 2 percent could have unanchored those expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker (Mr. Tarullo) is expressing concern about the approach to 2 percent potentially unanchoring inflation expectations. However, he notes that he was not previously worried about the failure to reach 2 percent doing the same. This contrast in concerns indicates a disagreement or difference in perspective on the matter.


Passage number 150.
 MR. LACKER.  Inflation has gone from below 2 percent to well above 2 percent before.  We had this experience in 2003 and 2004, when we thought it was below 1, and within 12 months, it was close to 3, and we were off to the races and ended up with 2.9 percent inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a historical fact about the rise in inflation rates in 2003 and 2004.


Passage number 151.
 MR. TARULLO.  Right.  But, with the exception of that, for almost all of the period from the financial crisis until today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is making a statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 152.
 MR. LACKER.  Was I worried about downside risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Lacker, was not worried about downside risk.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 153.
 MR. TARULLO.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the response "Yes" given by Mr. Tarullo.


Passage number 154.
 MR. LACKER.  Sure.  We all were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 155.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Two-hander—President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Tarullo is speaking and Chair Yellen responds by referring to President Bullard as a "two-hander," indicating that she wants to give him an opportunity to speak or for him to respond to Mr. Tarullo's comment. There is no evidence of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 156.
 MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair, Brexit has been brought up, and it’s a vote on a particular day.  Is it feasible to think about calling a meeting after the Brexit vote and making the decision at that point. CHAIR YELLEN.  As an intermeeting move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 157.
 MR. BULLARD.  Intermeeting, yes.  If we felt like we wanted to go, but we wanted to see the outcome of the Brexit vote, then you could have a meeting after the Brexit vote.  Is that something to consider. CHAIR YELLEN.  My mind isn’t closed on it, but it would suggest a level of urgency.  We will be meeting in July and have an opportunity then.  I don’t quite know what message it would send that we felt it was utterly urgent to have an intermeeting move.  But it’s obviously not impossible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Bullard and Chair Yellen express their openness to the possibility of a meeting after the Brexit vote, without opposing each other's views. Chair Yellen also suggests that an intermeeting move may not be necessary or urgent.


Passage number 158.
 MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.  It’s your turn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 


Passage number 159.
 MR. BULLARD.  Oh.  I guess I didn’t need this two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses that they did not need a particular item.


Passage number 160.
 MR. POWELL.  You two-handed yourself.  It’s illegal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Powell, is making a statement about an action (two-handing oneself) being illegal.


Passage number 161.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support the policy recommendation in alternative B and the statement as written. Coming out of the March meeting, my position was that the April meeting should be kept alive for a rate move if the incoming data proved to be largely confirming of a beginning-of-the-year real-side outlook of moderate economic growth between 2 and 2½ percent, provided that growth momentum was accompanied by continuing strength in labor reports and evidence of inflation firming.  The economic growth signals have not been confirming that outlook, although the employment and inflation data have mostly cooperated.  So I have backed off any inclination to move at this meeting.  I advocate a wait-and-see posture.  I believe June ought to remain a live option, and I’m satisfied that the language in alternative B adequately preserves that option. Unfortunately, as the data calendar presented in Bill Wascher’s presentation yesterday shows, there will not be a lot of information on hand on second-quarter economic growth by the June meeting.  And, to state the obvious, as everyone has mentioned, the pending Brexit vote has the potential to be a very significant event.  So I think we could be facing ambiguous circumstances again in June.  If progress toward the Committee’s mandated objectives moves along with even soft, below-forecast economic growth—below 2 percent—and otherwise mixed incoming data, policy-setting in conditions of ambiguity may be our curse for a good while.  Circumstances may force the Committee to more explicitly explain its reaction function as regards normalization and, as a participant, may force the question of my preferred policy-setting decision framework. The approach I expect to apply is to test my baseline assumptions against accumulated incoming data, looking for evidence that invalidates those assumptions.  This is a lower bar than requiring an improved and broadly affirmative constellation of data that sounds the all-clear.  I’m concerned we will always have some reason not to act, and, although I perceive little potential cost associated with a patient, wait-and-see posture, at this moment I doubt we can rely on such conditions indefinitely.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the author's position and thoughts on the current economic situation and potential policy decisions.


Passage number 162.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, and I share the Tealbook baseline outlook of continuing employment gains and inflation slowly picking up.  Under that outlook, a very gradual path for the federal funds rate seems appropriate.  As I said in March, I believe that, while inflation remains low, it’s appropriate for the Committee to keep rates low to support continued job creation, especially as recent job gains reflect rising labor force participation rather than a falling unemployment rate. When I think about June, I think about two communication challenges.  One is changing market expectations in advance of such a move; as you said, you have a speech coming up when you can do that.  The second communications challenge is really the data.  We’ve said that we’re data dependent, and if, between now and June, we haven’t seen a move in inflation or inflation expectations and if we haven’t seen a move in wages or in the headline unemployment rate, how do we explain the move.  I struggle with being able to point to data in any of our key indicators that would justify the move, so that’s something I’d like us to think about. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. Mr. Kashikari is expressing his support for alternative B and discussing his views on the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. He does mention some potential communication challenges and questions about the data, but there is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 163.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  Both my December and March SEP paths assumed two funds rate increases sometime in 2016.  I’m sticking with that assessment today. My outlook for economic growth over the remainder of the year is basically on track with my earlier forecasts.  Here the improvement in financial conditions we’ve experienced since midwinter is an important factor.  Otherwise, I would have carried some of the first-quarter weakness into my outlook for the remainder of the year.  The incoming data have also led me to stick with my March inflation forecast, which had the four-quarter change in core PCE prices in the fourth quarter of 2016 at 1.6 percent. I do not think, however, that one of those two policy moves should occur today.  First, I prefer waiting until the incoming data on spending corroborate my forecast of recovering economic growth.  Second, the improvement in financial conditions supporting my forecast is due in good part to the more accommodative policy rate path that markets began to expect during the winter and that we delivered on in the March SEP.  We should not hazard undoing that welcome support, especially at a time when the risks to both the economic outlook and inflation forecasts are tilted to the downside and our policy rate is still close to the effective lower bound. For today, I believe alternative B serves us well, and I support it as written.  It clearly communicates our assessment of appropriate policy, in view of the outlook and surrounding risks, for achieving our dual-mandate objectives.  Furthermore, in view of the uncertainties and risks, at the moment I think we should be agnostic about when the next rate hike is likely to take place.  Alternative B as written neither commits us to a move soon nor takes June off the table, and I think that’s a good place to be. Because President Bullard mentioned his lack of support for the dot plot, I just want to register that I support the dot plot very strongly.  Without it, I think our statement would need to convey a much better, stronger consensus view of our policy expectations, and that’s historically been difficult to accomplish within our statement.  The dot plot adds more information, all of this at a time when the ultimate renormalization would be on the order of 250 to 300 basis points eventually.  I think that’s tough.  If we took it away, we’d have to replace it with something, and, in the past, we’ve talked about constructing a consensus forecast.  I’m not optimistic about our ability to deliver on that, but it would be an alternative.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Evans, expresses his support for alternative B and explains his outlook on economic growth and inflation forecasts. He also expresses his preference to wait for more data on spending before making a policy move and argues against undoing the improvement in financial conditions. Mr. Evans also expresses his strong support for the dot plot, which adds more information to the statement. There are no signs of disagreement or contention with other speakers or viewpoints in this passage.


Passage number 164.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  Between now and the next meeting, I’m hoping to see evidence—jobs growth, PCE data, and other measures—that is more consistent with my GDP forecast of approximately 2 percent growth for 2016.  I do believe we will see that improvement, in light of the strength of the consumer and the strong jobs market, but time will tell.  While I remain concerned about risks outside the United States, I also believe that the FOMC’s slowing of its expected pace of rate increases as well as firming prices of oil have helped stabilize financial conditions and have helped ease the adjustment process that’s going on in China and other non-U.S. countries. Assuming I see firming economic data, I will likely be advocating that we remove some amount of accommodation at our June meeting.  And I believe that if we see that firming in incoming data—even though we won’t have a GDP estimate—market expectations of a June move will rise.  So I think the data may, to some extent, help resolve that issue. I would like to see any removal of accommodation be slow, gradual, and cautious.  In that regard, I would like to have the option of waiting more than a quarter to observe the effects of our next move.  So, to me, moving in June is attractive because it would give us the time needed to be patient and assess the effect of that move, and I think it would give us greater options with regard to moving at least a second time this year.  In my view, waiting beyond June reduces our options. I’m also mindful that the world is very different—to me, at least—than it was 10 years ago, particularly because of key secular forces, which I’ve talked a lot about:  overcapacity globally, aging demographics, and high levels of debt to GDP in advanced economies, which, all things being equal, tend to put downward pressure on potential GDP growth and inflation.  In a world that is more interconnected than we had even 10 years ago, the transmission of these forces affects the U.S. economy and has a greater potential to spill over into overall financial conditions. To me, all of that reinforces the desire to have a slow, gradual, and cautious removal of accommodation.  That said, I remind myself that there is a cost to excessive accommodation.  It hurts savers.  It creates distortions in investment decisions, some of which we talked about yesterday.  It affects asset allocation and hiring decisions.  And some of these imbalances can be painful to absorb and unwind and are easier to recognize in hindsight.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the perspective of one individual, Mr. Kaplan, discussing his support for alternative B and his hope to see certain evidence and economic data in the future. He also expresses his concerns and preferences regarding the removal of accommodation by the FOMC. There is no disagreement or contention with any other individual or viewpoint.


Passage number 165.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In view of the recent near-term weakness in economic activity, I am supportive of no change in the funds rate at this meeting.  Inflation remains below target, and some patience is called for as more data allow us to better assess whether current economic weakness is largely transitory, perhaps partly driven by residual seasonality in the data, as mentioned yesterday.  But as I noted yesterday as well, my modal outlook is for economic activity to grow slightly above trend and for inflation to return to target relatively quickly. If this outcome transpires, then it will be appropriate to continue on the path toward normalization at the June meeting.  Doing anything else would most likely require an entirely new narrative.  However, if market probabilities of a June increase do not rise from their exceptionally low levels, then raising rates in June will be made unnecessarily difficult.  Thus, the language in the statement is of paramount importance, and I am skeptical that the language in alternative B is up to the task.  I prefer paragraphs 1 and 2 in alternative C, which give a more upbeat view of the economy.  That said, we will have significant amounts of new data between today and the June meeting, and there are other avenues of communication that can and should be used to influence market sentiment. So I can support alternative B as written for today.  Monetary policy is quite accommodative and, as emphasized in the Tealbook, will still be accommodative in the event of a few future rate hikes.  If economic data come in much weaker than I envision or if inflation retreats from its firming trend, then, of course, no rate hike will be called for.  But in order for monetary policy to normalize in a predictable and coherent way, all meetings must be “live.”  And our statement language must ensure that this is the case.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their support for no change in the funds rate at the meeting and discusses different scenarios and outcomes, but there is no direct disagreement with any other party.


Passage number 166.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The unemployment part of our mandate has largely been met, and inflation is gradually moving toward our goal of 2 percent.  In my view, risks to the outlook are roughly balanced.  Although economic growth remained sluggish in the first quarter, the signals from the labor market continue to be quite strong, and those have proven to be more reliable as the economy has continued to be resilient through financial market volatility, the drop in oil prices, the higher dollar, and relatively weak economic growth abroad. With that as backdrop, I believe it’s appropriate for the federal funds rate to continue to be on a gradual upward path.  Even considering that estimates of the short-run equilibrium real rate are still very low, monetary policy is very accommodative, and I expect it to remain accommodative for some time because the anticipated pace of normalization is slow.  Thus, policy will continue to provide some insurance against downside risks even as we implement gradual reductions in the level of accommodation to provide some insurance against the upside risks. I do not think the FOMC is “behind the curve,” but while there are risks associated with moving too soon, there are also risks associated with waiting too long, on account of the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy.  If we wait until every piece of data lines up or all uncertainty is resolved, then we will surely have waited too long. We should have the courage to act when the economic outlook calls for it, as I believe it currently does.  And if the economy evolves in an unexpected way, we should have the courage to change course if necessary.  I view that as essentially the meaning of running policy in a data-dependent way.  Data dependency was meant to give us flexibility so that we could react appropriately to evolving economic conditions, but, in reality, I think it has actually come to constrain our flexibility.  It hasn’t given the public enough indication of our own reaction function.  It has not helped the public understand the economic considerations that will drive our policy decisions this year and next. At the same time, we don’t want to act in a way that surprises the public.  Thus, we’re at an impasse.  The public is not expecting us to raise rates at this meeting, and the policy rate path that market participants currently anticipate is quite a bit shallower than the path we’ve indicated in the March SEP as most likely to be appropriate.  As long as we are ineffective in conveying our interpretation of economic developments and the outlook, the market’s policy expectations need not align with ours.  If we are, then, unwilling to act in such a situation, we have essentially ratified the market participants’ expectations and not our own. I can go along with alternative B today because we haven’t prepared the public for anything else, but I would like us to be in a position to raise rates in June because of the actual progress we’ve made on our dual-mandate goals.  That means we need to be working on our message throughout the intermeeting period.  Conditional on the economic outlook, my operating assumption is that we will likely raise the funds rate in June, and only if we get some negative surprises would we back off from that. We’ll need to start preparing the public.  Unfortunately, I don’t think today’s statement is going to be much of a help.  Indeed, I think it could very well be read as indicating a lower probability of a rate increase in June, because the statement is silent on whether we view risks as having receded since March and because the tone of paragraph 1, in which most of the changes appear, could be read more negatively than intended.  I appreciate the Chair making a speech the day before the next blackout period, but I hope the Chair will take on the burden of speaking publicly throughout the intermeeting period to ensure that we do indeed have the flexibility to raise rates in June should the economy evolve as expected.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Mester is expressing her views and concerns about the current economic outlook and the need for the Federal Reserve to raise rates in June.


Passage number 167.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Since the March meeting, potential downside risks have softened or shifted but, of course, not entirely disappeared.  With financial conditions calmer, however, my modal outlook is unchanged from our March meeting, and I see current economic outcomes as well aligned with our mandated objectives.  Labor markets are near maximum employment.  Prices are rising at a rate commensurate with the economy’s longer-run potential.  In this context, I see economic fundamentals consistent with a 25 basis point rate increase at this meeting and consistent with a gradual and patient approach.  My other concern with alternative B is that it seems likely to be read as placing more weight on transitory financial and economic factors and too little weight on our modal outlook for economic growth, employment, and inflation. It is increasingly unclear what framework will guide our policy decisions.  Policy rules appear to be carrying little, if any, weight.  Tealbook B shows we are likely to be well behind even the prescriptions from the inertial Taylor (1999) rule for some time.  However, many frameworks suggest that the equilibrium real rate is lower, though we seem reluctant to adjust the stance of policy in response to changes in the equilibrium real rate.  For example, Tealbook B shows that the current real federal funds rate has fallen, while the Tealbook-consistent measure of r* has risen.  The widening spread suggests that monetary policy has become more accommodative since the March FOMC meeting during a period when conditions might suggest less accommodation would be appropriate.  In fact, the spread between the Tealbook-consistent measure of r* and the current real federal funds rate is at the widest level at any point, according to my staff’s look at Tealbooks, over at least the past 10 years. In addition, recalling the January 2015 Board staff memo that compared the “early and gradual” approach to normalization with the “late and steep” approach, it is striking to look at the distribution of the funds rate under these two strategies.  Our current policy setting is below or on the boundary of the lower bound of the 90 percent confidence intervals in either case.  Yet current inflation and unemployment are well inside the 70 percent confidence bands.  Certainly, the discrepancy reflects concerns about downside risks, although risks were viewed as balanced last December at liftoff. Finally, the current Tealbook offers another framework, one that attaches asymmetric losses to the unemployment rate gap.  This approach takes the projected path closer to what is implied by the current SEP projections but still suggests a slightly faster removal of accommodation. Essentially, none of the frameworks align with our policy settings.  As we approach the June meeting, I would like to see our policy choices begin to align with such decisionmaking frameworks more closely.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Ms. George, is expressing her own concerns and perspectives, but there is no clear disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 168.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is not provided.


Passage number 169.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  The statement sets us up to react appropriately at the upcoming meetings to the incoming data on labor markets, economic activity, and inflation. Since our March meeting, concerns about global economic and financial developments have ebbed.  Therefore, I think it’s appropriate that paragraph 2 no longer puts a spotlight on these as specific sources of risks.  Indeed, as we think about future policy, changes in the outlook for inflation are particularly important because we’re already essentially at or very near our full employment goal.  Alternative B correctly emphasizes that we’ll closely monitor both inflation and global developments. I recently looked back at my forecast and the Tealbook’s forecast from a year ago, April 2015.  For both core inflation and unemployment, the economy is currently very close to the path that we forecast a year ago.  In fact, the main miss is core inflation over the past year, and, in the current quarter, it’s been just a tad stronger than expected a year ago.  The fact that the expansion remains on track gives me confidence that we can and should soon make another gradual move to normalize the federal funds rate.  In addition, there are potential risks to waiting too long, as our discussion yesterday of monetary policy and financial stability highlighted. In light of these considerations, I like to think ahead about the statement language that may be used when we raise rates.  Alternative C is a good starting point.  One concern, though, is that paragraph 2 of alternative C mentions the balance of risks for economic activity and the labor market but not for inflation.  It would be good to emphasize the risks to both of our mandate goals, and that’s easily remedied by moving the risk assessment to the end of paragraph 2 and then being symmetric about the two parts of the mandate.  For example, we might say, “The Committee sees the risks to its outlook for both economic activity and inflation as nearly balanced but is monitoring inflation indicators and global economic and financial market developments closely.”  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Williams, is expressing support for alternative B and alternative C, but is suggesting a slight change to the wording in alternative C to emphasize the risks to both economic activity and inflation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 170.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B, and I support the statement as written. My base case is that we should proceed with a gradual pace of interest rate increases, including probably two increases this year, provided that the economy continues on its projected path.  As for June, if we have two more months of continued labor market progress and some indication of a brighter picture on spending, then I could support another rate increase as soon as June. I have to say that, sitting here today, the question of whether to move in June strikes me as a particularly tricky one for two reasons.  First, U.S. and global financial conditions are significantly improved since early February, and that is due, in large part, to the perceived shift in U.S. monetary policy, which was validated by the March SEP.  I would like to see things come together for an increase in June.  I’m not at all certain that they will.  And that’s partly because of the data that are incoming, as President Lockhart indicated. The second thing is Brexit.  There was a lot of discussion on it yesterday and some today.  The June meeting ends on June 15, eight days before the Brexit vote.  As of June 15, the result of the Brexit vote may or may not be in serious doubt, and markets may or may not be in turmoil over that.  So I’m just saying I can imagine circumstances in which I would think it risky to proceed with another rate increase, and I can also imagine circumstances in which it might be safe, assuming the data also justify it. I would not want to tighten going into a situation in which it’s highly uncertain what’s going to happen.  I think we don’t need to be in that kind of a hurry.  So I’ll leave it there.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Powell expresses uncertainty and hesitation about whether to support a rate increase in June due to improved financial conditions since February and the uncertainty surrounding the Brexit vote in June.


Passage number 171.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  The probability that we will raise the interest rate in our June meeting is likely lower today than the parallel probability for a December 2015 increase was at our October 2015 meeting.  I regard today’s probability as somewhere around 40 percent. Obviously, our decision on June 15 will depend on what happens between now and then and on our expectations of the development of the U.S. economy and the global economy in the months and years following June 15, 2016.  Our decision will depend, to a considerable extent, on the conclusions we will have reached by then about economic growth in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year and on the implications of those conclusions for the growth of the economy in the remaining three quarters of this year.  And that conclusion will depend, to a considerable extent, on whether the labor market continues to strengthen. Before our next meeting we will receive two employment reports, on May 6 and on June 3.  The probability that we will want to raise the rate seven weeks from now will be higher if these reports confirm the basic dilemma we’ve had to deal with for well over a year—that the labor market is strong, while economic growth is disappointing.  I continue to go with the advice to focus on the labor market, which I was given soon after arriving here. Of course, there’ll be many other factors that we’ll take into account when we make the next interest rate decision, among them current and expected rates of inflation and wage growth and current and expected exchange rates.  But there’s no point at this late stage in our discussions in trying to summarize our collective reaction function not only in terms of the arguments that enter our explicit or implicit monetary rule, but also in terms of what determines our beliefs about that rule and about future values of those arguments. So, to save time, I’ll conclude by mentioning only two key issues, both of which have been mentioned several times already in this discussion.  The first is the message we want to send about the probability of our raising the interest rate on June 15.  Probably most of us prefer not to surprise the markets, at least unnecessarily.  If that is our approach, we need to raise the markets’ estimated probability of an increase in June.  That could be done both through today’s statement and by messages that we send in the next seven weeks.  I do not think that alternative B will send the message that I believe conveys the right probability.  And if our aim is to not create surprises, we should not wait too long to send the message that the probability of an increase in June is well above the 20 percent number we’ve heard several times this week.  I hope that the statement and, in particular, the minutes will be useful in this regard. Second, we confront the issue of what to do about the possibility of Brexit, which was discussed yesterday by several people, including in some detail by Vice Chairman Dudley, and again today by others.  In principle, the way we should handle the Brexit issue seems clear.  If the odds on Brexit are low on June 15, we should go ahead and make the decision on the interest rate, ignoring the possibility of Brexit.  If the odds on a “leave” Brexit vote result are close to or above 50 percent, we should delay our decision on the rate, particularly if the tentative decision would have been to raise the rate, until the July meeting.  This has one extra advantage.  That could be the ideal occasion to show that, in practice, all of our meetings are live—that is to say, we really can make an interest rate decision at any meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 172.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  I think we need to acknowledge both the weakness in recent economic activity, which I believe we do in paragraph 1, and the fact that financial conditions have improved so that the downside risks arising from this source have diminished somewhat, and I think the changes in paragraph 2 address this. Unlike some others, I expect the statement will be viewed as slightly on the “hawky” side, in view of the elimination of the “continue to pose risks” language.  How much so is difficult to tell.  I don’t read the statement as indicating a bias one way or another about June.  But with the market expectations for June at only about a 20 percent probability, it seems to me this statement, even if it really is not indicating a lean to June, should push the probability up a little bit, and I view that as a good outcome. Yesterday I discussed the Brexit issue.  I’m pretty much where Governor Fischer is on that.  I think that if it’s obvious at the next meeting that we would like to tighten ex Brexit and the probability of Brexit is low, we should just go ahead.  But if the probability of a leave vote is high, then it may very well make sense to wait. I do think that there is an option to potentially have a very hawky statement in June and then make it clear in the press conference that we’re very close to tightening monetary policy, setting up the expectations that the July meeting would be live.  And I agree with Governor Fischer that tightening in July has some other attractions, because it would eliminate this idea that we can tighten only at press conference meetings.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Well, I think I’ve heard broad-based support for alternative B for today and heard many of you emphasize the importance of communications between now and June.  And if we see a divergence between what markets think and what views are developing in the Committee, I will be very attuned to try to remedy that. For today, let me ask Brian to call for a vote on alternative B as written and the associated directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a reflection on the current economic conditions and the speaker's views on monetary policy.


Passage number 173.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As you mentioned, this vote will be on the policy statement for alternative B as indicated on pages 6 and 7 of Thomas’s briefing materials and on the directive to the Desk as included in the implementation note on page 10 of those materials.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement acknowledging the forthcoming vote on the policy statement and directive, without expressing any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 174.
 Chair Yellen  Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard  Yes President Bullard  Yes Governor Fischer  Yes President George  No President Mester  Yes Governor Powell  Yes President Rosengren Yes Governor Tarullo  Yes MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


