Passage number 1.
 MR. FISCHER.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  And, as many of you know, Nellie Liang and Mike Leahy have announced that they will be retiring, and this will be their last FOMC meeting.  Nellie began her career at the Board in 1986 when she joined the Division of Research and Statistics as an economist, and she worked on a variety of financial issues over the course of her career.  Nellie was a key participant in crafting the Federal Reserve’s response to the financial crisis.  She helped lead a number of crisis-era programs, including the 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, or bank stress tests, which played an important role in increasing public confidence in the banking system and set the template for our ongoing CCAR program.  In 2010, she was appointed founding director of the newly created Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, which went so well that it is now the Division of Financial Stability.  As director, she led the effort to establish our new financial stability monitoring and policy framework.  Nellie started attending FOMC meetings in 2005 and has attended a total of 53 meetings. Mike first joined the Board as a research assistant in the Division of International Finance on a break from his Ph.D. work.  After returning to graduate school and completing his studies, he rejoined IF and then rose steadily through the ranks, becoming deputy director in 2012. Along the way, Mike made innumerable contributions to the work of the division, the Board, and   the FOMC as one of our leading experts on exchange rates and monetary policy.  Including today’s meeting, Mike has attended 55 FOMC meetings since his first meeting in 2004. Nellie and Mike, we are all truly grateful for everything that you have done for the Federal Reserve, and we wish you the best in your well-deserved retirements.  [Applause] Before turning to the first agenda item, I would like to recognize Governor Fischer as chairman of the communications subcommittee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply provides information about two individuals retiring from the Federal Reserve and recognizes their contributions and achievements.


Passage number 2.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would like to provide some advance notice on changes to the policy on external communications that the subcommittee on communications will be proposing when we conduct our annual review of FOMC organizational documents in January.  In particular, we would like to align the start of the blackout period more closely with the start of our serious discussion of the monetary policy alternatives. Under our current practice, Committee participants receive the first draft of the alternative policy statements on the Friday 11 days before the beginning of the FOMC meeting.  That is assuming the usual Tuesday–Wednesday meeting schedule.  But our blackout period on external communications commences at midnight eastern time 7 days before the beginning of the meeting.  The circulation of the draft policy statements marks the start of our deliberative process for the coming FOMC decision, a process that the blackout period is intended to foster and to protect.  That means that we currently face a gap between the time our deliberations begin and the start of the blackout period.  And we are investigating ways to close this gap.  In the meantime, I urge all of us to be very careful in our public communications—which I’m sure we all are most of the time—particularly during the time period in question. In addition to this modification, in January we will also be suggesting some clarifications of the blackout policy, particularly as it relates to the staff and their possible participation in  conferences and during the blackout period. The subcommittee will circulate a memo describing all proposed changes sometime before the December meeting.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any questions or comments for Governor Fischer.  Okay.  Then let’s turn to the first item on our agenda, which is “Long-Run Framework for Monetary Policy Implementation.”  Troy Davig is going to start off our presentations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes proposed changes to the policy on external communications and mentions that a memo will be circulated to describe the proposed changes.


Passage number 3.
 MR. DAVIG.1  Thank you Madam Chair.  We will be referring to the materials titled “Material for Briefing on Long-Run Monetary Policy Implementation Framework.”  The briefings today summarize the work of the latest phase of the long-run framework project. As you are aware, this has been a Systemwide project featuring contributions from the Board and all Reserve Banks.  In addition to the presenters at the table, there were several additional coauthors on the main memos, including Ron Feldman, who is also present and available to answer questions. Following on the foundational work presented at the July meeting, which covered money markets, foreign experiences, and lessons from the crisis, this phase of the project focused on issues related to possible policy rate targets and operating regimes as well as considerations regarding the balance sheet.  In general, the combination of these elements comprises the key aspects of an operating “framework.” The scope of this project was outlined now over one year ago, with three broad objectives listed on page 3 of your briefing packet.  The first project objective was that any framework needs to achieve an appropriate degree of short-term interest rate control, including in periods of financial distress and in a manner robust to structural changes in the financial system.  As the briefings by Jane Ihrig and Antoine Martin will highlight, this objective can be achieved using different policy rates and with a range of operating frameworks, which could vary in the use of ceiling and floor facilities, the level of reserves, and the breadth of counterparties. The second objective was that a framework should enhance the ability to achieve macroeconomic and financial-stability objectives at the effective lower bound.  Here the work reveals that the ability to effectively respond to the effective lower bound does not create sharp distinctions across operating regimes, though some operating regimes would require adjustments at the lower bound.  In addition, maintaining operational readiness is important, particularly if the Committee intends to possibly use asset purchases or other tools that are not used routinely as part of the day-to-day operational framework.  In terms of balance sheet policy, Deborah Leonard and David López-Salido will discuss how the balance sheet can be used to support interest rate control as well as macroeconomic goals and financial stability. 1 The materials used by Mr. Davig, Ms. Ihrig, Mr. Martin, Mr. López-Salido, Ms. Leonard, and Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).  The third objective was that a framework should support the System’s ability to address liquidity strains in money markets and support overall financial stability.  Regarding liquidity strains, the work suggests there may be advantages to having separate lending facilities for different types of liquidity provision as well as a broad set of counterparties. Tradeoffs often exist when decisions about one aspect of the framework can have implications for others, though there are exceptions.  For example, the briefings will discuss arrangements that allow for some separation between decisions about the balance sheet and the policy rate, such as in the current framework.  Decisions about various aspects of a framework, of course, can also have important implications from a political economy perspective. In addition to the three project objectives I just discussed, there was a set of additional objectives listed on the top of page 4 of your packet that are addressed in today’s briefings.  Finally, the Committee’s normalization principles and plans provided an additional set of criteria, also listed on page 4.  In general, the issues discussed in the memos do not necessarily call for any near-term decisions about a long-run framework or for a need to make decisions about changes to the existing framework.  Looking ahead, today’s discussion will help inform any additional staff work or dimension of the project that warrants further analysis.  Thank you.  With that, I will now turn the briefing over to Jane.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an overview of the materials and objectives of the long-run monetary policy implementation framework project.


Passage number 4.
 MR. MARTIN. Thanks, Jane.  Slide 14 provides a summary of some of the salient considerations associated with each of the three cases. The first two rows concern the policy rate. As noted in row 1, the choice of policy rate would be familiar in cases 1 and 2, particularly if the Committee chose to continue targeting the federal funds rate or move to the closely associated overnight bank funding rate.  The interest rates paid on reserves, both required and excess, have been used in FOMC communication, so they are also familiar. In case 3, a market repo rate or the overnight RRP offering rate, which represent risk-free rates, would be less familiar to market participants and a more significant change. Row 2 notes that case 1, using the federal funds rate as the policy rate, would not be robust to a significant reduction in federal funds lending by Federal Home Loan Banks.  Those concerns would be mitigated by the OBFR, particularly if that rate could be broadened to include onshore wholesale deposits.  These concerns would be lessened in case 2, as an interbank market would likely reemerge. There are few robustness concerns associated with a repo rate. The next three rows concern properties of the operating regime. In row 3, case 1 would be particularly simple to operate in normal times, even if the Committee wanted to supply a smaller quantity of reserves than at present.  Case 2, while familiar from the pre-crisis experience, is more complicated. Case 3 would be least familiar, although the experience of the last few years suggests that it could work like the current operating regime. As noted in row 4, since the level of reserves doesn’t affect interest rates much in case 1, injecting liquidity in times of market stress would not be an issue.  In contrast, sterilization tools would be needed in case 2, or the regime would have to transition to case 1.  Liquidity provision may not be an issue in case 3 if this framework operated with the supply of reserves intersecting the flat part of the demand for reserves.  For similar reasons, cases 1 and 3 could remain unchanged at the effective lower bound, as noted in row 5, whereas case 2 would likely have to transition to a framework like case 1 in instances of large-scale asset purchases. Row 6 concerns reserve requirements. These requirements could be set to zero in case 1, as they would not play any role in a regime that operates on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve.  To operate on the steep part, as in case 2, reserve requirements could be maintained, or you could consider voluntary reserve targets, which would reduce some of the costs associated with reserve requirements. Reserve requirements could also be set to zero in case 3 if operating with abundant reserves. Finally, row 7 discusses political economy risk.  Some risks are associated with having a relatively large balance sheet, as could happen in cases 1 and 3. Case 2 likely represents the lowest amount of political economy risk, because it could be  accompanied by a smaller balance sheet and money market rates would be above IOER. Slide 15 discusses considerations for a ceiling tool that may be relevant for any of the cases Jane reviewed, with some focus on the discount window.  Historically, the discount window has been used for three purposes:  to help support interest-rate control, to provide liquidity to address broad-based market funding pressures, and to provide liquidity to individual firms facing idiosyncratic liquidity shocks. Stigma— the reluctance of an institution to access a central bank’s standing lending facility out of concern that, if detected, it could be interpreted as a sign of financial weakness—is perhaps most closely related to the third role. But because use of the discount window does not distinguish the motivation, the presence of stigma for that one purpose likely prevents the discount window from performing all roles effectively. Policymakers may want to consider options to reduce stigma.  One approach, as Troy mentioned, is to establish separate facilities, one for each role, which may allow some tools to work more effectively.  The memo provides two examples of facilities that may act as a more robust ceiling for interest rate control.  Policymakers could consider introducing a depository institution repo facility (DIRF) or a financial institution repo facility (FIRF).  These facilities would be established under Section 14 authority for open market operations.  More work could be done on considering the effectiveness of these facilities and other options could also be considered. These ceiling tools could be used alongside the discount window, which would only address individual liquidity needs, and a version of the term auction facility, or TAF, which could be considered for broad-based liquidity needs.  Slide 16 considers the degree to which these types of liquidity backstop might be incorporated into the framework.  For example, the discount window and swap lines are “integrated” into the current operating regime—that is, they are continuously available as part of the monetary policy implementation framework.  A potential drawback of integration is that integrated tools are more likely to lead to moral hazard compared with other approaches. The degree of integration could range from fully integrated tools to those that are less integrated and made available only under some preannounced conditions. Or, tools could be left inactive, such as the TAF is now, with no specific preannounced conditions under which it would be used again. Slide 17 discusses the breadth of the counterparty framework. In normal times, a narrow set of counterparties may reduce the risk of distorting markets but could be seen as providing privileges to a few institutions. A broader set of counterparties for liquidity provision tools could be viewed as more inclusive but might also increase the risk of moral hazard or of political scrutiny.  However, in times of stress and perhaps in normal times, it might be advantageous to have broader reach in markets, for both OMO and liquidity facilities, to help with interest-rate control and transmission.  These tradeoffs would need to be considered as the Committee moves forward with building a long-run framework.  I will now turn the discussion over the David to begin the presentation of the balance sheet workgroup’s findings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 5.
 MR. LÓPEZ-SALIDO.  Thank you, Antoine.  Debby and I will now present findings made by the balance sheet workgroup, which we co-led with Fabio Natalucci.  As noted on slide 19, we were tasked with exploring a range of issues that are relevant in determining the longer-run size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  I will start with a discussion of the roles that you might want the balance sheet to play in the long-run framework.  These roles include interest rate control, achieving macroeconomic objectives, and supporting financial stability.  Debby will then discuss the implications that choices about the balance sheet objectives may have for the design of the System Open Market Account as well as the fiscal and political economic considerations related to use of the balance sheet as an active policy tool. In slide 20, if effective interest rate control is the only role assigned to the balance sheet, its size would likely be determined primarily by currency in circulation, other autonomous factors, and the level of reserve balances associated with the central bank’s operating regime.  As Jane and Antoine illustrated, interest-rate control can be achieved with either a small or a large balance sheet.  Just as the choice of the operating regime can influence the size of the balance sheet, decisions to use the balance sheet as an active policy tool to achieve macroeconomic goals or promote financial stability may also have implications for the operating regime.  For instance, if policymakers wished to maintain elevated levels of reserves to foster financial stability, they would need to rely heavily on policy tools such as IOER, overnight RRP, or voluntary reserve targets to control interest rates effectively. Slide 21 addresses the balance sheet’s use to support macroeconomic objectives. A large research literature has documented the point that, through a number of channels, large-scale purchases of longer-term assets can lower term premiums and long-term bond yields and boost prices of various other financial assets. These changes in financial conditions support stronger economic growth and higher inflation.  The experience of central banks since the crisis suggests that asset purchases have appreciable macroeconomic benefits when the effective lower bound binds, especially in the event of stressed market conditions. Economic theory would suggest using all available tools, especially in the presence of multiple goals.  However, policymakers would have to coordinate the use of multiple policy tools.  Communicating the nature of the central bank’s multidimensional “policy reaction function” could be challenging.  Moreover, the ongoing use of asset purchases could affect financial markets in ways that are difficult to anticipate. Policymakers may therefore assess the tradeoffs between the benefits and costs of active use of the balance sheet differently at the effective lower bound versus away from it.  One possible approach would be to use the changes in the size and the composition of the balance sheet to achieve macroeconomic objectives only when the policy rate is constrained at the effective lower bound or during periods of stressed market conditions, and then revert to its passive role and prior structure at other times. This strategy would seek to preserve space that permitted future use of expanding thebalance sheet by holding a relatively small balance sheet and a low level of duration risk outside the effective lower bound episodes. There may also be benefits of using the balance sheet actively away from the effective lower bound, although the case may be less clear.  In a post-crisis “new normal” characterized by a low equilibrium real rate, there will be less room than in the past to cut the policy rate in response to a recessionary shock, and there may be more frequent, and potentially longer, spells at the effective lower bound.   An open question is whether a permanently large balance sheet would permanently reduce the risk premiums and thus it would raise the equilibrium real risk-free rate. If that is the case, from an ex ante viewpoint, holding a large balance sheet that bears a relatively high level of duration risk away from the effective lower bound might create additional scope to cut interest rates in the event of a recessionary shock. This strategy might help to limit the frequency of episodes at the effective lower bound.  However, this same strategy could present, ex post, some costs of having less space to expand the balance sheet further should short-term rates still fall to the effective lower bound. In either case, the macroeconomic effectiveness of any purchase or sales program will depend a great deal on the public’s understanding of the Committee’s reaction function and its stopping rule for using balance sheet tools, in conjunction with forward guidance on the short-term interest rate. I will now turn to ways the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could be used to promote financial stability.  I would like to preface this discussion by noting that, currently, there is only a small research literature on this topic and no real consensus.  As shown on slide 22, policymakers might consider several financial stability objectives. During periods of stress in financial markets, asset purchases could be used to promote market liquidity and improve market functioning.  The Federal Reserve’s first asset purchase program, initiated at the height of the crisis, likely helped along these dimensions. Outside periods of stress, the balance sheet might also, in principle, be used preemptively to reduce the vulnerabilities in the financial sector.  One of those vulnerabilities could arise from privately created, short-term, money-like assets.  In normal times, investors perceive such assets to be safe and liquid, but sudden changes in investors’ perceptions can lead to stressed market conditions.  Those changes were powerful catalysts for instability during the financial crisis. In light of these considerations, a recent literature has suggested that a greater supply of publicly provided money-like assets may be able to crowd out excessive creation of runnable, private money-like assets.  Nevertheless, a great deal of additional research would be necessary before we would be able to assess the magnitude of the potential benefits of displacing privately supplied money-like assets. Another vulnerability relates to the potential for excessive private maturity and liquidity transformation that arises from the shape of the yield curve.  Some researchers have suggested that the Federal Reserve could flatten the yield curve by  buying long-term securities, and therefore, by increasing the costs of short-term borrowing relative to the yields on longer-term assets, reduce the amount of maturity transformation taking place in the private sector.  However, there is very limited evidence on the responsiveness of liquidity and maturity transformation to changes in the yield curve.  Finally, some observers have suggested that the Federal Reserve hold relatively few high-quality liquid assets in its portfolio to expand the quantity of the same assets available to financial institutions.  Others have suggested that the Federal Reserve can “lean against the wind” in the housing market by adjusting its holdings of agency MBS and therefore influencing mortgage market conditions.  This policy might be beneficial if the housing sector is viewed as an important channel affecting financial stability.  Thank you.  Debby will now continue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speakers are presenting findings and discussing various roles and considerations related to the Federal Reserve's balance sheet.


Passage number 6.
 MS. LEONARD.  Thank you, David.  David reviewed a number of roles the balance sheet could potentially play in the Federal Reserve’s future operating framework.  Your eventual decisions about these roles will have implications for the design of the SOMA portfolio.  Some instructive cases are summarized on slide 23. A simple case might be to use the balance sheet passively to support short-term interest rate control and to deploy it as an active tool only when short-term rates are constrained by the ELB or during times of financial stress.  Maintaining a portfolio in normal times that is somewhat greater than currency in circulation and other autonomous factors—but not substantially so—and that has a short average duration would preserve capacity to conduct maturity extension or large-scale asset purchase programs. Active use of the balance sheet at the ELB or in stressed market conditions would then mean expanding the portfolio’s size, lengthening its maturity, or changing its asset composition—then reverting to its previous structure when conditions warrant. A limitation of this strategy is its assumption that the balance sheet can be normalized before it is expanded again.  Under this approach, the portfolio’s size and composition are not necessarily choice variables; they depend on economic developments.  With a persistently low r* suggesting that spells at the ELB may become more frequent or persistent, there is a risk of an ever-increasing balance sheet. Using the balance sheet to support macroeconomic objectives while away from the ELB or to promote financial stability in normal times would likely entail a relatively large balance sheet—driven by needs to supply a large quantity of Federal Reserve liabilities or to hold a large stock of assets—in order to achieve desired objectives. Different objectives, though, lead to different portfolios.  For example, using the balance sheet as a macroeconomic tool away from the ELB might suggest holding a large amount of longer-term securities in order to apply downward pressure on term premiums. In contrast, positioning the portfolio to be able to flatten the yield curve suggests holding a large stock of shorter-term securities that could then be sold when the need arises.  Meanwhile, a desire to increase the quantity of HQLA available to the private sector suggests weighting securities holdings toward agency MBS.In slide 24, policymakers might consider a range of possible guiding principles for portfolio management, particularly insofar as there is some leeway in determining the composition of SOMA assets within the narrow limits established by the Federal Reserve Act.  Three principles that guided portfolio management before the crisis were safety, market neutrality, and liquidity.  The weight each of these concepts holds in a future portfolio will depend in part on your choices about operating regimes and long-run balance sheet objectives.  Strategies that require substantial holdings of longer-term Treasury securities or agency MBS mean accepting some financial risk and potentially distorting relative prices or promoting credit allocation across sectors in order to achieve their policy objectives.  While portfolio liquidity provides flexibility to sell assets in response to shocks, the need for sterilization capacity may be less important in an operating regime in which IOER and ON RRP can provide interest rate control.  Even so, maintaining some short-term liquid assets in the portfolio might remain a priority if you see such holdings as potentially helpful in meeting policy goals in some economic or market circumstances. Maintaining operational readiness in key financial markets might conceivably be considered a new principle, perhaps suggesting ongoing maintenance of at least a small agency MBS portfolio if you believe you could need to operate in this market sometime in the future.  Return and transparency could conceivably become more prominent principles if the Federal Reserve runs a permanently large balance sheet. Transparency about balance sheet policies is important not only to enhance policy effectiveness, as David mentioned, but also to enhance accountability, by enabling the public and the Congress to judge whether the Federal Reserve’s actions are consistent with its stated objectives.  This is all the more important in light of possible fiscal and political economy issues that could accompany certain balance sheet strategies. As noted on slide 25, monetary policy has fiscal implications regardless of the size and composition of the central bank’s balance sheet.  However, maintaining a persistently large balance sheet and using it as an active policy tool would accentuate fiscal and political economy issues. One issue is the division of responsibility for debt management decisions between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury.  Changes in the size and composition of the central bank’s balance sheet can alter the liability structure and funding costs of the government.  Different goals for the central bank and fiscal authority may, in certain circumstances, lead each to act in ways that are at cross purposes with one another. A second set of issues pertains to the costs of funding a permanently large central bank balance sheet.  Interest paid by the central bank to its counterparties can generate political pressures if such payments are viewed as unfair, unwarranted, or a subsidy.  Additionally, to the extent that interest payments on central bank liabilities are simply a component of the government’s overall interest expense, one might ask whether central bank liabilities are the least expensive way to finance the public debt. Another set of issues arises when one considers the Federal Reserve as an independent entity that generates a stream of remittances to the Treasury. If the term   premium is positive, a larger and longer-duration balance sheet should lead to levels of income and remittances that are higher on average, but possibly more variable.  Purchasing assets while term premiums are negative across the yield curve implies expectations of future negative net income associated with those assets. Of course, monetary policy has general equilibrium effects that have broad fiscal implications, including effects on public revenues and expenditures and rates at which the government finances its debt.  Simulation results presented in our memo show how the overall fiscal impact of a large balance sheet can remain positive even when Federal Reserve income is weak. Moreover, negative net income is not an impediment to executing monetary policy so long as losses are not so large as to impair the central bank’s solvency— measured by the sum of net worth and the expected present discounted value from seigniorage.  Nonetheless, balance sheet strategies that heighten the risk of losses could jeopardize the Federal Reserve’s independence or ability to pursue its policy mandate should concerns about income losses call into question policymakers’ commitment to raising rates when economic and financial conditions call for it.  Thank you, and Thomas will now conclude the briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information and discussing various factors and considerations related to the Federal Reserve's balance sheet and portfolio management.


Passage number 7.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Thank you, Debby.  As Troy mentioned, the staff memos and presentations prepared for this meeting and for the July FOMC meeting are the culmination of over a year of effort by a large number of staff across the System.  In total, the staff delivered over 500 pages of analysis on a very wide-ranging and complex set of topics.  There will be a quiz before lunch on the details of these staff memos.  [Laughter]  Apart from the memos, over the past year the staff also hosted a number of research and policy conferences and other events to build a broader and deeper understanding of the issues; to draw on the insights and perspectives not only of staff throughout the Federal Reserve System, but also academics, market participants, and analysts at other central banks; and to inform the public. As you might imagine, a project this large and complex required a more formal and extensive project management approach than is typical of FOMC projects.  On behalf of the Executive Committee, co-chaired by Simon and myself, I’d like to thank everyone who helped keep the long-run framework trains running on time, including all the members of the Operating Committee—and particularly Julie Remache, the OC chair.  I’d also thank all of the workgroup leads, the project management office, and a number of staff that helped with information technology and other technical and meeting support. The very broad focus of the long-run framework project has provided a strong foundation for the analysis of related issues in coming years.  The possible questions we provided for your discussion, shown on slides 27 to 29, are intended to elicit your views on any tentative conclusions you draw from the materials we presented so far. Going forward, we expect that follow-on work will be more targeted and focused on particular topics.  These more targeted efforts will likely be conducted following the usual approach of convening a relatively small group of System staff as necessary to   work on particular topics over an FOMC cycle or two.  And with that, we’d be happy to take your questions.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Before beginning our discussion, I, too, would like to express my sincere thanks to all of the staff across the System who have contributed to the long-run framework project.  A great deal of thoughtful work has gone into this project, and the documents we received for this meeting are clear, well organized, and highly informative.  As we complete this phase of our work on the long-run framework, I would like to congratulate the staff for a tremendous effort. To set the stage for a discussion, I think it’s useful to review the timeline for when decisions about our longer-run implementation framework will likely need to be made.  Clearly, there is no urgency at the moment. Our current implementation framework is working well and should continue to work well for the foreseeable future.  So when might we need to act to either change or affirm our framework.  It seems highly unlikely that we would need to take action while we are continuing our reinvestment policy.  And even after we cease reinvestments, it will be quite some time until shrinkage of the balance sheet would force decisions.  As noted in Tealbook B, the staff assumes that reinvestments will cease once the target range for the federal funds rate reaches 1¼ to 1½ percent.  Under the baseline, this occurs in the third quarter of next year.  Thereafter, reserve balances decline at a pace of roughly $650 billion per year.  In the Tealbook projection, it will not be until late 2019 that reserve balances move below $1 trillion, a level that is probably still ample enough to keep us operating on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve, as in our current floor-based system. Now, waiting until reserves become scarce to make any decisions is surely not advisable, particularly as the public will long before then want some idea of where we are headed.  That said, we still have much to learn about the future operation of money markets in the new regulatory environment, including gaining insight into the factors that will affect the supply and demand for reserves.  The significant changes in money markets over the past few months in response to the reforms affecting money market mutual funds is a good reminder that the world may look quite different in some important respects a year or two down the road. Many of the questions that are before us today need not, and probably should not, be settled now.  That being said, I think it is important that we remain engaged in considering these issues, and it’s my hope that we can identify some specific areas for improvement in our implementation framework that will yield benefits regardless of our longer-run decisions.  It will also be useful to get a sense of your general views on the bigger-picture questions regarding the choice of our policy rate, the operating regime, and use of the balance sheet.  I am looking forward to hearing your views on these important issues.  And with those remarks, let’s start off with Q&A, and then we will go into a round of comments.  Any questions for the staff.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a series of remarks expressing gratitude and discussing the work that has been done on a project.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 8.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with all that you said, Madam Chair, in terms of not having to make decisions right now.  But presumably there are some decisions that you might want to make now, just because there might be consensus and there might be a deadweight loss of not making that decision.  The one that seems most obvious to me, potentially, is the reserve requirement. It doesn’t seem, in the current regime, that required reserves has any great value, and it has administrative costs.  It results in fewer high-quality liquid asset sales. I have a general question for the staff or anyone else.  Do people feel like all this has to necessarily be deferred if there is consensus on issues like required reserves.  I presume a determination on required reserves is a Board decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker agrees with the points made by the Madam Chair about not having to make decisions right now. However, they disagree with the idea that all decisions should be deferred and argue that certain decisions, such as the reserve requirement, could be made now if there is consensus.


Passage number 9.
MR. MARTIN. Certainly, if the Committee felt comfortable raising them again later, should it decide to operate on the steep part of the demand curve, there would be a number of benefits to setting them to zero temporarily or permanently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting an idea and discussing the potential benefits of setting something to zero temporarily or permanently.


Passage number 10.
 MS. IHRIG.  I also think a significant amount of time would be required to get from here to a place like that.  You could actually ask the staff for a proposal for what would be needed to get from here to there and continue thinking about it.  So you wouldn’t have to necessarily make a formal decision immediately.  You could ask the staff for further work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 11.
 MR. POTTER.  The only thing I would say is that it might signal something that you don’t want to signal.  So there have to be some overall context, I think, for a decision like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.  There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Potter expresses concern about a potential signal being sent, suggesting that he disagrees with the decision being discussed.


Passage number 12.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions for the staff.  Okay.  Seeing none, this is an opportunity to comment.  I think, more or less, everybody has indicated that they would like to comment, so let’s begin our go-round.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that there is an opportunity for comment and is inviting individuals to provide their thoughts.


Passage number 13.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Let me add my thanks to the staff for the excellent suite of memos and the presentation we just heard, which was helpful and very clear. In approaching the subject of the implementation framework for policy in the long run, my first reaction to the questions was to limit comments to purely practical considerations under the assumption that the balance sheet will likely be large—that is, on the flat part of the demand curve—for quite some time. I am a little skeptical about constructing a long-term framework that’s disconnected from the feasible time horizon for its implementation. If this time horizon is long, our implementation practices are likely to become institutionalized and impractical to abandon.  Options that might seem easy to implement in the abstract could be more difficult and costly in reality.  Ease of transition may be a consideration in designing a long-term framework. In later discussions down the road, the Committee may want to engage the question of the transition path.  Nonetheless, the more my team and I worked through the memos and questions, the more I saw some value in laying out tentative thoughts on an idealized framework, even if short-term considerations could make its implementation elusive. In thinking about such a framework, I am inclined to narrow the options to just those that focus on an unsecured interbank funding rate.  Although I can see some merit in expanding the focus to the broader market represented by the secured rate option, I think issues like volatility argue for sticking closer to the status quo. In an ideal situation, I lean toward operating with the quantity of reserves at or near a point on the flat part of the demand curve in which the volume of reserves is smallest and the balance sheet is, accordingly, as small as possible.  I am inclined to avoid operating at positions on the curve with more reserve scarcity because of the concern about payment systems efficiency.  I also prefer to operate in the area on the curve of smallest balance sheet consistent with ample reserves—that is, the flat region—for reasons related to the concerns of financial stability and the functioning of short-term funding markets. As a safeguard of global liquidity in various states of the world, I think the Federal Reserve should hold as small a fraction of outstanding safe assets as feasible. One other reason to operate with the smallest possible balance sheet, consistent with being in the flat region of the curve, is mitigation of political economy concerns that could arise with sizable payments to financial institutions. Conditions associated with the balance sheet setting I’ve described are likely to make an active federal funds market less viable, so I envision moving in the direction of the OBFR as the policy target.  A framework that stays on the flat part of the curve would necessarily involve the IOER rate as an implementation tool.  With the OBFR as the policy target, it makes sense to me   to maintain an ongoing overnight reverse repo facility with the aim of enhancing monetary control by providing a deposit facility for a wider set of participants in short-term money markets, including the Eurodollar market.  An ongoing ON RRP facility would serve as a complement or even a replacement, in time, for the IOER rate. Regarding balance sheet composition at my preferred position on the demand curve, I envision a relatively neutral asset side of the balance sheet.  By “neutral,” I mean holdings are distributed across maturities in rough apportionment to outstanding issues.  And in my idealized framework, I prefer an asset portfolio in steady state being close to composed exclusively of Treasury securities, as that avoids any credit allocation.  That said, I could see maintaining a small MBS operation as a form of contingency readiness. One final thought:  Some of the options we are considering include elements in conflict with our earlier public positions.  I think it’s advisable for the Committee to consider when and how to indicate any shift in thinking about these previous positions presented in the September 2014 normalization principles as well as public statements on the overnight reverse repo facility.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 14.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not enough information given in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 15.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, found the briefings and the memos very valuable.  However, I have a somewhat different take on where we are on these issues.  I noticed that in the briefing it was described as the “long-run monetary policy implementation framework,” and that was the task that you were assigned and carried out.  I actually think we need to be thinking much more seriously about the long-run monetary policy framework itself, and this ties into a lot of the comments that David López-Salido made in his presentation. I’m going to focus primarily on macro stabilization and macroeconomic objectives, and my main concern, as always, is how are we going to conduct monetary policy successfully, achieving our inflation goal and our macroeconomic goals, in a world of a very low r*.  I’ll note the staff’s view today is that the equilibrium nominal funds rate is 2¾ percent.  I agree with that. If you look at the recent research that Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and I have done, and at research by economists at central banks around the world using similar methods, many people are finding that r* is much lower today than in the past in many countries.  And it’s a global phenomenon. This brings me to concerns about our monetary policy framework.  First, if you think about our balance sheet of more than $4 trillion and the massive QE in other countries, that is presumably adding, at least according to our models and our analysis, quite a bit of stimulus to the U.S. economy and to the global economy more generally. If you look at the methods for actually estimating r*, whether it is the model with Thomas and Kathryn or models, such as those developed at the Richmond Federal Reserve, DSGE models, and others, they generally do not take into account the effects of QE on demand.  It’s just part of where the IS curve is, if you will. Then, if you actually think about going from massive QE stimulus in the United States and around the world and taking that away, going back to the baseline, you’re talking about reducing a significant amount of stimulus in the global economy and the U.S. economy in particular, which arguably, using the methodology either of the work of my work with Thomas or other people’s work or DSGE models or whatever, generally would imply that r* will be lower in the future, not where it is today. I am really picking up on what David López-Salido said.  He described it the opposite way; a large balance sheet will boost r*. But if you actually look at how the methodology of   these research papers work, because they don’t take into account the balance sheet generally, it actually is arguing that that boost to r* is already built into our estimate. So I would argue that there is up to ½ percentage point lower r* out there once we take away QE in the United States, and more generally globally, which would argue a nominal neutral federal  funds rate maybe of 2 or 2¼ percent or so.  And that does bring a huge challenge to carrying out monetary policy.  If we keep the balance sheet elevated to keep r* higher, like David López-Salido said, we don’t have as much room to use QE to stimulate.  If you look at the very nice paper by Dave Reifschneider a few months ago, it does point out, if we can get our balance sheet back down and if r* isn’t lower, we actually have a lot of room for stimulus. But in my interpretation, I fear that there’s not nearly as much room for stimulus.  There are limits to how far QE can go in terms of the assets that we can buy under current law and the amount of outstanding MBS. These considerations make me think that, really, we need to be seriously discussing the monetary policy framework.  And we should be focusing our discussions and our decisionmaking on that framework, meaning what our inflation target should be and whether we should be thinking about price-level or nominal GDP targeting or other approaches to overcome the effective lower bound.  And from that will flow naturally some of the decisions about what’s the right size of the balance sheet, what’s the right policy framework. From my point of view, I agree with the Chair that we are not in a rush to make these decisions about what I think of as mostly tactical aspects of the operational sides of monetary policy.  I think instead we should not be making public statements about what our operational or implementation side of our framework would be until we really have thought through some of these longer-run issues in connection with what our objectives and our actual monetary policy framework itself should be.  Thank you.CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. President Williams argues that there needs to be more serious consideration of the long-run monetary policy framework and expresses concern about conducting monetary policy successfully in a world of low interest rates. This differs from the views presented by David López-Salido, who believes that a large balance sheet will boost interest rates. Additionally, Williams suggests that there is a need to discuss the monetary policy framework and make decisions about inflation targets and policy approaches, while also cautioning against rushing into decisions about operational aspects of monetary policy.


Passage number 16.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My comments actually follow very closely those of President Williams.  I would say there does seem to be a surprising amount of consensus when the Presidents to my right and left actually agree on being on the flat part of the demand curve.  [Laughter].  There does seem to be somewhat of an emerging consensus. There was an awful lot of material. The staff did a fantastic job pulling it all together. I’m going to deal with only part of that, because I’m trying to keep my comments parsimonious. [Laughter] Let me start by focusing on the balance sheet and make some conditioning assumptions.  I assume that if and when we again hit the effective lower bound, tools other than negative interest rates will be our first line of defense.  I make this assumption for three reasons.  First, I view the results arising from the experience of other nations as quite mixed.  Second, I do not believe that currency will be eliminated or retail deposits will stop being sticky at a zero rate. Third, these regimes disproportionately affect banks, which in turn affect monetary policy transmission and financial stability, often in perverse ways. I also make the assumption that in the near term, this Committee will not be willing to raise the inflation target, even though I personally think we set the inflation target too low.  Finally, I take as given that the short-term equilibrium interest rate will remain lower than it has been historically. In a world with low equilibrium interest rates, it is worth revisiting how frequently short-term rates are likely to hit zero and how long they may stay there.  The business cycle is unlikely to have been tamed.  If we look at the Tealbook and private forecasters’ assessments of the probability of a recession in the next few years, it would be risky to assume that no recession occurs over that horizon.  Thus, it is reasonably likely that even if we were to shrink the balance sheet relatively soon, the next recession could easily occur before the current surplus of excess reserves is fully removed.  With a low real interest rate and a low 2 percent inflation target, we will not have much room to lower short-term rates. This may well cause us to, once again, hit zero short-term rates and to need alternative monetary policies to stimulate the economy, most likely by engaging in large-scale asset purchases to lower longer-term rates and rates other than on Treasury securities.  Thus, if my assumptions are right, I think it is, at the least, prudent risk management to assume that large-scale asset purchases, in conjunction with hitting zero for short-term rates, will be our standard recession-fighting tools.  Thus, I see the balance sheet varying but with high average excess reserves that grow during recessions and recede during recoveries. If we are quite likely to have a large balance sheet, then our operating framework should make clear and seek to optimize policy in a framework that acknowledges that we will be operating in a world of large excess reserves. What factors other than the business cycle should be considered in determining the size and composition of the balance sheet.  I would continue to hold some long-term Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities, the latter in order to maintain operational expertise in preparation for economic downturns, when we may resume large purchases or sales. Also, we have successfully used the size, composition, and duration of the balance sheet to support the economy during recessions.  Some of the staff memos point out that such purchases may have smaller effects during expansions, in part because they will not be helping to improve market function.  But there is no reason to believe that these factors can affect the economy only during economic downturns or only in one direction.  Thus, I would maintain sufficient balance sheet compositional mix and duration to address both macroeconomic stabilization and financialstability concerns.  However, to signal or influence these concerns, we would need to continue to hold MBS and long-duration securities in our portfolio. I would prefer to have a broader discussion on rates once we have more clarity on the balance sheet strategy.  My current thinking is to communicate policy primarily through the administered rate that we control. Because the only administered rate controlled by the FOMC is the overnight RRP rate, I would focus on that rate as a floor unless the interest rate on excess reserves at some point in the future becomes a tool of the FOMC.  My own view is that we closely monitor short-term rates but not necessarily target them. I would postpone the discussion of liquidity facilities.  I think we should make decisions about the balance sheet first. In particular, what are the size, composition, and duration of our balance sheet going to be should we experience a long period of recovery, knowing that in a recession the size, duration, and composition of the balance sheet will likely be altered by the severity and nature of that recession. How we need to think about liquidity facilities depends on the decisions that we make about the balance sheet during good times.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their thoughts and assumptions about the balance sheet and monetary policy tools without any conflicting views or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 17.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Let me thank the staff for these valuable summaries of key issues facing the Committee.  I know a lot of work went into this, and I think this is going to provide fodder for thought for the Committee for a long time. I have a broad comment, and then I’m going to get to more specific comments.  I think my broad comment is consistent with what many around the table are saying, but perhaps my statement will be a bit stronger.Normalization, as originally conceived by this Committee, is not proceeding as planned.  The pace at which we are going, which is about one 25 basis point increase per year, is almost imperceptibly slow.  The balance sheet is unlikely to decline via ceasing reinvestment any time soon.  I think it would be better for the Committee to state that we are not thinking in terms of a normalization program and that we instead think that the current level of the policy rate and the current size of the balance sheet are approximately correct, in light of the macroeconomic situation prevailing today and likely to prevail over the forecast horizon. In my view, this makes many of the issues addressed in the long-run framework project somewhat less urgent, as it appears that it may be many years before we are in a policy situation that is meaningfully different from the one that exists today. And in this I agree with Governor Powell’s assessment just a moment ago and those of many others around the table.  At a minimum, I think that these issues would need to be discussed in detail when we are closer to a decision point on how we want to deviate from what we’re doing currently.  That said, I’ll now turn to some brief comments centered on the questions posed to the Committee. Regarding the first question, the so-called key design elements, I have a mild preference for a floor system with no reserve requirements and in which we use the overnight reverse repo rate as the policy rate.  I would prefer no gap between the overnight reverse repo rate and the IOER rate—the so-called no subsidies condition. Concerning liquidity provision, the second question, I prefer to leave the discount window operations as they are.  I would be willing to consider a continually operational TAF with periodic testing, which could then be more fully utilized in the event of severe financial stress.   Finally, considering asset purchases as a policy tool for the future, I think it is a reality that asset purchases are the Committee’s most effective tool once the zero bound has been reached and are likely to be implemented by the Committee should we return to recession in the years ahead.  However, because this is a discussion about the FOMC’s long-run policy framework, we may want to put more weight on three possibilities that could provide partial substitutes for asset purchases:  number one, price-level targeting; number two, nominal GDP targeting; and number three, targeting long-term interest rates more directly.  It seems to me that the future of the Committee probably lies in one of these directions more than in the asset purchase direction, or at least as much probability should be assigned to these possibilities as to extensive use of asset purchases over the next decade or so, let’s say. Now, if I turn back to limiting the discussion just to the balance sheet question, I have three further comments.  Number one, I think we should turn to asset purchases only after the effective lower bound has been reached, as several here have said. I would rank asset purchases well ahead of a negative nominal interest rate policy in terms of likely effectiveness. Number two, concerning the balance sheet as a financial-stability tool, as the staff suggested, I think this deserves further study.  I found former Governor Stein’s comments at the Jackson Hole symposium interesting, but the topic requires additional research.  And, finally, on the long-run composition of the balance sheet, I would like to go with all Treasury securities, with an average duration under five years.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 18.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to the working group for this great work. Let me mention three aspects of discussions I have had with my team as we wrestled through some of these issues. The number one issue we talked about was how hard it is to discuss these issues separately from talking about the realities of monetary policy.  In particular, and to return to what President Williams talked about on r*, our view is that unless there are fiscal policy structural reforms, infrastructure spending, or other actions, r*, all things being equal, is going to be lowfor an extended period of time.  If that’s going to be the reality, it’s harder to have this discussion. Assuming there are other economic policy actions that help improve prospective economic growth rates and, therefore, give us more operating maneuverability, my team and I totally agree with an objective to operate on the flat part of the demand curve for reserves, with a balance sheet ideally smaller than the one we have today—and I might even go so far as to say as small as possible, but certainly smaller than the one we have today—with the Federal Reserve owning as small a percentage of safe assets as is feasible.  Like others, I’m much more comfortable with our owning Treasury securities than MBS.  The Treasury market is a big liquid market, and the Federal Reserve owning sizable portions of Treasury securities is unlikely to affect the dynamics of that market materially.  My concern is that we could have a big effect, and we probably already are, in the MBS market.  So while we may have some minimum working level of MBS, I’d prefer to keep it as small as possible. With those objectives, we also came to the view that an administrative rate or the OBFR might make more sense as a target than the federal funds rate.  And, clearly, we would need to employ other tools, such as the IOER rate. The biggest issue we wrestled with, though, is—I guess I’ve learned a new acronym, PE—the effect on the political economy.  In particular, we debated extensively the need for the Federal Reserve to be independent and the importance to this country of a strong, independent central bank.  My concern is that if the Fed’s balance sheet stays large and there’s a prospect of it getting larger, certainly away from a crisis, we are likely to induce accusations that the Federal Reserve has overstepped its bounds, which I fear will reduce our scope to act in a crisis when action is actually needed. I think a large balance sheet, or a sizable balance sheet, is probably going to be accompanied by calls for review of our communication practices, transparency, andhow we deal with our various constituencies.  So all things being equal, I, for one, would like to see us take every opportunity to reduce the size of the balance sheet, and I’m very leery of alternatives that would call for a larger balance sheet, for fear that it might ultimately reduce our independence and our ability to act when there is a crisis.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of the speaker's opinions and concerns about various aspects of monetary policy.


Passage number 19.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’d like to associate myself with the perspective introduced by Presidents Rosengren and Williams and echoed, at least briefly, by Presidents Evans and Kaplan.  That is to say, I think the most important thing for us to be focusing on now is, as President Williams said, not necessarily the implementation framework but the framework.  President Williams’s point, which he made today and has made in his paper, is that in a world of low r*, one needs to think about what your monetary policy framework is and consider alternatives that heretofore haven’t been particularly attractive to people. I think what President Rosengren did in complementing President Williams’s approach was basically to ask us to hypothesize that some external event causes a recession in the relatively near term and ask how we would respond.  Those are somewhat distinct things to ask about, but I think they fit together.  And, indeed, those concerns have informed my position on meeting-to-meeting monetary policy, that is, my concern that we have relatively few tools to deploy—or at least attractive tools to deploy—in the event that we were to get a recession. So I very much agree with them and with President Williams’s point that a lot of the implementation issues will, if not fall easily out of that analysis, be a little bit more obvious and the choices perhaps a bit more circumscribed. I might note, in that regard, that I thought Rob framed it exactly right.  We can hope that other things happen—that there’s fiscal stimulus, that there’s structural reform—but we can’t  count on it, and so we need to be thinking about options.  And a related point is, it’s not enough to say, “Oh, gee, there are downsides to some of the options that are out there.”  Well, yes, negative interest rates have downsides. A higher inflation rate has a downside.  Nominal interest rate targeting has a downside.  But so, too, as many people have pointed out, does further growth of the balance sheet have a downside, and it might not even be particularly efficacious if the slope of the yield curve hasn’t risen very much.  Another LSAP may well not even do the trick were we to take on some of the additional political vulnerability.  So I just want to reinforce the most important point to focus on. As a corollary, I will say I wouldn’t dismiss all of the balance sheet issues out of hand— even though I agree with those who have said that it’s sort of provisional and we don’t really know about the effects—precisely because of my first point, which is we just don’t know what kind of tools we’re going to have and what the downsides of those tools are going to be.  I think looking at some of the issues associated with maintaining a larger balance sheet or at whether there would be utility in having different durations on the balance sheet and buying and selling those is very much worth consideration, precisely because we might find ourselves constrained in our overall monetary policy and have to use a tool that does have some costs but whose benefits might be more important. I do have one quite discrete suggestion, though, in the context of the particular memos that the staff has done.  There was a passing reference in one of the memos to the possibility of changing the qualifications for those who participate in the ON RRP program, and some of you may recall that my concern at the outset of our institution of the ON RRP was the potential for counterparties using the Federal Reserve as a place to run from other short-term funding destinations when stress built up in the economy.  I was particularly concerned about prime money market funds doing that, yanking their CP from large banks and sticking it in the Federal Reserve at the first sign of stress.  The SEC’s reform package, coupled with the reaction of the industry and of investors, which was, I will say, greater than what I certainly had anticipated has provided an opportunity now, as prime funds are what, Simon.  Down to about 200.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily a statement of agreement and support for the views expressed by Presidents Rosengren and Williams. The speaker also expresses a related concern about the lack of tools to deal with a potential recession and suggests considering alternative options. There is no explicit disagreement or argument in the passage.


Passage number 20.
 MR. POTTER.  Institutional funds, 200.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that Mr. Potter is interested in institutional funds.


Passage number 21.
 MR. TARULLO. Yes, institutional prime down to about 200.  So this may be an opportunity for us to narrow the formal qualifications for being a counterparty, for example, to a fund that invests only in government securities, but to do so in a fashion that doesn’t have an enormous practical effect, because that’s what most of the funds are now.  I would hope that maybe we could pursue that a little bit in the shorter term, so that we don’t lose the opportunity to do it, particularly if the prime funds have a bit of a resurrection over the next year or so if investors perhaps come back or spreads change or something of the sort. The other thing I’d say is that neither of the issues that Vice Chairman Dudley raised at the end of his comments—that is, to make a change in the leverage ratio or regulatory requirement, or to be able to lend to broker-dealers—is within the authority of this Committee. So I don’t feel the need to comment at length. But at least on the leverage ratio point, I did want to say I’m not quite sure I would have framed the issue the way Vice Chairman Dudley did.  First, the whole purpose of a leverage ratio conceptually is not to focus on issues of risk.  So the risk-free nature of reserves is not really relevant to the conceptualization of a leverage ratio as part of a complementary set of capital requirements.  Second, although it is true that the banking system as a whole does not have the ability to affect the amount of reserves in the system, the activities and conduct of any particular bank do have an effect on the relative reserve holdings that it has, and there are regulatory benefits that come from having those reserves. So, in some  sense, as in many areas, this is a balancing that the banks need to engage in.  But third, and maybe most importantly, it seems to me premature to draw any judgments on this right now not only because of the debate that’s going on in this room today, but also because, not having implemented all of the risk-based reform requirements, we don’t really yet have a good picture as to the degree to which the large banks that very much want a change in the leverage ratio will be scraping up against that in a way that we would regard as counterproductive.  So it’s obviously something that people are watching, but there are other ways to deal with a problem that may be established over the years other than the exclusion of one asset from the denominator.  And that’s sort of the way in which regulators, particularly those from noncentral banks, have leaned, even though central bankers sort of like the idea that their asset is the one that would get excluded. Finance ministries like the idea that their asset is the one that would get excluded.  And you can see why, as a conceptual matter, academics have tended to say that’s why you don’t exclude anything.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily focused on discussing potential changes and considerations related to regulatory requirements and the leverage ratio.


Passage number 22.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, thank the staff for their work over the past year to bring the discussions we’ve had in July and today.  I will also jump on the President Williams bandwagon, because as I looked at this material, I found the various tradeoffs left me thinking about what’s the appropriate starting point for a framework, in view of the realities we face today. I think there are many ways we could go about it, as some have already suggested, but I thought about it in the context of the size of our balance sheet in the longer run as one approach.  In light of the importance of this issue, it’s worth certainly more discussion among this Committee to get a sense of where we’re ultimately going.  As it relates to the questions the staff asked, I see the benefits of a leaner balance sheet. Political issues that arise with payment of interest on a large stock of reserves and credit allocation pose a number of risks that come with a very large balance sheet. In addition, if the equilibrium real rate remains low, a leaner balance sheet would give us more scope to use large-scale asset purchases if we are, again, at the lower bound, rather than expanding the balance sheet further into uncharted territory or contemplating negative policy rates. Of course, transitioning to a leaner balance sheet poses its own challenges.  While I understand this work is about the framework in the long run, it seems one part of the discussion that could be missing is talking about the costs and benefits of a possible transition to a leaner balance sheet. A lean balance sheet, however, does not need to resemble its pre-crisis composition.  From this standpoint, I’m not sure we necessarily need to operate on the steep portion of the demand curve for reserves.  If we remain on the flat portion, then it may make sense to consider an alternative policy rate, including the OBFR. In this case, a reconsideration on the longer-run plans regarding the overnight RRP facility is also warranted.  I could imagine a scenario with a leaner balance sheet, a standing ON RRP facility, and the OBFR as the target.  The leaner balance sheet would provide a lower cap on the ON RRP facility, and that would give me more comfort if it were to be integrated into our framework on a more permanent basis.  Of course, there would be significant changes that would require a communication to the public and a revisiting of the current normalization principles and plans. In terms of the liquidity provision options, the tradeoffs between providing backstop lending, interest rate control, and moral hazard are not new ones.  I think further analysis would be needed, and I’m interested in how separate facilities might support different liquidity needs in   the future.  And as some have commented, I, too, believe that thinking about the TAF as a standing facility has some merit.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of the speaker expressing their thoughts and opinions on the topic at hand.


Passage number 23.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair, and I’d like to thank the staff as well for the excellent work.  I appreciate a lot of the comments around the table about focusing first on the broader framework and then on the implementation issues.  I think that would be worth spending time exploring. One thing that I’m struggling with—and this may be a topic more for tomorrow than for today—is that many people around the table are concerned that we are in a low-r* environment for the foreseeable future, yet at the same time there seems to be momentum building for raising rates.  I find those two things somewhat inconsistent, but maybe we can talk about that tomorrow. In terms of implementation, it strikes me that switching costs are high because there’s a big downside risk if something doesn’t work.  So we shouldn’t make changes unless there is a compelling reason to make changes.  The FOMC had compelling reason during the crisis to switch from a corridor system to a floor system, and that shift was successful.  But in light of that, as the staff said, all the various frameworks seem to work, and what we are doing now seems to be working pretty well, there doesn’t seem to be a compelling reason to make a big change any time soon. I think the Chair mentioned this in her comments. For me, when I look at where we are and where we’re going, I favor a more passive framework, something that requires lower-frequency activity and lower cost.  And that pushes  me toward staying in the floor environment, preferably with an administered rate, under which we focus our market rates expressed in a range, so that we’re not in and out of the markets very actively.  To me, like many others, this also raises governance questions, but I think they can be addressed.  And I would encourage the staff to do some work to see how we could maintain the FOMC’s role in that environment.  Like many others, I do think the discount window seems to be broken, and I would encourage us to do more work on what reforms could look like. In terms of the balance sheet, I, too, view the large-scale asset purchases as a tool to use when we are at the effective lower bound or in periods of market stress.  I’d like to see the balance sheet return to maybe not pre-crisis levels, but as small as necessary to stay in the floor environment.  I am not excited about getting into the active yield curve management business.  I think it’s hard enough to manage short-term interest rates and to express our reaction function to markets, let alone actively managing the yield curve.  I think it implies a level of wisdom that maybe we may or may not have. Finally, I am skeptical that a large balance sheet is necessarily good for financial stability. I understand the theory of crowding out maturity transformation, but if we’re simultaneously pushing up asset prices, it isn’t at all clear that a large balance sheet is a net benefit for financial stability.  But, again, it’s worth doing more work on.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and opinions on various monetary policy issues, but there is no evident disagreement with others.


Passage number 24.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like everyone, I am grateful to the staff for its work in producing this comprehensive set of documents. This is an important stage in thinking through how we’re going to move ahead and where we’re heading.  I’m sure that wherever we’re heading is not a final destination, but that there’s going to be many more changes in the financial system as time goes by.  I’m certainly happy, for the moment, to live with the current system, the IOER rate floor with abundant reserves combined with the overnight RRP facility.  That system seems to be working pretty well at the moment and should continue to be a viable option for some time into the future. And I’d guess that it may be close to the system to which we converge 5 to 10 years down the road. But we should acknowledge the potential political cost of paying interest on a large stock of reserves as well as another PE problem, which is that a large balance sheet is a standing invitation to even the most financially conservative of governments to raid the central bank.  Two of the central banks that were raided were the Swiss central bank and the German central bank, whose gold reserves got to be worth too much and the government took funds away.  Big balance sheets are politically problematic at times, and we need to be careful about that.  I’d support efforts to shrink the size of the balance sheet, but it’s not clear how far we should go, and we’re going to have to work on that in the months and even years ahead. In doing that, I was interested, as the study points out, that Australia and other countries are actually doing different things.  For example, the DIRF and the FIRF, the standing facilities that allow either depository institutions or financial institutions to run a balance at the central bank, are being used in the United Kingdom and in Europe.  It would be interesting to know how useful they are in determining the size of the reserves.  Similarly, the statement that was made about how Australia is dealing with stigma was very interesting.  I think it’s very similar to the main proposal that’s made in Mervyn King’s recent book on how to reform the entire financial system.  Again, we need to know how well these things are working, if they’ve started to work at all.  The Australian one sounds particularly interesting, because I couldn’t quite figure out how the three proposals we had for different facilities that would handle different uses of reserves  would deal with the stigma problem.  I think that is absolutely critical because when a bank has a good reason for running into trouble and we don’t want it to collapse, lending to it makes sense, and it would be useful not to have the stigma. On the LSAPs and when we use them, I’m not quite sure of the logic of what we’re saying.  If we are going to be prepared to use LSAPs, I don’t see why we should run ourselves all the way down to zero and then start using the LSAPs.  That means we’re more likely to hit the effective lower bound than we would be otherwise, and I’m not sure we want to be there if reasonably sized operations in the assets that we have could be used to prevent us getting to zero.  I think we need to rethink the view that we have to change regimes very sharply rather than slide into them with the hope that by sliding, you increase the probability that you’re not going to get to where it looks like you’re going. I want to talk a little bit more about the balance sheet as a tool for managing financial stability concerns.  There are suggestions that we should structure the balance sheet in such a way that it makes it easier for us to intervene in a variety of circumstances or in a variety of industries that might get into trouble.  Obviously the one that is clear is housing, and we’re already doing that as part of our portfolio.  I don’t think we should go too far on this because we’re going to look like micromanagers of the economy if we’ve got this little fund for that industry and another little fund for another industry, and so forth. Anyway, the financial markets kept working to some extent even during the Great Financial Crisis.  So I think that our normal mode of operation, which is to set the interest rate and to leave it to the markets to decide on the allocation of the resulting changes in credit, is the right mode, both politically and economically.  And the politics are very complicated.  We’re not elected officials, and when we start deciding   that we should be intervening in this industry or the other, we would be making decisions that are much closer to being political than what we do when we deal with the overall balance sheet. I don’t think it’s a big problem if the balance sheet, which obviously would continue to include short-term government obligations, included long bonds.  This is related to the fact that the model that we use for most of our simulations and forecasts actually relies on the long rate to affect output and not the short rate.  Now, either the model is wrong, and possibly that’s the end of that story, or if the model is right, then I think having long-term bonds could be useful. And then, at least at present I don’t think we should get rid of the MBS in a given morning, but I’m not sure we want to keep a big supply of MBS there.  We can intervene in that market, if the need arises, with our general balance sheet. I also suspect that the more we go into specific areas, the more political problems we’re going to have, and that we just shouldn’t do it.  Monetary policy should be macroeconomic, not microeconomic.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 25.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I have two factual questions, and I think they are both on Lorie’s part of the presentation.  Lorie, I infer from what you said that the roughly $1 trillion in prime fund investments that flowed out was not replaced euro-for-euro or dollar-for-dollar by the former recipients of those investments. But to the degree that there was replacement, what were the sources of the funding that they got that had formerly been provided by the prime funds.  If banks were getting investments from the money market funds, they may not have replaced dollar-for-dollar what they were getting, as you explained.  But they obviously   replaced some significant proportion of what they were getting.  Who was making those investments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking two factual questions and seeking clarification on the source of funding for investments made by banks.


Passage number 26.
 MS. LOGAN. One of the other things I noted was the widening in the FX basis swap, and I think some of the foreign banking organizations turned to the dollar swap market to obtain dollars by swapping out yen or euros or something into dollars, and that was putting pressure on that swap.  So I think they turned to that type of investment product as one alternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining that foreign banking organizations used the dollar swap market to obtain dollars by swapping out other currencies, putting pressure on that swap.


Passage number 27.
 MR. TARULLO. I see.  But does that mean that the balance sheets of the European banks were, on net, reduced, because they were just swapping assets rather than getting new funding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification regarding the reduction of balance sheets of European banks.


Passage number 28.
 MS. LOGAN. I think, in the term markets, they tried to replace some of that.  I think, in the overnight markets, a lot of that was arbitrage trading taking place in Eurodollars, and I don’t think they replaced that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. Logan, is expressing her viewpoint on the replacement of certain trading activities in the term and overnight markets.


Passage number 29.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay, got it.  Thank you.  The second question is on the take-up of ON RRP. Again, I think I’m trying to read between the lines of what you did say, but I want to make sure I understand it.  The quarter-end take-up was substantially larger than the past couple of quarter-ends, which I found, when I first looked at the chart, a bit counterintuitive. I thought one of the reasons why the quarter-end spiked in the past was that the European banks that are operating under this system of “it’s the last day of the quarter that matters for your capital ratios” would want to reduce their balance sheets at that time.  But that, presumably, should be less the case when the ON RRP market is dominated by government money market funds.  You said that some of these government money market funds had parked the funds in the ON RRP initially. But does that mean you expect that subsequent quarters will not have this kind of spike.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on a topic.


Passage number 30.
  MS. LOGAN.  I think we’re still going to learn a lot from the quarter-ends, but I think we have also been seeing that type of balance sheet reduction take place in repo, particularly on the part of some of those European broker-dealers.  So some of these government funds are invested in repo, and those balance sheets reduce as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion and observations about the balance sheet reduction in repo, particularly among European broker-dealers. There is no conflicting viewpoint present.


Passage number 31.
 MR. TARULLO.  Oh, I see.  Those would still be affected, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MR. TARULLO is simply acknowledging and agreeing that the mentioned entities would still be affected.


Passage number 32.
 MS. LOGAN.  And I think the government funds are still having to do some replacement in the overnight RRP around quarter-end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It states a fact about the government funds needing to do some replacement in the overnight RRP around quarter-end.


Passage number 33.
 MR. POTTER.  We just saw the same thing on month-end, that the government funds were a large part of the increase around the prime funds.  So that’s consistent with Lorie’s story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Potter, is agreeing with Lorie's story and stating that the increase in the prime funds aligns with what they observed during the month-end.


Passage number 34.
 MR. TARULLO.  I know it’s hard to predict, but if one had to, would one predict an end-of-quarter spike that was somewhere between the spike at the end of September and those of the previous couple of quarters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely seeking a prediction based on the given information.


Passage number 35.
 MS. LOGAN.  It’s hard to know.  I think year-end also has its own thing, so that could be larger.  What I was trying to emphasize was that we saw higher usage around just the quarter-end date—a couple of days before and a couple of days after.  And I think those were higher than typical because of the placement temporarily.  On the quarter-end itself, from what we’ve heard from market participants, it’s largely dominated by government now.  It still could spike— maybe not quite this high, but higher than it was before—from the repo balance sheets being used.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 36.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 37.
 MR. LACKER.  Call on Eric first. CHAIR YELLEN. Okay.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is simply a conversation about giving someone a turn to speak.


Passage number 38.
  MR. ROSENGREN.  I wanted to follow up where Governor Tarullo just was.  In the earlier discussion, Governor Tarullo had made the comment about no longer using the prime money market funds for the overnight RRP.  And when I look at this chart, it highlights that they are not a particularly essential part of the overnight RRP.  What are the costs versus benefits of no longer using them.  I can think of one benefit from a financial stability standpoint, which is that having less prime money market funds may be, overall, stabilizing over time, and getting them out of the overnight RRP might be an effective signal of that.  But are there countervailing costs that we ought to be thinking about when we consider who should have access to the overnight RRP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for the costs and benefits of not using prime money market funds for the overnight RRP. They mention one potential benefit and ask if there are any countervailing costs.


Passage number 39.
 MS. LOGAN.  I should note that of the remaining assets under management for prime, $131 billion of it is institutional, and I think that institutional amount is the part that we are more concerned would be flightier.  So it’s a fairly small number now.  I think it’s possible to consider either adding caps or eliminating prime funds as counterparties, and it’s something we should study over the coming months.  And I do think there is still this competitive arbitrage that may still be supporting interest rate control even at those low amounts.  But it’s also possible that they could seek access through government funds if they needed to use the overnight RRP as competitive pressure to the other rates they’re receiving in money markets.  So I think we should definitely look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Ms. Logan is simply expressing her thoughts and suggestions for further study and consideration.


Passage number 40.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange between two speakers.


Passage number 41.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you.  His question was more interesting than mine.  [Laughter] On the overnight bank funding rate, we understand that there is work going on to broaden its coverage to perhaps include bank deposits and stuff about where the Eurodollar funding is going.   I was interested in the prospects for that:  Is that going to be easy.  Are there impediments.  Is it going to be hard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a light-hearted remark expressing interest in a different topic.


Passage number 42.
 MS. LOGAN.  As we said in chart 15, most of that decline we think is related to money fund reform. We’re aware that about $20 billion to $30 billion of that total decline might be related to moving some deposits on shore.  It’s a small portion of the total amount, but it is something we’re studying.  I think it would be quite complicated to get the instructions right, to capture the right amount of onshore deposits that we’d want for this type of reference rate, but it’s definitely something that we’re studying carefully right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is describing the decline in a certain amount and stating that they are studying the potential impact of moving some deposits onshore.


Passage number 43.
 MR. POTTER.  This market is still much more diverse than the federal funds market in the sense that there are a lot more types of lenders rather than one type of lender for 95 percent of federal funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states the fact that the market being discussed is more diverse compared to the federal funds market because it has more types of lenders.


Passage number 44.
 MR. LACKER. Can I ask a follow-up.  What would be hard about it.  I’m sort of thinking naively that $10 million on deposit is $10 million on deposit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a naive understanding of the concept of $10 million being deposited.


Passage number 45.
 MR. POTTER.  Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the name "Mr. Potter" and "Jim" without any conflicting information or opposing views.


Passage number 46.
 MR. CLOUSE. One thing that’s hard about it is that in the one case in which we had Eurodollar deposits move from a Cayman Islands branch to a domestic office, the deposits at the domestic office were classified as “demand deposits.”  So we have a deposit that is a money market instrument, but it’s lumped in with many other types of retail deposits.  As a result, you have to figure out, as Lorie was noting, how to write the instructions to capture the types of deposits that you would not want to use for monetary policy purposes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a difficulty or challenge in categorizing deposits for monetary policy purposes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 47.
 MR. LACKER.  Why wouldn’t you want to use them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker's question "Why wouldn't you want to use them?" implies disagreement or contradiction with someone else's opposing viewpoint. This suggests that there is a difference of opinion or contention on whether or not to use whatever "them" refers to.


Passage number 48.
 MR. CLOUSE. Well, many of the deposits are retail liquid deposits, and we have rates on all kinds of liquid deposits right now that we are not using for the purposes of the OBFR. The   purpose of the OBFR is to try to capture a money market rate, not a retail deposit rate, and the rates on demand deposits, as you know very well, are just very heavily dominated by factors such as the market power of banks in retail deposit markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the purpose and factors influencing the rates on demand deposits.


Passage number 49.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I’m just thinking that it was not necessarily the case that you want to limit it to capturing what was in Eurodollars, because obviously some wholesale funding goes on with deposit markets in the United States as well.  Thanks for that explanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Lacker is simply expressing his thoughts and providing additional information.


Passage number 50.
 MR. POTTER.  We are working on it.  We will try our best to capture wholesale transactions rather than retail.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that Mr. Potter and his team are working on capturing wholesale transactions rather than retail ones and will try their best to achieve that goal.


Passage number 51.
 MR. LACKER.  Sure. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Are there further questions. [No response]  Okay.  If not, I need a motion to ratify domestic open market operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants in the conversation appear to be in agreement and there is no opposition or debate mentioned.


Passage number 52.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. CHAIR YELLEN.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Now we’re ready to move on to the “Economic and Financial Situation,” and let me call on Eric Engen to get us started.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple exchange of words between the Chair and Eric Engen.


Passage number 53.
 MR. MADIGAN.  If I could interrupt just before we get started, in the financial stability package of briefings, on exhibit 2, you’ll see that there’s a missing panel.  Corrected versions with the panel included are coming around right now.  Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making an announcement or providing information about a missing panel in the financial stability package, and stating that corrected versions will be provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 54.
  Moreover, the low profitability of European banks likely reflects other factors besides low NIMS, such as excess capacity, failure to cut costs, low GDP growth, and legacy of nonperforming loans. Accordingly, protecting the financial system is probably not a sufficient reason to forgo further stimulus.  Instead, what Japan and especially Europe need are assertive measures to restore banking system health, including cutting costs, consolidation, and concerted capital raising.  The inadequate capital and profitability of Europe’s banks pose two threats to the outlook.  First, they may constrain lending, leading to lower investment and growth.  Second, they raise the likelihood of bank failure.  The Tealbook features an alternative scenario in which the deterioration in the financial position of a large systemic bank in Europe requires its resolution.  Obviously, it’s very difficult to predict the consequences of such an event.  In our scenario, the failure of the authorities to bail out the bank, concerns that other banks may have similar problems, and difficulties implementing the resolution process trigger disruptive spillovers and a retreat from risk in global financial markets. Europe falls  back into recession, and—as shown in panels 10 through 12—the dollar appreciates, U.S. GDP growth slows, and the federal funds rate rises more slowly. While we are on the topic of financial stability, I’d like to briefly remind you of a new product developed by the International Finance Division that was presented in the QS financial stability report a couple of weeks ago: the International Financial Stability Matrix, or IFSM.  As shown in your final exhibit, the IFSM provides evaluations of financial vulnerability for 12 countries based on both quantitative data and judgmental assessments and, like the matrix for the U.S. economy, is built up from assessments of various key sectors.  You may have noticed that I spoke about uncertainties in the foreign outlook for 10 minutes without discussing China.  Indeed, China is one of the countries highlighted in our matrix as being especially vulnerable to financial disruptions, but describing its many issues would take at least another 10 minutes and would in any case cover pretty familiar ground.  I will cede that time to Michael, who will discuss U.S. financial-stability issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two different perspectives or ideas. The first perspective is that protecting the financial system is not a sufficient reason to forgo further stimulus, and instead, assertive measures need to be taken to restore banking system health. The second perspective is that the inadequate capital and profitability of Europe's banks pose threats to the outlook, such as lower investment and growth, as well as the likelihood of bank failure.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 55.
 MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I’d like to hear more about this upgrade.  What caught my ear was the increase in maturity transformation activity at Federal Home Loan Banks. Let me just verify that they’re not off the table or out of bounds because they’re quasi-government.  If they’re risky, it counts as risk for you, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker expresses doubt or skepticism about the risk associated with the Federal Home Loan Banks despite their quasi-government status.


Passage number 56.
 MR. PALUMBO.  Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The word "Yes" does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 57.
 MR. LACKER. I want to verify that, but I also wanted to ask whether you have a quantitative sense that net or gross maturity transformation has decreased. It seems like it has gone from some places to some other places.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no apparent contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely seeking confirmation about a quantitative aspect.


Passage number 58.
 MR. PALUMBO.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. This is because there are no opposing statements or conflicting viewpoints presented. It is a simple response or agreement.


Passage number 59.
 MR. LACKER.  But is there is less of it now, or do you know that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 60.
 MR. PALUMBO.  I wouldn’t say there’s less of it.  I’d say we think it’s in a little bit more stable, less run-prone form.  The FHLBs, I think, are a bit of an open question.  That’s another area in which I think we’re engaged in discussions among ourselves and in new research and analysis to think about, if that developed, how we would feel about it over time.  Personally, I think anything that doubles in size over the course of a year is worth giving some attention to, and we are.  And I know we’ve got some decent understanding and knowledge about the FHLB systems and how they’re interacting with other money markets.  But I think that’s an area in which work is now going to be ongoing.  But they’re not off the table, so we wouldn’t say that because they’re agencies with implicit government support, we don’t need to consider their activities in the context of the system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts and concerns about the FHLBs and the need for ongoing research and analysis, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 61.
 MR. LACKER.  Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "MR. LACKER. Right" simply acknowledges and agrees with a previous point.


Passage number 62.
   MR. PALUMBO.  So that’s definitely not true, and we’re just trying to see, compared with the highly run-prone prime money funds—which was, you know, from our perspective, a horrible vehicle for maturity transmission to take—whether this is a little bit of a better place to be.  But that’s why we’re half yellow and half green, because we haven’t really come down firmly on that particular question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Palumbo is discussing a comparison and expressing uncertainty, but there is no apparent disagreement or contention.


Passage number 63.
 MR. LACKER.  Can I follow up.  Is it like a dollar-for-dollar wash— why is it a better place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 64.
 MR. PALUMBO. The mutualization of the prime money funds with the rounded NAV provided a first-mover advantage for highly sophisticated investors that evidently were unwilling to take chances on receiving their money a few weeks after they thought they were promised it.  That was a very dangerous and run-prone vehicle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests contention or disagreement. The use of phrases like "evidently were unwilling" and "very dangerous and run-prone vehicle" implies a negative viewpoint or disagreement with the concept of mutualization and rounded NAV for prime money funds.


Passage number 65.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement or response.


Passage number 66.
 MR. PALUMBO. The FHLBs themselves are doing a lot of maturity transformation and more than they were a year ago because they’ve been adding short-term debt, and they’ve not, as best we can tell, shortened their asset side at all, or at least not meaningfully. So it’s worth looking at, but it is different.  I don’t know a lot about the FHLBs, but they have the ability to take very senior positions in the debt structure of their lending.  Again, that means that for better or worse, they do move up the seniority structure.  So in that sense, they should be, at high frequency, a little more stable. But I think, as you might recall, FHLB discount notes’ spreads soared in the financial crisis.  They went to something like 150 basis points very quickly, and government money funds are not necessarily always going to be well positioned to absorb those price changes if they occurred.  If the confidence in the FHLBs were to erode, then I think it could be a problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information and analysis about the FHLBs and their potential stability and potential risks. There is no argument or disagreement present.


Passage number 67.
MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I remember learning suddenly about FHLBs when I discovered that the Atlanta one had a $50 billion credit to Countrywide and a total balance sheet of $120 billion.  That caught my attention. How do you feel about the governance of these things.  How do you feel about their incentives and how well they’re run. And do you monitor their investment side.  Do you have visibility into that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is a series of questions and statements about the speaker's own learning and opinions.


Passage number 68.
 MR. PALUMBO.  I think we have visibility.  It’s a growth area for us.  I’d say four months ago, the FHLBs were just entering the radar screen.  Four months from now, I think we’ll be able to, with much more confidence than I could do today, have a more definitive stance about what the issues are and how we feel about them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the growth area and their confidence in being able to have a more definitive stance in the future.


Passage number 69.
 MR. LACKER.  You wouldn’t criticize me for putting a little asterisk against this upgrade, would you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 70.
 MR. PALUMBO.  No. Again, the half-green, half-yellow is signaling an asterisk from our perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement.


Passage number 71.
 MS. LIANG.  If I could make one comment.  On the decline in the black line, the CD + CP + ABCP, I think you asked about where that funding has gone.  We’re not able to totally quantify it.  Certainly, some of the European or Japanese institutions have termed out— gone a little bit longer.  We’ve heard them going to other asset managers or to insurance companies for slightly longer paper. It makes us feel a little better.  That would be one.  In part, they are using the FX swap market, as Lorie said.  So that’s a plus, but we clearly wanted to show there are offsets here that need to be looked at. We think, on net, it’s a little bit better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information and expressing a slightly optimistic perspective on certain aspects.


Passage number 72.
 MR. LACKER.  Right. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Chair Yellen, simply acknowledges President Rosengren's comment with agreement.


Passage number 73.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Is yours a two-hander or one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No - there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 74.
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just wanted to talk about the Federal Home Loan Banks for a second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses a desire to discuss a specific topic, the Federal Home Loan Banks.


Passage number 75.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. Mr. Rosengren's response appears neutral and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 76.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We met with Federal Home Loan Bank of New York in a week or two ago.  A couple of points.  One, the incentive system is pretty good in the sense that they’re run as cooperatives.  They’re not trying to make profits for shareholders.  So you don’t have the Fannie and Freddie issues that you saw for the GSEs.  Two, their capital is sort of self-created.  As people take advances, it automatically creates capital.  And the point that Mike made about them being super senior is really important.  They’re collateralized loans, but they’re actually ahead of the FDIC in the capital stack. So if the depository were to fail, they actually have a claim senior to the FDIC.  They presumably could get in trouble from an asset quality issue, but they’re super senior.  They could get in trouble from an interest rate or transformation issue, but I think they’d have to take a lot of interest rate risk to really get into great difficulty.  So I guess my bottom line after talking to them and looking at their performance during the financial crisis is, it could always be a risk, but it doesn’t seem to be something I’d put pretty high up on my list.  That’s one person’s view. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides an explanation of the speaker's perspective on the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Mike, I also have a question for you.  It’s on exhibit 2, and I’m trying to figure out in my own mind how much comfort I should take from the change between the “level” and the “adjusted for Treasuries.”  One way to think of this chart is, if we were in a bubble world, the orange-red-red would more than likely be orange-red-red in the second column, and that would be a bubble. If instead the mechanism was “reach-for-yield,” then it might look a lot like the column that you actually have there.  So I was trying to ask, in my ownmind, is there an inherent reason why the risk of price reversal is greater in an asset-bubble world than it is for a “reach-for-yield” one, and should I take comfort in the difference between these two columns.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is questioning whether the difference between the two columns (representing an asset bubble world and a "reach-for-yield" scenario) should be a cause for comfort or concern.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 78.
 MR. PALUMBO.  Well, I can’t say that you shouldn’t.  I think the reason we presented it this way is that, necessarily, you cannot feel better about the right-hand column than the left-hand column.  As a group, we frankly ended up splitting the difference.  And I tried to allude to that a little bit in my remarks, but I think we’re of two minds. If you’re just somebody who’s discounting cash flows, and you’re using a risk-free rate and you don’t mind a rate that has a negative term premium in it to do your discounting, then, again, that’s the sense in which the right-hand column gives you more comfort, and I think neither of these have super predictive power for what the future price changes are going to be, but, on average, there’s probably a little bit of evidence for the right-hand side versus the left-hand side.  But I think it’s just a case in which we don’t know.  And I would say, to me, the low-term premiums as part of the calculus is part of the reason that I would be more inclined to hedge away from the right column toward the middle column.  That’s really an unusual pricing situation for these asset markets, and I guess I wouldn’t want to be too confident about how that would play out with a shock or even maybe with something that’s not even so shocking. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents differing viewpoints on the effectiveness of the right-hand column compared to the left-hand column. Mr. Palumbo suggests that there is some evidence for the right-hand side, while also mentioning the low-term premiums as a reason to be more inclined towards the middle column. This suggests a lack of consensus or agreement on which column is more reliable.


Passage number 79.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The provided passage is incomplete, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement without further context.


Passage number 80.
 WILLIAMS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given information is not enough to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage, as no passage or context is provided.


Passage number 81.
  Jeff— MR. LACKER.  Yes, a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement acknowledging Jeff's presence and confirming that Mr. Lacker is present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 82.
 MR. ROSENGREN. He had a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. While the passage does not provide explicit information about the nature of the disagreement or contention, the presence of the word "but" suggests that there is some sort of disagreement or contrasting opinion.


Passage number 83.
 MR. LACKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without any context or passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in this statement. Please provide more information.


Passage number 84.
  Oh, did you want to— MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 85.
 WILLIAMS.  I have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement by Williams does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Williams has a two-hander, without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 86.
   MR. EVANS.  It’s a tie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "It's a tie" simply states that the result of something is equal or balanced, without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 87.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 88.
 WILLIAMS.  We tied.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 89.
 MR. LACKER.  I think mine’s reasonably interesting.  [Laughter] Is one way to interpret this that if you look at the valuations all by themselves of these risky assets, they look overvalued.  If you believe longer-term Treasury securities are at their right value, then these are not overvalued.  And so then my next question is, is that a fair description.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their perspective and posing a question for discussion, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument being presented.


Passage number 90.
 MR. PALUMBO.  It’s certainly a description that you hear and that many people believe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 91.
  [Laughter] MR. LACKER.  It seems implied by your colors, doesn’t it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making an observation about the implied meaning of the colors being discussed.


Passage number 92.
 MR. PALUMBO.  I’m sure investors are taking many different approaches for valuations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that investors are taking different approaches for valuations.


Passage number 93.
 MR. LACKER. Can you guess my next question.  Are Treasury securiries overvalued.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question without expressing any opinion or taking a stance on the matter.


Passage number 94.
 MR. PALUMBO.  I don’t think Treasury securities are necessarily overvalued, but the term premium is out of its historical range.  So I have to think about it a little bit more as an empiricist rather than a theorist.  Of course, a year ago we said it was out of its historical range, more likely to rise than to fall, and subsequently we’ve been marking down our forecast of what Treasury yields would do and what term premiums would do, because it seems like the world is different than the one we expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Palumbo is simply stating his perspective on Treasury securities and acknowledging that his previous forecasts have been adjusted due to unforeseen changes in the world.


Passage number 95.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 96.
 WILLIAMS.  So that does set me up.   There are a couple of issues about whether Treasury securities are properly priced.  One issue is just this issue of very low r*. How do you take that into account if you really think we’re in this world of very low rates. Then that obviously changes your view about what interest rates should be relative to the SEP.  But the second issue is the term premium itself. In our earlier discussion today, I think we kind of came around to realizing that we’re probably going to have a big balance sheet for a long time despite our earlier public statements that we’re going to normalize the balance sheet. So that could be an argument for a low term premium for a very long time.  In addition, I think there’s a growing recognition that the pricing of risk in the Treasury securities market has changed fundamentally from the 1980s and 1990s, when the risk you were protecting against was high inflation.  The market seems to be, at least based on what I’ve seen, pricing the downside scenario in terms of what you’re really worried about.  And that is just going to push the term premium associated with a 10-year Treasury security from a high positive value to a potentially very low positive value or even a negative value. Getting back to President Lacker’s question:  How do you take into account both a very low r* and, probably because of a low r*, a shift in the equilibrium term premium when you do this kind of assessment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions two issues regarding the proper pricing of Treasury securities - the issue of very low r* and the issue of the term premium. The speaker suggests that the term premium might be low for a long time due to the likelihood of a big balance sheet and a changed market perception of risk. This differs from earlier public statements about normalizing the balance sheet. Therefore, there is disagreement or contention regarding the pricing of Treasury securities and how to take into account various factors.


Passage number 97.
 MR. PALUMBO.  As best we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion or observation without any opposing views or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 98.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the prompt to answer whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Can you provide the passage you are referring to?


Passage number 99.
 WILLIAMS.  Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 100.
 MR. PALUMBO. We’re thinking about things very much the way that you are.  As I mentioned a second ago, over time, in the Tealbook baseline outlook, we’ve both lowered not just the r* in the forecast—which we’ve taken down, as you know, quite a bit—but we’ve also materially lowered where we think the term premium will end up over the long term, though it’s still well above where it is now. We’ve also flattened out the trajectory. We’ve elongated the time it will take for today’s term premium to migrate toward whatever we think its long-run equilibrium would be. We did that all in the context of recognizing that the pricing is different,that the global equilibrium rates around the world are lower, and that’s going to have very persistent consequences. So we’ve factored that in as best we can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that they are thinking about things similarly and have made adjustments to their forecast based on lower interest rates and global equilibrium rates.


Passage number 101.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 102.
 WILLIAMS.  Yes, but by implication, if I do the subtraction of the colors—if I can do this in my head—the Treasury securities are red, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the colors of Treasury securities.


Passage number 103.
 MR. PALUMBO. Well, maybe.  [Laughter]  I wouldn’t necessarily put it that way.  It depends.  I think we have people on the team who would say that longer-term Treasury yields could stay where they are today and stock prices could fall 15 percent over the next seven months if the economy evolves the way we think it will—if there are no surprises—just because the valuations that are implicit in today’s prices will prove to be unsustainable by themselves. Again, that’s not everybody on the team, it’s the position of people I respect. I don’t think it’s a ridiculous place to be, I guess.  It’s not like it’s only those people.  You read about that in other spheres as well. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thomas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Palumbo is discussing a potential scenario and acknowledging that it is not the universally held position but one that he respects. Chair Yellen does not express disagreement or challenge this statement.


Passage number 104.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Perhaps merely to add the detail that, of course, we think that part of the low term premium is thanks to the large asset holdings.  Right now, for example, the Kim-Wright model, which is informed by survey expectations as best as we can tell, is at about negative 50 basis points.  We think that the current effect of the balance sheet is about in the range of 85 basis points.  That would get you to an adjusted level of about 35 basis points.  Certainly, that’s still low by historical standards, but as you point out, it might reflect a different perception of the hedging properties of long-term nominal safe assets. CHAIR YELLEN. Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are providing additional details and elaborating on each other's points without contradicting or arguing with each other.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
 MR. FISCHER.  Just two questions.  First, why do you show the level of debt on a ratio scale.  What happens if you show debt service. Doesn’t everything look very different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests contention or disagreement between Mr. Fischer and another party. Mr. Fischer questions why the level of debt is shown on a ratio scale and suggests that showing debt service instead would provide a different perspective. This indicates a disagreement on how to represent and analyze the debt.


Passage number 106.
   MR. PALUMBO.  Yes, debt service does look very different.  The debt service ratio for households is basically lower than it was between 1980 and 2013.  I guess one reason we do it this way is that in 2006, the debt service ratio was also not looking particularly high, and so we think that—especially when you think about it in terms of originations—it’s also useful to track just the overall positions of households.  Again, we do both, typically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing information about the debt service ratio for households and explaining the reasons behind tracking it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 107.
 MR. FISCHER.  Yes.  You said it’s also useful to track the overall positions, but the ones with the income are not shown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker states that the overall positions are useful to track, but also points out that the ones with income are not shown. This suggests disagreement or discrepancy regarding which positions should be included or displayed.


Passage number 108.
 MR. PALUMBO.  Right. It’s hard for us to do income, because the data that we’re showing here are the credit-records data.  And, unfortunately, we get to see a lot about debt, but we don’t get to see much about income.  In these data, we don’t even get to see much about payments or risk—only a little bit about payments. But the point I was trying to make here is a different one, which is that even insofar as we do see real increases in debt owed by households, it’s accruing to these households who have, in the data, virtually no delinquency rates or default rates.  It’s just a way to characterize, again, the overall likelihood of the sustainability of those balance sheet positions.  That’s the only thing I was trying to do there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the limitations of the data they are working with and clarifying the point they were trying to make.


Passage number 109.
 MR. FISCHER.  And the second question:  Was it intentional that you showed “adjusted for Treasuries” in the national colors of Brazil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a question and a statement.


Passage number 110.
  [Laughter] MR. PALUMBO.  No. If you look at the legend, which is in probably a 4.5-point font beneath that table, you can see what we were trying to do is gauge where they were located in the historical distribution.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the legend and the intention behind it.


Passage number 111.
 MR. TARULLO.  He’s just giving you a hard time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that someone is being given a hard time.


Passage number 112.
 MR. PALUMBO.  I know. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting or differing views. Both Mr. Palumbo and Chair Yellen are simply acknowledging and understanding a statement.


Passage number 113.
 MR. LOCKHART.  I’d like to return to the top of exhibit 2 and the color chart and ask about the equity ratio valuation.  I’ve been reading recently about growing concern over the changing structure of equity markets with exchange-traded funds and other aggregations of equities that are perhaps more vulnerable to runs.  Two things are going on:  Exchange-traded funds are growing and the, let’s say, in the battle between passive and active management, passive is winning.  Both suggest that in a really bad market, very disruptive runs could occur.  Is that factored into your valuation here or is this just a P/E ratio effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 114.
 MR. PALUMBO. Here, this is just a P/E ratio.  Now, again, when we’re thinking more broadly about the valuation pressures in the domestic equity markets, we do take a much broader view, and we certainly would entertain the possibility that changes in the microstructure of the markets were either reducing or adding to pressures beyond what we would see in our traditional or historical metric.  So that’s part of the perspective that we take. I think, though, it’s fair to say that in the U.S. broad stock markets today, I haven’t heard people really emphasizing that the active versus the passive investors are particularly causing trouble evaluating the resilience of prices.  And I guess I don’t know much about the exchange-traded funds, but I have colleagues that do.  Some people like the exchange traded fund as an instrument. It depends on how these—what are the dealers called in the ETFs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their perspective and stating that they have not heard people emphasizing the active versus passive investor debate as a cause for trouble in evaluating stock prices.


Passage number 115.
 MS. LIANG. “Authorized participants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides the name and title of the person speaking, without giving any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 116.
” MR. PALUMBO.  Authorized participants.  It depends on how they’re going to behave in a period of stress, but in principle, investors can’t just pull their money out of those funds the way they can out of an open-ended long-term mutual fund. So there’s a sense in which they may  have more robustness than the long-term mutual fund model. We’ve thought about that a lot in the context of loan funds and bond funds, but it could even be true in equity funds in principle. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 117.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Is it okay to ask questions on the economic situation. [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN. Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response of laughter suggests a friendly or humorous atmosphere.


Passage number 118.
 MR. EVANS.  It’s a question for Eric about inflation expectations on exhibit 11.  We had taken note of the fact that, as you pointed out, the Michigan survey had dropped down to a historical low for inflation expectations, and then you did the trend-augmented calculation, taking into account food and energy inflation. So I was staring at that for a little while, and I guess I have a question and an observation.  My question is whether or not the shaded region corresponds to the same type of uncertainty as it does for the other data.  The observation is, as I stared at it, that the other times the green line had sort of touched down on the bottom were both periods when the FOMC was either adding a lot of accommodation or had just recently added accommodation.  One was August 2003, when we did forward guidance by saying it’ll be a considerable period of time before we increase the funds rate.  The other one looks like it was the fall of 2012 when we started the open-ended asset purchases, QE3.  So as we’re on the downward slope here and perhaps haven’t touched bottom on that green line, I wonder if the circumstances aren’t a little bit different than just “it’s within the normal historical experience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is simply asking a question and stating an observation.


Passage number 119.
” MR. ENGEN.  Yes.  The gray shaded region is the 70 percent range for just the historical observations, unadjusted for anything, and so the green line being in that range is just an observation. All the green line controls for, other than estimating a simple trend, is essentially movements in food and energy prices both contemporaneous and 12 months previous and  months previous.  That’s the lag structure.  And the estimated cofficients on these variables are all significant.  The coefficients on both the contemporaneous and the 12-month lags are of roughly equal size.  So that lag structure does seem to matter. You raise a possibility that there may be something else in there.  We haven’t looked at that, but at least sort of walking through some of the history could be something we could consider to see if it does further explain the trend. Now, it’s also going to be the case that, looking ahead, if we do get the rise in food and energy prices that’s in the forecast, this measure should be kind of bottoming out and then moving up, if that’s what’s going on here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing an explanation and analysis of data.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.  The way you did the presentation, I might have had the takeaway that looks like this is not that unusual, but recognizing those two episodes, I wonder about that.  Sounds like it’s up for grabs, at least.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the presentation might suggest that the situation is not unusual, but expresses doubts or skepticism by questioning the validity of the two episodes mentioned. The phrase "Sounds like it's up for grabs" implies that there is a lack of agreement or certainty about the situation.


Passage number 121.
 MR. ENGEN.  Yes, point well taken. CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other questions.  [No response]  Okay.  We now have an opportunity for people to comment, if they’d like, on financial-stability issues, and a few of you have indicated your desire to do so.  Let’s start with President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The participants seem to be in agreement and there are no opposing views presented.


Passage number 122.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair. My comments on financial stability usually highlight increased risks to financial stability.  Today I wanted to highlight that one risk associated with the shadow banking system has clearly declined, as was mentioned in the Tealbook and the presentations we just heard.  The recent trillion-dollar movement out of prime money market funds into government-only money market funds represents a relatively rare instance in which we have been successful in intentionally reducing risk in the shadow banking system.  Prime money market funds were a source of great instability during the financial crisis. The promise of a fixed NAV on a fund for which investments for a significant credit duration risk turned out to be a promise they could not necessarily keep, especially in the wake of Lehman’s failure.  A very substantial movement into government funds as a result of regulatory changes to prime money market funds should give us some hope that, with sufficient perseverance, we will be able to identify other significant areas of instability in the shadow banking system, discuss them publicly, and get them changed.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that one risk associated with the shadow banking system has declined and expressing hope that other areas of instability can also be addressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just want to make a few comments on one of the risks that’s already been highlighted by several different people on the staff, which is Deutsche Bank. As I see it, there are multiple problems here:  a bad business model, poor execution, undercapitalization, and multiple legal cases that will result in large fines that will certainly put even greater pressure on the bank’s capital.  And the situation is made worse because of the lack of visibility about when the legal cases will be settled and the amount of fines that will ultimately be assessed. The firm is apparently waiting to settle its RMBS case with the Department of Justice before unveiling its new strategy, which apparently is going to be to shrink to a smaller, more reasonable footprint supplemented by a large equity capital raise. But the problem is that, in the meantime, the franchise is eroding, which undercuts the firm’s future profitability prospects.  This also makes it more difficult for the firm to raise the necessary equity to shore up its balance sheet. I think someone remarked that it’s selling at 0.3 times book value currently.  So the firm is very fragile, and even though it announced its earnings last week and nothing really bad happened, the risk of an abrupt loss of confidence seems to still be very, very high.  I rememberthe summer of 2008 when there were weeks and months when there were firms that looked okay.  That didn’t mean that they turned out to be okay. Now, one might argue that the German government will not let Deutsche Bank fail because it is their largest bank, and that could be correct, but I think it does ignore two constraints, one political and one legal.  The political constraint is that a German government bailout of Deutsche Bank would be very unpopular politically, and that’s particularly relevant in the current environment, in light of the upcoming German election and the fact that Angela Merkel’s popularity is already somewhat diminished.  The German government has said they will not do a recap, but it’s unclear what their appetite would be if there was actually no alternative. The legal constraint is the European Union’s bank competition policy, which sharply constrains the ability of national governments to recapitalize, as opposed to resolve, their troubled institutions.  In a resolution, bank debt has to be built in, which means large losses for investors and a heightened risk of contagion.  So they’re in a difficult place. Although the financial system is a lot stronger today than it was in 2008, I believe that the failure of a firm the size and complexity of Deutsche Bank would have significant consequences for the stability of the global financial system.  Deutsche Bank has a huge derivatives book, and a significant portion of this book is still cleared on a bilateral rather than centrally settled basis. Moreover, the risk of failure really isn’t priced in to any significant degree, although Deutsche Bank’s five-year CDS is elevated relative to other institutions.  It’s only trading in a range of 200 to 250 basis points, which is far lower than a number of institutions that actually did not fail during the 2008 financial crisis.  So I think that if Deutsche Bank did fail, it would be a pretty big surprise, and so the shock would be even more intensified.  I also don’t think it would be viewed as a purely idiosyncratic event, because there are other firms that are challenged in terms ofprofitability, business model, and uncertain legal liabilities, including banks like Credit Suisse and Barclays.  Now, on the positive side, I think those firms have some core businesses that are well functioning and actually do have fundamentally stronger franchises, but I have little doubt that if Deutsche Bank failed, it would put significant pressure on several other major banking institutions. Of course, what’s frustrating about all of this is, what do we do about it sitting here in the United States.  Well, there’s not much we can do but to ensure that Deutsche Bank has sufficient liquidity in the United States so there is no late-day funding shortfall, and to press Deutsche Bank and the ECB, which is its supervisor, to have Deutsche Bank settle its RMBS case with the Department of Justice as swiftly as possible.  Settlement of the case, I think, would be important, because it would encourage Deutsche Bank to then go forward and announce its new strategy, quickly followed by a raising of capital.  And I think if those two things could happen, we might be in a somewhat better place.  But where we’re sitting today is not something that makes me very confident.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker highlights multiple problems with Deutsche Bank and expresses concern about its fragility and the risk of an abrupt loss of confidence. They then discuss potential constraints on a German government bailout and the legal constraint of the European Union's bank competition policy. The speaker also discusses the potential consequences of a failure of a firm like Deutsche Bank on the stability of the global financial system. Overall, the passage presents a negative view of Deutsche Bank and raises concerns about its future.


Passage number 124.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thanks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple expression of gratitude.


Passage number 125.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Could I ask a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person asking the question is simply seeking permission to ask a question.


Passage number 126.
 MR. FISCHER.  There is a two-hander there. CHAIR YELLEN.  Oh.  Yes, President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response of "Oh. Yes, President Kaplan" indicates surprise or acknowledgement but not disagreement or contention.


Passage number 127.
 MR. KAPLAN.  This discussion begs the obvious question, which I guess I’ll just ask.  I am familiar with the bank, and it does have profitability.  And, although there are other issues, the accelerant to this is a $14 billion fine for a $13 billion-less-market-cash company.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the bank's profitability and then mentioning the large fine that the company is facing.


Passage number 128.
  VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That is just the Department of Justice’s opening offer. That doesn’t mean that’s where it will end up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the Department of Justice's current offer may not be final.


Passage number 129.
 MR. KAPLAN.  But it has created substantial instability because of the uncertainty about where they are ultimately going to settle.  What I’m asking is—although I guess you may not agree with that premise—if that were true, what could we do.  Is there something that should be discussed so we don’t manufacture a crisis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is posing a question and acknowledging that the other person may not agree with their premise. However, there is no explicit disagreement or argument in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 130.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. No, I don’t think there is anything for us to do, in that sense. The Department of Justice has to do what it has to do, and I don’t think there is any role for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a disagreement with the idea that there is anything for "us" (presumably the speaker and the person being addressed) to do. The speaker states that the Department of Justice has its own role to play, suggesting that "we" should not intervene or get involved. This implies a disagreement or difference in opinion on the appropriate course of action.


Passage number 131.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Okay. There is the case, then there is the amount of the fine, and then there is the way it is being negotiated.  Even though the ultimate negotiation may ultimately wind up being a far smaller number, the headline will do a lot of damage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating different aspects of the situation but does not express any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 132.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. The problem here is lack of clarity.  The lack of clarity means that people have no visibility about when it will be resolved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply states that the problem is due to a lack of clarity, and this lack of clarity causes people to be unaware of when the problem will be resolved.


Passage number 133.
  And in the meantime, the franchise value of this company is eroding because of the wide level of uncertainty MR. KAPLAN.  I know.  I watch it every day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers seem to be in agreement and there is no indication of a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 134.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you can argue that there is some sort of combination of size of settlement and speed of settlement that are both probably relevant here. CHAIR YELLEN.  Nellie.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing points of view. It simply mentions that there may be a combination of factors that are relevant to the topic being discussed.


Passage number 135.
 MS. LIANG.  I just wanted to add that Deutsche Bank has been an ongoing issue for most of this year.  It wasn’t just this settlement. I think its stock price fell about 50 percent in January, and it has not recovered.  So it has got a thin capital cushion.  It is not only the DOJ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating facts about Deutsche Bank's ongoing issues and stock price decline.


Passage number 136.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. And there are other cases besides the current RMBS case that are relevant here, which makes it even more complicated. CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 137.
 MS. LIANG.  Thank you very much.   CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I think we’re ready now to go into our round on economic comments. And our first speaker is President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a polite exchange between two individuals.


Passage number 138.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, the given phrase "MR" does not provide enough context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 139.
 WILLIAMS.  All right.  I’m losing half my audience.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Real GDP growth in the third quarter was strong.  The economy grew almost twice as fast as my estimate of its sustainable trend, which is about 1½ percent. Of course, we have to remember that the quarterly numbers can be volatile, and they’re subject to one-off transitory factors such as the spike in soybean exports and residual seasonality. Now, in the past, some people, including my good friend who sits here to my right, have claimed that I only talk about seasonal adjustment problems when the real GDP number is weak.  So to prove him wrong, let me wade back into the weeds of residual seasonality one more time when residual seasonality is, in fact, likely giving us an overly optimistic read on the economy.  Just to recall, the main problem is that, on average, first-quarter real GDP growth has been weaker than growth in other quarters even after seasonal adjustment.  In fact, this seems to reflect the BEA’s bottom-up methodology, which seasonally adjusts the individual subcomponents instead of the aggregate number directly.  But small amounts of seasonal variation at the granular level when aggregated can affect the top-line GDP numbers. In the past, to correct for this residual seasonality, my staff has applied a second line of seasonal adjustment to the published aggregates, taking, in effect, a top-down approach.  Recently, the BEA has taken some steps to reduce residual seasonality, and in this summer’s annual revision, it implemented several improvements to its seasonal adjustment methodology.  That creates a little bit of a problem, because in that annual revision, the BEA only provided us with three and a half years of historical data using these new procedures, and that short sample means it’s hard to calculate a precise magnitude of any remaining residual seasonality.  And,furthermore, a complete sample of the consistently revised GDP data won’t be available until 2018 when we get the next comprehensive NIPA revision.  So until then, I won’t go so far as to say that we’re flying blind on this important issue, but our windshield is still fogged up. In view of the likelihood of some remaining residual seasonality, it seems appropriate to focus even more on the four-quarter growth rates of real GDP and prices.  And on that basis, both real GDP growth and core PCE inflation appear likely to be around 1¾ percent this year, which is in line with the September SEP—that is, on balance, the recent data have been consistent with our expectations. Of course, much of the economic and policy discussions focus on the balance of risks associated with the forecast and the management of those risks.  One risk that has been highlighted in the Tealbook and in the presentation today is that future interest rate hikes and the associated divergence in global monetary policies may cause an appreciation of the dollar. For example, the Tealbook currently expects the dollar to rise almost 5 percent over the next couple of years as market participants’ expectations of FOMC rate actions are revised up.  Underlying this projection, the Tealbook assumes that each 100 basis point funds rate surprise leads to a 3 percent appreciation in the dollar.  This effect—the “bang for the buck,” if you will—is based on recent dollar responses that are somewhat larger than historical averages. In looking into this issue, my staff investigated the robustness of the estimated dollar response across several different specifications to get a sense of how much larger or smaller it could be.  And while the dollar has shown greater sensitivity to interest rate movements since 2014, overall, this change isn’t statistically significant one account is taken of the wide empirical confidence intervals surrounding these estimates. Of course, these wide confidence intervals also imply that there is a risk that the exchange value of the dollar may appreciate even more   than assumed in the Tealbook.  But I don’t lose too much sleep over this risk, because it can be fairly easily mitigated by an adjustment in the path of policy.  For example, if we raise interest rates a bit and we see a larger-than-expected rise in the dollar, we can offset this jump by postponing future funds rate increases appropriately.  We don’t need to let risk-management caution turn into paralysis. And it’s important to see the risks on both sides.  There are downside risks to inflation from an outsized appreciation in the dollar, but there are also notable upside risks.  The divergence between the PCE and CPI inflation rates may get resolved in favor of the CPI.  That may happen, for example, if the unusually weak PCE health-care price inflation starts to rise next year. Also, there’s no question that wage growth is picking up.  If you look at the apples-to-apples measure like the Atlanta Fed Wage Growth Tracker, that’s been increasing, but other labor cost measures are firming somewhat as well.  And if these upside risks play out, inflation could easily overshoot our 2 percent target next year.  I don’t think that would be such a big problem, because in that case, monetary policy should be positioned to shift to a much less accommodative stance. For the real economy, the risks look fairly balanced.  While the improvement in labor force participation this year has bought us some time, I see a low probability of a repeat performance next year. So it seems more likely that job gains will outpace labor force growth, and the unemployment rate will go back to edging down to somewhere between 4½ and 4¾ percent. To sum up, the economic expansion looks like it’s on track.  The labor market is strong and shows solid momentum, inflation is moving back toward our 2 percent goal, and we’re well positioned for a gradual increase in interest rates.  Thank you.CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information and analysis on various economic factors.


Passage number 140.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I expect the economy will likely reach 2 percent core PCE inflation and my estimate of full employment, which is 4.7 percent, sometime next year.  Achievement of both parts of our mandate in 2017 is likely, conditional on my forecast of continued above-potential economic growth over the next couple of years.  We are already relatively close to full employment, and with projected output growth above potential next year, we may well see the unemployment rate continue to decline gradually , although this, of course, depends on the evolution of labor force participation, a topic to which I will now turn. One reason to be skeptical that labor markets will tighten further might be the constancy of the unemployment rate over the course of this year.  Of course, a relatively flat unemployment rate, despite reasonably strong payroll employment growth, is a good sign for the economy, as it implies that the labor force has grown strongly over the past year.  However, there is reason to believe that this good news on labor force growth is unlikely to persist too far into the future.  At the Boston Federal Reserve conference last month, papers by Robert Hall and Alan Krueger each emphasized important secular trends in labor force participation.  In particular, the paper by Krueger suggests that the scope for further increases in labor force participation may be limited by the fact that a large portion of the working-age male population currently out of the labor force reports having a serious health condition that is a barrier to work. It is also worth noting that while the recent increase in labor force participation can be interpreted as evidence of slack in the labor market, participation does feature a cyclical component.  From a cyclical perspective, the rise in labor force participation, rather than a sign of slack, could well be taken as a sign of a labor market that is nearing full employment. While I hope that the recent increase in labor force participation at this juncture of the business cycle will  prove persistent, it is also important to be mindful that the historical experience in the United States is not especially supportive of such a view.  Work by my staff indicates that workers entering the labor force at age 25 or older in a good labor market do not exhibit a significantly higher permanence, measured over a 12-year span, in the labor force than similar workers entering the labor market at other stages of the business cycle. In all, we should not be overly confident that output growth above potential will continue to entice new entrants into the labor force, nor that those who enter will remain for long.  With the aging of the baby boom and its entrance into retirement, along with the limited evidence that labor force growth is likely to continue, I expect that output growth above its potential rate will result in a gradual decline in the unemployment rate. Turning to potential signals of labor market tightness, evidence suggests that both wages and prices seem to be gradually rising.  Core PCE prices over the past year have risen 1.7 percent. If, in fact, we reach 2 percent inflation by next year, it will likely have an effect on financial market prices and the relative stability we have enjoyed over the past year. The Tealbook is forecasting a fairly gradual rise in the 10-year Treasury rate. While I hope that is the outcome, I am worried that the long rate response may be more unruly than the Tealbook envisions as markets realize that their assumed funds rate path is inconsistent with having achieved our dual mandate, with the prospect of further labor market tightening still to come. In sum, we are currently quite close to achieving our dual mandate.  Both my forecast and that in the Tealbook expect the unemployment rate to undershoot the natural rate.  Our ability to pursue a path of gradual tightening will be dependent on when we resume raising rates.  Tomorrow I will discuss in more detail why delaying too long could be costly.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It is a speech given by Mr. Rosengren discussing his forecasts and concerns about the economy.


Passage number 141.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I think everyone shares the intuition that monetary policy operates with a lag, although I would note, in passing, that this means that a central bank may keep tightening for too long as well as that it may wait too long to begin tightening.  But saying we shouldn’t wait too long is almost tautological and not particularly helpful in deciding when to move. There have been suggestions in some quarters going back several years or more about the existence of lags, arguing for raising rates relatively soon after the suggestion was made.  And, of course, many more people have been voicing this view in the past year or so. I certainly didn’t find this view convincing two or three or four years ago.  But as I mentioned at our previous meeting, although I haven’t yet been persuaded—and, thus, I haven’t been in favor of incurring the costs of the marginal jobs and economic growth that would not be realized with another rate hike taking place sooner rather than later—I have found the case a closer one over the past few meetings. Because not moving won’t be the right position forever, except perhaps if secular stagnation has gripped the economy with a vengeance, I have tried to define for myself with a little more specificity when the intuition of a preemptive move should click in.  There doesn’t seem to be a consensus answer to the question of how long the implementation lag may be.  I’ve seen everything from three months to two years, with relatively more views in the two-to-three-quarter range.  And I should note that, if one’s concern is financial stability, the implementation lag may be a good bit shorter than that affecting real economic activity. And, of course, the length of the implementation lag isn’t the only important question.  Also important are the relative degree of certainty that conditions are emerging that will recommend a monetary policy  response and the relative magnitude of the risks associated with dealing with possible adverse outcomes that suggest ex post it would have been better to have followed the policy road not taken.  While I suppose the implementation lag may have changed even in the past year or so, I think it would be very difficult to determine with any certainty whether that’s been the case. And I don’t think that what I’ve regarded as the asymmetric balance of risks or the relevance of a low r* that may remain low indefinitely have changed materially in recent months. In examining whether my own position should change, I focused mostly on the questions of the relative degree of confidence that conditions will emerge, counseling a rate increase, and the relative magnitude of risks associated with possible adverse outcomes in both directions.  I’m not going to repeat my self-described pragmatic view, which you’ve all probably heard plenty of times.  But let me mention a few developments that have affected my assessment as to whether we are closer to the point at which a failure to remove more accommodation would begin to carry sufficiently high risks that it is worth the admittedly hard-to-quantify opportunity costs of some number of additional jobs being created. On the labor market front, I continue to believe there is more slack—that is, that the trend of the past year or more of job creation well above the number of new entrants with an essentially flat unemployment rate can continue.  Again, though, this view won’t be right forever.  And even though the flat Phillips curve means that the pass-through from potentially increased nominal wage growth to price inflation is not all that direct, I think nearly everyone agrees that, directionally at least, there is some correlation.  So I’ve been watching for some indication in the data that this trend may be nearing its end.  I don’t think there’s too much in wage patterns yet.  Here, not much has changed in the past year.  There is one measure suggesting we have begun to see some increased distance between industries in which wages are  growing faster and those in which they are not—something that, in the past, has been correlated with later acceleration across the board. But this is the measure based on three-digit industry codes, and even then it’s not that significant a move.  The more granular four-digit industry code measure shows no change at all. Our labor economists did, however, point out something that might prove to be a harbinger of the end of the aforementioned trend. At the height of past business cycles, the labor force participation rate has increased somewhat above its trend but, with the exception of the halcyon period of very high growth in the late 1990s, not for more than a couple of quarters.  Under the staff’s current estimate of trend labor force participation, actual labor force participation has, for the first time since the financial crisis, exceeded the trend, albeit by a very small margin.  Now, I think the staff would agree that we shouldn’t have a high degree of confidence in current estimates of trend, as they have debated it so much among themselves.  If it’s actually higher than the staff estimate, which does fall below some other estimates I’ve seen, then we’re still not back to trend.  And the fact that we have been below trend for so long— nearly eight years—may mean that past correlations won’t hold up in current circumstances.  But it is something I’ll be watching. Another thing I want to note in passing—and I think people have commented on this before, but it’s something we should probably keep in mind—is that the change in the labor force participation rate, contrary to the instinct I think we all have, is not principally due to a lot more people being pulled back into the labor force.  It’s actually due to people making decisions not to leave the labor force in greater numbers than they had previously—I guess it’s a double positive—which may affect our sense of the future trend, particularly when you’re talking about   people who are hitting an age that, in the past, has been a retirement age—that is, it may be a little bit more sustainable. With respect to inflation, I’ve been focused on seeing some tangible developments on the inflation front that would credibly promise nontransitory attainment of the inflation target, with due consideration to the symmetrical nature of that target. It does seem as though the disinflationary effects of the stronger dollar and energy prices are waning, though it’s less clear whether the dollar is done strengthening.  And the recent core inflation reading has come in a little higher than anticipated, I gather reflecting, in part, slightly larger effects from now-rising energy prices and some nonmarket services components.  I don’t place an enormous amount of weight on such a modest change, particularly any that is attributable to those pesky nonmarket components, but now, at least, the uncertainty with respect to inflation’s path is a little more tilted in an upward direction. To conclude, as you can tell, I find the situation to have considerably more nuance than was the case just six months ago.  I don’t find the case for another increase yet to be compelling and certainly not urgent, in view of the still mixed nature of incoming data.  Moreover, I don’t think there should be concern about some overshooting of the 2 percent target, something that could actually have favorable medium-term effects.  But I do find it arguable that we’re getting to the point at which some further modest, cautious removal of accommodation may be a reasonable response to the continuing diminution of slack in the economy and the labor market.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting their own analysis and assessment of the current economic situation.


Passage number 142.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you very much, Madam Chair.  Economic conditions in the Fifth District appear to have changed little since September.  There are a couple of exceptions.  First, Hurricane Matthew caused extensive flooding in areas of North and South Carolina, although major cities were spared, and that sparked the usual rebuilding efforts.  And, second, a number of survey participants and other contacts mentioned the upcoming election as a reason that businesses were hesitant to place orders.  Otherwise, conditions looked very similar to what we’ve seen recently.  For example, manufacturing indicators were somewhat mixed this month, as has been the case for the past few months. October survey results indicated continued contraction, although with some improvement from September.  The composite index rose 4 points to negative 4.  More manufacturers saw wage increases in October, and the wage index, which rose to plus 18, has been in double digits for the past 11 months.  The services sector continued to expand in October, according to our survey results and comments from contacts.  Difficulty finding qualified workers persists as an issue cited by directors and other contacts.  For example, a staffing company reported seeing a sizable shift toward orders for permanent rather than temporary hires, reflecting a desire to lock in qualified workers rather than risk losing them. The wage components across all of our surveys are elevated and have increased notably for the retail sector.   Turning to residential real estate markets, they continue to improve in many areas of the District.  For the most part, comments on housing were upbeat, and the CEO of a leading national building products supplier reported strong gains for September and October after several flat months in the late spring and summer and was expecting that strength to continue through year-end.  The outlook for commercial real estate is more mixed, according to our contacts.  In most markets, the demand for multifamily construction remains strong, although there was a good deal of commentary about financing constraints.  Banks that are close to their CRE guidance thresholds are reportedly pulling out of many markets and leaving borrowers to choose among only one or two lenders rather than four or five as had been typical. Turning to the national economy, the most notable change in the staff’s medium-term outlook since our previous meeting was the reduction of the GDP path.  Growth in 2017 is projected to be 2.2 percent versus 2.4 percent in the September Tealbook.  Some markdown seems appropriate, I think, even though third-quarter GDP growth was a bit above the staff’s estimate, because in that report final sales to domestic purchasers were weaker than expected. Growth in real consumer spending, which dominates that category, slowed to an annual rate of 2.1 percent in the third quarter, but that’s right in line with growth in real disposable income. The staff’s assessment is that we are at full employment, and that output growth will exceed its trend rate for the next couple of years.  But I think there’s a good chance that real GDP growth will converge to its trend rate more rapidly than the Tealbook projects.  I think we’re already seeing some signs of supply-side constraints on growth.  Reports of difficulty finding skilled workers have broadened noticeably over the past year or so.  We hear many instances of firms limiting current production as a result. In several areas in our District, we’ve heard that single-family housing construction is being limited by labor constraints as well as by alimited supply of buildable lots, and we’re hearing that many firms are coping with labor shortages by increasing overtime hours for existing workers and by hiring unskilled workers and putting them through training.  As I mentioned earlier, we’ve also heard reports recently of reduced lending for multifamily construction in response to the regulatory burdens. So I would not be surprised to see real GDP growth fall below 2 percent over the near term as we converge to trend, and a corollary of lower real GDP growth is that employment growth will almost certainly be lower as well. In fact, it would not surprise me if employment growth fell to below 10,000 jobs per month in the near term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker provides information and analysis without indicating any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
 MR. EVANS.  Did you mean 100,000.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not provide sufficient information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 144.
 MR. TARULLO.  You said 10,000 per month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as the statement does not imply any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 145.
 MR. LACKER.  I said 10,000.  Well, so, you know, if 60,000 per month would keep labor force participation rates constant, and there’s a significant amount of noise about 60,000, maybe under 10,000 would be realized as well.  I did mean to say 100,000, though.  [Laughter] Turning to inflation, core inflation has averaged 1.7 percent over the past four quarters, up from 1.3 percent four quarters ago.  Many forecasters have been surprised by the strength of core readings this year.  The Tealbook, for example, last December predicted that core inflation would be at an annual rate of 1.4 percent in the first quarter. It turned out to be 2.1 percent.  Similarly, in March, core inflation was predicted to be 1.5 percent in the second quarter, but the latest estimate is 1.8 percent for the second quarter.  And in June, core inflation was predicted to be 1.3 percent in the third quarter, but on Friday we learned it was 1.7 percent.  The Tealbook still has inflation remaining below 2.2 percent for three more years, though.  For me, this year’s experience suggests that we seem to be likely to hit 2 percent more rapidly than we otherwise would have thought.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 146.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The reports from my directors and other business contacts were mixed this round.  The consensus seems to be that economic growth is proceeding slowly and steadily.  Although nearly everyone had some commentary about the near-term uncertainty, nothing concrete seemed to be flashing red. I did hear a few more reports of larger wage increases this round, but, in general, the gains were still moderate and not expected to have much of an effect on inflation.  Many employers say they don’t have the pricing power to pass along more than minimal cost increases to their customers.  Others expect productivity enhancements to offset their higher wages, and pretty much everyone is expecting to be living in a low-inflation world for the foreseeable future. My financial market contacts also had little new to report, although I did hear from one large nonfinancial firm as well as from a small business owner that the increase in LIBOR over the intermeeting period had raised their short-term borrowing costs about 25 basis points. With regard to the national outlook, recent data seem reasonably consistent with our previous economic projections.  Overall, third-quarter GDP growth was in line with our forecast, although private domestic final purchases were a little softer than we anticipated and are something to keep an eye on.  But we still think that consumer fundamentals are good and that GDP growth will continue to run modestly above potential over the next couple of years.  Our GDP growth numbers are somewhat stronger than the Tealbook’s, but our basic forecast narratives are quite similar.  However, our estimate for the natural rate of unemployment in 2016 is 4.7 percent, and the labor force participation rate is currently below our estimate of its trend. So our Chicago outlook envisions a bit more resource slack remaining in the economy than the Tealbook does.  We also see less overshooting in potential output later in the projection period. The news on inflation has been a bit encouraging, and like the Tealbook, we’ve nudged up our forecast of core PCE inflation to 1.7 percent this year and see it remaining there in 2017.  I would take more comfort from the higher inflation numbers if we were also seeing better news on inflation expectations.  The recent uptick in TIPS breakevens is a small move in the right direction, but the levels of breakevens and other financial market measures of inflation compensation are still pointing quite loudly toward downside risks.  And the Michigan survey of household inflation expectations has hit a new low.  All in all, we seem to be on a steady-as-you-go tack at the moment, and I’m not seeing any significant changes to economic conditions that alter my views on appropriate policy for tomorrow’s decision or for the near future. I apologize for the brevity of my comments today.  It’s been hard to get my staff to help lately because of late-night World Series games.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply reporting on the mixed reports they have received and their own observations.


Passage number 147.
  [Laughter] MR. TARULLO.  It’s going to end soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a light-hearted comment about something coming to an end soon, which elicits laughter.


Passage number 148.
 MR. EVANS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about a disagreement or contention between individuals or groups.


Passage number 149.
  Well— MR. TARULLO.  One way or the other.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It consists of brief and polite remarks between speakers.


Passage number 150.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Incoming intermeeting data seem to be consistent with the regime-based view of the state of the U.S. and Eighth District economies.  The regime is characterized by relatively slow real GDP growth at 2 percent per year; stable unemployment, which remains in the 4½ to 5 percent range over the forecast horizon; and an inflation forecast roughly centered on the Committee’s inflation target of 2 percent.  That is, looking at a chart, once uncertainty is taken into account, it would look like 2 percent is roughly in the middle of the probability distribution for the forecast.  You could look at panels 7 and 8 on the U.S. outlook, which were just handed out, to see examples of that. District contacts emphasized a relatively weak agribusiness sector, along with weakness in some heavy manufacturing.  Some contacts at large firms stressed that slow growth and low interest rates would continue to make mergers and acquisitions the top business strategy for the future.  Housing market contacts reported relatively strong results.  District labor markets appear to have outperformed national labor markets in recent months.  Commentary from the health-care sector was mixed. Nationally, the third-quarter real GDP estimate of 2.9 percent was about as expected, according to tracking estimates on the eve of the announcement.  Most tracking estimates for the current quarter are lower.  The median of tracking estimates around the Federal Reserve System is currently about 2.1 percent for Q4.  This means that the real GDP growth rate for the year as a whole will likely be somewhat below 2 percent, perhaps 1.7 or 1.8 percent, once we have all available information.  Many forecasts for 2017 real GDP growth are close to 2 percent.  I regard these available data and forecasts as consistent with a regime of 2 percent growth in real GDP over the forecast horizon, and this is likely the current trend pace of growth for the U.S. economy.  In light of this outlook for real GDP growth, I continue to expect unemployment to remain in the 4½ to 5 percent range over the next several years, and I expect inflation to be centered on the 2 percent target.  I think this outcome can be supported with a policy rate setting only slightly higher than currently. In short, unlike many around the table, I would not interpret the current situation in cyclical terms.  I do not see the current situation changing unless at least one of two things happens: Number one, there is a switch to a higher-productivity-growth rate regime, which would be associated with faster real GDP growth and a higher real rate of return on safe assets; number two, the large liquidity premium associated with safe assets abates and switches to a value more consistent with historical pre-crisis experience, which would also drive the real rate of safe assets higher; or both.  I do not expect either one of these switches to occur over the forecast horizon, but I will keep my eyes open and watch the data carefully.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 151.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data continue to show moderate GDP growth, a healthy pace of labor market tightening, and inflation gradually moving up to 2 percent.  The expected pickup in real GDP growth over the second half of the year seems to be materializing, thanks to the waning effects of oil prices on business investment and an end of the inventory correction.  I expect output growth to continue at about 2 percent in 2017 and productivity growth to remain weak, with reasonably strong job growth continuing as well—inessence, a continuation of the trends that we’ve seen for the past several years.  That does imply significant ongoing labor market tightening. So far this year, that tightening has taken the form of higher participation as the unemployment rate has moved sideways—a welcome development, as it shows that the economy has had a bit more “room to run.”  For the period ahead, I expect that participation will remain about flat, on net, for a while longer or perhaps decline slightly, as that margin of slack has probably been used up, and that job growth will again show through to the unemployment rate, which I expect to decline to the mid-4s over the next year.  It’s worth remembering again that participation has been volatile this year and can move around two- or three-tenths and it can be noise.  If participation had declined as forecast by the Tealbook last December, unemployment would now be 4.3 percent, holding all else equal. Wages have continued their gradual upward climb.  With low inflation and de minimis productivity growth, real wage increases are now quite healthy.  Real unit labor costs have been increasing since early 2014, and this should put some upward pressure on prices. Trailing 12-month core inflation has increased 0.4 percentage point over the past year— now it’s at 1.7 percent—and total inflation is forecast in the Tealbook to reach that level in the first quarter of next year. In the staff narrative, inflation remains at 1.7 percent next year, despite tightening labor markets and the waning of the drags that I mentioned, because of the unwinding of some transitory factors that are temporarily boosting inflation this year.  Overall, inflation has been in line with our forecast for some time, albeit a little higher. The Michigan survey notwithstanding, there does seem to me to be evidence of a change in inflation sentiment, with higher nominal yields, higher market-based inflation compensation, and market chatter about a modest overshoot.  I regard this as a healthy development and hopethat it will be sustained. For me, there is good reason to expect that inflation will continue to move gradually up to 2 percent, with a reasonable likelihood that this will happen faster than in the forecast. While the U.S. economy remains on a healthy track, the global picture remains a source of risk, whether it is excessive credit growth in China or a hard Brexit or weak European banks or just low economic growth and low inflation.  Perhaps with global risks in mind, by a straight read, the market continues to price in only about one rate increase per year, assuming a zero term premium.  Of course, term and risk premiums are probably negative, especially at longer durations.  Even so, markets are clearly pricing in significant risks of low economic growth and inflation outcomes. I’m supportive of allowing a modest undershoot of the natural rate of unemployment. With inflation having run below our 2 percent inflation objective every single month since I joined the Board four and a half years ago, I do not expect to feel alarmed if inflation moves modestly above 2 percent, except in what, in my view, is the the highly unlikely case in which longer-run inflation expectations move up excessively. I believe that this approach may help repair some of the residual labor market damage at little risk to price stability. I have supported a patient approach to policy, and I believe that that approach has paid dividends and continues to do so.  I do also believe, however, that the risks are now becoming more two sided, and more on that tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Powell, is presenting his analysis and expectations for the economy, inflation, and labor market. He mentions some potential risks but does not express any disagreement with the information or views presented.


Passage number 152.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My presentation will be divided into three unequal parts—the labor market, inflation, and economic growth—and if much of what I have tosay induces a sense of déjà vu, I plead guilty, for the economic situation and the key economic issues have not changed by much since our September decision. First, the labor market.  Nonfarm payroll employment has been continuing to grow at a good pace, averaging 178,000 per month so far this year.  There’s been one interesting development with respect to the employment data since our September meeting.  The headlines about the 151,000 estimated net new hires in August were distinctly gloomy.  Those about the 156,000 estimate of net new hires in September were neutral to positive, so much so that I was asked in an interview in mid-September whether the economy was now in a “Goldilocks” situation. I was tempted to answer “yes,” with the proviso that Goldilocks isn’t what he or she used to be [laughter], but instead switched the topic to the slow growth rate of GDP. It’s not clear why public reactions to almost identical data between September and October were different, but whatever the reason, we need to emphasize that the rate of hiring required to prevent the unemployment rate from rising depends on changes in the participation rate, and that staff estimates of the required rate of hiring range between 75,000 and 150,000.  Otherwise, we would be faced with unnecessary public and market disappointment about numbers that could, in fact, be fully consistent with the continuation of the strong performance of the labor market. Over the course of the past two years, we’ve been concerned about the effect of a variety of negative shocks on the U.S. economy, including the Chinese devaluation, the market turbulence in the first six weeks of this year, the May pothole, Brexit, and more.  U.S. employment has resumed robust growth after each temporary slowdown.  This has been, and continues to be, a powerful recovery in terms of one of our two main targets: employment.  Second, inflation.  We’ve not heard many complaints about the low rate of inflation from the general public.  The 2 percent inflation target was set originally as a tradeoff between the many costs of positive inflation and the increased efficiency of reallocation in the labor market that a moderate rate of inflation makes possible.  I do not recall that the costs associated with the greater probability of being at the ELB with a low rate of inflation was taken into account at the time.  It was the early and mid-1990s when the 2 percent inflation target started becoming the received wisdom. The core rate of PCE inflation has been increasing—slowly, to be sure—and is now close to our 2 percent target.  In view of the imprecision of our estimates of the optimal rate of inflation, we should be happy to be as close to the target as we are, particularly when the Phillips curve appears to be so flat.  The CPI rate of core inflation has been above 2 percent, but that is not the inflation rate we target, even if it is the rate of inflation with which the public is most familiar. Further, the rate of nominal wage increase has been rising—an indication that the Phillips curve lives, if not with the same vigor as it has in the past.  On balance, I believe we are close to meeting our inflation target. Let me discuss a few other aspects of the inflation target. One is the argument that because we set 2 percent as our target, that’s the number we have to hit if we are to remain credible.  I give this argument some weight, though I do not believe we need to hit precisely 2 percent, and I believe that the public and the markets will treat small divergences both above and below 2 percent as consistent with our being credible. Taking into consideration the wide confidence interval associated with the economic costs of diverging from the 2 percent target, I still believe it would have been better to define an optimal range for the inflation rate, possibly 1.5 to 2.5 percent, rather than an optimal point estimate.   Finally, on inflation, the jury is still out on whether there’s been a permanent downward revision in the level of r*, something that’s extremely difficult to predict, for the future is long and the standard deviation of r* is large. However, as we’ve been saying, if r* remains low for a relatively long time, monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB during that period more frequently than in the past. Should we, therefore, raise the target inflation rate.  Well, of course, the optimal rate of inflation is an area of active research and debate.  But actually changing the target rate is a serious matter not to be entered into lightly.  There are welfare costs associated with higher inflation, especially the advent of more widespread indexation, which kicks in at a relatively low rate of inflation.  There is, further, the credibility cost of changing the target inflation rate, something that done once becomes a permanent credibility-reducing part of history.  If such a step were nevertheless taken, it should include a formal mechanism for dealing with future changes in the target rate—for instance, the mechanism used by Canada in which the inflation target can, in principle, be reset every five years. All this is to say that core PCE inflation is, indeed, approaching the 2 percent level, that real wages are rising more rapidly than earlier in the post–Great Recession period, and that we need to think very hard before changing the monetary framework to solve a problem that is likely to be solved within a year or two without changing the inflation target. Third, economic growth.  Here I need to mention that I support everything that President Mester said about what happened at her directors’ meeting because I was there, and I was greatly struck by the fact that almost everyone there was complaining about some aspect of information technology.  There were the people who were in the automobile industry who were petrified   about driverless cars.  There were guys in the retail industry who were petrified about Amazon, which was building some huge depot in—was it in Cleveland or in Pittsburgh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply presents information and his own beliefs about the labor market, inflation, and economic growth.


Passage number 153.
 MS. MESTER. In Cleveland.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot provide an answer as the passage is incomplete.


Passage number 154.
 MR. FISCHER.  In Cleveland, and that was going to put them all out of business.  And they said, “There are no more malls being built. All you have are strip malls.”  There have been only three malls built in the United States since the Great Recession, and that’s a result of the revolution that’s taking place in the retailing industry.  So I really began to wonder whether there’s something going on slowly in the background, and whether we’re sort of close to the 1990s solum line when a lot of thing are happening, but we’re not seeing much effect of them at this stage, and maybe it could happen later.  Thank you for the visit.  It was very interesting. Now, on economic growth, with a first estimate of third-quarter growth at 2.9 percent, it’s tempting to say that the period of very slow growth and negative productivity growth from which we’ve been suffering for several quarters should no longer be relevant to our thinking about the growth of the economy in the next few years.  That’s especially so, because the 2.9 percent real GDP growth was probably accompanied by positive productivity growth, and that estimated productivity growth could soon return to the 1¼ percent rate that the staff now regards as its long-run level.  Well, those could be the directions in which data on, and expectations of, growth will move in the next quarter or two, but the data of one quarter do not make a trend.  Tealbook A forecasts that total labor productivity will increase at a rate of 1.1 percent in 2017 and 2018 and 1.2 percent in 2019. We’ll have to wait and see whether that’s what happens—namely, whether productivity over the next few years will grow at a rate close to 1.1 percent or possibly even a little higher.  And as we wait to see whether productivity growth increases, we’ll need to monitor the situation closely, to look at the details of growth, and be prepared to change policy in  either direction should that become necessary. If productivity growth, in fact, increases, we’ll have to remember the standard warning that the IMF dispenses when things are going well: Complacency must be avoided.  But, truth to tell, the FOMC is a committee that shows few signs of succumbing to the disease of complacency.  [Laughter] The slow growth of the economy since the Great Recession is due mainly to the extremely low rate of productivity growth, for which the low rate of physical investment, despite the near-zero short-term interest rate, bears the significant share of the responsibility. But there’s not much that we in the Federal Reserve can do that directly affects productivity growth except to maintain conditions conducive to investment and productivity growth—which one thought were low interest rates—by giving confidence to investors in the stability of the economy, especially the stability of the financial system, and by continuing to support the excellent research on productivity growth of several of our Federal Reserve economists. Now, each of us probably asks herself or himself from time to time why the outstanding employment performance of the economy in the period since the fall of Lehman Brothers and the essential role of the Federal Reserve in producing that result are so underappreciated. Well, almost certainly, the slow rate of real GDP growth during that period and the phenomena that indicate animal spirits are low are both important factors in this regard. For some time, answers to two questions in public opinion surveys have presented an interesting contrast.  Asked whether they’re satisfied or dissatisfied about the way things are going or similar questions, a large majority of the public is dissatisfied.  Yet University of Michigan and Conference Board consumer satisfaction polls say that Americans are just as happy or optimistic as they were before the Great Recession.  Ben Bernanke took up this contrast in a June blog and Alan Blinder wrote about it in an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal on October 25.  Ben concluded—and here Iquote Alan Blinder’s article that agrees with Ben—that it “might be the increasingly shrill, partisan nature of our politics, not the state of the economy” that has so disappointed Americans, or, as the headline to Alan Blinder’s article says, “It’s Not the Economy, Stupid.  It’s the Political Gridlock.”  All that is by way of suggesting that people don’t feel as bad about the economy as many, certainly including me, have for some time felt that they do.  Thank you, and more tomorrow. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of statements and observations made by the speaker.


Passage number 155.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the intermeeting period, overall economic activity in the Third District continues to be a bit sluggish, with economic growth a bit below trend.  Job growth continues to lag the nation, with year-over-year employment growth at a mere 0.4 percent in September, less than half that of the nation.  The unemployment rateremained at 5.5 percent, a full ½ percent higher than a year ago.  That said, the region’s higher unemployment rate is largely due to higher labor force participation than the nation as a whole, and almost all of the increase in regional unemployment has occurred in Pennsylvania.  In addition, the sectors facing the stiffest challenges remain mining and drilling in the Marcellus shale region, and job growth remains somewhat weak in manufacturing. Our region’s relatively weak labor market is reflected in our state coincident indexes that, with the exception of Delaware, are measurably less robust than the national average.  For example, over the 12 months ending in September, Pennsylvania’s coincident index increased 1.6 percent, compared with a 2.9 percent increase for the nation as a whole. Manufacturing activity, however, appears to be on a slight upward trend, with October’s general activity index in our Business Outlook Survey remaining in positive territory for the third straight month.  At 9.7 in October, the index is exactly at its nonrecessionary average.  Both the new orders and shipments indexes are now in positive territory as well, but employment has yet to show signs of picking up.  Survey respondents remain upbeat, with all of the forward-looking indexes showing substantial optimism. Now, while we’re not generally seeing strong growth in the region, a few areas of the District are doing modestly well.  One such area is auto sales, which are holding up at high levels, and the value of residential construction continues at a pace that is somewhat stronger than earlier in the year. Permits are also up, but that increase is largely due to, again, the multifamily sector of the market.  Unlike the nation, we have yet to see any firming in single-family permits.  Additionally, nonresidential construction has weakened a bit recently, and, like the nation, we are seeing less strength in our retail sector.  Regarding Third District consumers, the pace of activity has diminished somewhat, which was reflected in the general activity index   in our nonmanufacturing survey remaining slightly below its nonrecessionary average.  But consumer confidence remains high and retailers continue to be optimistic. Overall, the Third District is seeing, and should continue to see, steady if unspectacular economic growth, and contacts remain upbeat about the future. Turning to the nation as a whole, we appear to have gotten the bounceback in third-quarter activity that most of us were expecting, but the details were a bit weaker than the headline number, with growth in final sales not particularly robust.  I find little to disagree with in the Tealbook forecast, although I anticipate a bit more slowing in employment growth and a bit more of a pickup in inflation. Basically, I see the current unemployment rate at about its natural rate, and economic fundamentals are in line with continued consumption growth.  And I agree with the staff that growth in investment may turn positive.  But it could remain at troubling low levels.  My main worry remains the lack of productivity growth, as others have mentioned, without which it will be difficult to maintain our economic momentum. Overall, conditions remain consistent with a rate move this year, but I’ll return to that thought tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a report on the economic conditions in the Third District and the nation as a whole, without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 156.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The 10th District economy continues to feel the effects of last year’s decline in energy and agricultural commodity prices.  Job growth is modest or slipping in all of our states except Colorado, and unemployment in Oklahoma and Wyoming is now 1 full percentage point higher than a year ago.  Tax revenues also continue to worsen in most District states, creating the potential for future drags on state and local government spending.  Construction has slowed in the region, but office vacancies and the inventory of unsold homes remain low, and mortgage delinquencies in energy states have not  shown any concerning increase.  Agricultural commodity prices also remain low and have continued to weigh on farm income, farm spending, and economic activity in rural parts of the District. On the positive side, consumer spending is rising in most District states, and capital spending plans have improved moderately outside of the ag sector.  Our manufacturing survey posted its second consecutive expansionary reading in October, the first back-to-back increase in almost two years, due in part to a somewhat brighter outlook in the energy sector. Current oil prices are around the level firms say they need, on average, to be profitable, and energy firms in our region have continued to modestly increase drilling activity and are planning further expansion in 2017. My outlook for the national economy is little changed since September.  I continue to expect a moderate pace of economic growth led by consumer spending.  Business fixed investment is also likely to begin making a modest contribution to output growth, as the recent rise in energy prices support new drilling activities, with additional oil rigs contributing to investment in structures.  Recent data on shipments and orders for core capital goods also suggest some gains in equipment investment. Labor markets appear well positioned to support consumer-led growth.  Nonfarm payrolls have grown, resulting in nearly 2.5 million new jobs on net.  Nominal wage growth has picked up this year, with the Atlanta Fed Wage Growth Tracker indicating median wage growth above 3 percent for all of 2016 and accelerating in recent months.  Most recently, it nearly matches the pace of wage gains at the peak of the last expansion.  Perhaps most encouraging is that the labor force has increased by 3 million since September 2015, which is the strongest growth in the labor force since 2000.  This solid growth in the labor force over the past year is a welcome   development.  But as Governor Tarullo highlighted, the increase in the labor force does not reflect a strong pull of workers from the sidelines into the labor market. In fact, the number of labor market entrants has slowed from 6.7 million in September 2015 to 6½ million entrants in September of this year. On the other hand, the number of people exiting the labor force over the past year has declined substantially.  Over the past year, the number of workers exiting has fallen from 6.6 million to 6.2 million.  Therefore, the growth in the labor force largely reflects slowing in outflows of workers rather than an increase in the flow of workers coming in from the sidelines.  The decline in exits suggests workers are now more attached to the labor force compared with earlier years in the recovery. Finally, I see inflation advancing toward the 2 percent goal, supported by higher energy prices.  Headline inflation increased at an annual rate of 2.1 percent over the past six months compared with 1.3 percent over the past 12 months.  Market-based measures of inflation compensation have increased, as have flows into investments offering inflation protection. Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 157.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The narrative on which I would premise a near-term increase in the policy rate anticipates GDP growth in the neighborhood of 2 percent for the medium term.  This modest pace of growth ought to be sufficient to absorb any remaining slack in labor markets and provide support for nudging inflation up to target.  I believe my outlook is in the mainstream of this Committee, and it is broadly consistent with the forecast presented in this meeting’s Tealbook. Although Friday’s third-quarter GDP report carried mixed messages, the top-line number in last week’s GDP report was in line with my expectation of a stronger second half.  The uneven  composition of growth was attention getting, but Friday’s GDP report did not set off any alarm bells, in my estimation. I would say that, overall, I’m satisfied the economy remains on narrative. The third-quarter personal consumption number was soft but on the heels of second-quarter strength.  Consumer-savvy contacts in my District reported for the most part that consumer spending continues to grow at a moderate pace.  Most expect flat-to-slightly-higher holiday sales.  One contact offered that consumers are tending to make their purchases later in the holiday shopping season, the implication being that we may not know much about holiday sales results until rather late in December.  Translating to the Committee’s concerns, we may not have much of a read on fourth-quarter spending at our December meeting. It’s widely recognized that online retailers are experiencing strong sales at the expense of their mostly brick-and-mortar competitors. In response to this trend, our director from a large global package delivery company reported adding a record number of new jumbo jet aircraft to the company’s fleet and aggressively expanding its number of facilities.  This encouraging business investment report was in contrast, however, to most of what we heard over the past few weeks.  Business investment continues to be soft, particularly in the bellwether equipment spending category.  Most reports confirm the signal coming from the data. Regarding net exports, we did not pick up in our interviews this cycle any expectation of ongoing strength in exports.  I think Friday’s result is best interpreted as a one-off quarter of better numbers, not a trend.  The soybean factor was apparently decisive.  I’m looking for a headline:  “Export Report Full of Beans.” [Laughter] Our District soundings for unemployment and labor market conditions continue to be suggestive of a tightening market, and businesses still report little in the way of pricing power. I consider the risks to be balanced, and, to summarize, neither our interpretation of the incoming data nor the economic intelligence collected in my District have challenged my basic narrative enough to reconsider a policy move at this or the next meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Lockhart presents his outlook on the economy and acknowledges some mixed messages in the data but does not indicate any disagreement with other members of the committee or any contention.


Passage number 158.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The last supper.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "The last supper" is not a statement or argument that contains assertions or positions that could be disputed or cause disagreement. It is simply the name given to a well-known event in Christian tradition.


Passage number 159.
 [Laughter] MR. LACKER. “For some time”. CHAIR YELLEN. “An extended period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The exchange of words seems to be light-hearted as indicated by the use of "[Laughter]" before Mr. Lacker's statement.


Passage number 160.
” [Laughter] MR. LACKER. I appreciate it—thanks.  I knew there was some guidance there.  CHAIR YELLEN.  It won’t be as long as “extended period” turned out to be.  We’re hoping for sooner.  We will reassemble tomorrow at 9:00. [Meeting recessed]November 2 Session CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  Let’s get started.  I first want to call on Eric Engen for a brief report on this morning’s data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of individuals expressing appreciation and making plans for a future meeting.


Passage number 161.
 MR. ENGEN. Thank you.  This morning ADP, in its employment report, estimated that private-sector employment increased 147,000 in October.  That was very close to our Tealbook forecast of a gain of 150,000, which includes an effect of Hurricane Matthew of minus 10,000, as the hurricane hit during the reference week.  So the ADP report is very much in line with what we’re expecting will come out on Friday for private-sector employment. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let me now turn things over to Thomas for a monetary policy briefing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the ADP employment report and the Tealbook forecast.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 162.
  MR. EVANS.  I have a question, Thomas.  It has to do with the way you described the uncertainty bands relative to the higher labor costs.  I heard you comment about how the red line was within the 70 percent confidence bands.  I think this is an important question for any future discussion we might have about including error bands associated with our projections.  My concern is, it’s so easy to glibly say, “Oh, here’s a path.  It falls within this band.”  And whether you say it or not, it leaves the listener with the impression that there’s not really a significant difference between these.  The validity of the bands, unless you’re doing something different than I’m familiar with, is point by point by point.  So it’s only for one particular hypothesis that it’s actually correct. I think, in my experience in doing some of these research tabulations of things that sort of fit within an error band, if you have a composite hypothesis like the average response or the discrepancy over four different periods, the tabulations might well end up being something significantly different  Do you have any comments on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Evans raises concerns about the way Thomas described the uncertainty bands and questions their validity. He argues that simply stating that a path falls within a certain band can give the impression that there is not a significant difference between the projected outcomes. Mr. Evans also suggests that when dealing with composite hypotheses, the tabulations within the error band might end up being significantly different. This shows a disagreement or contention between the two individuals regarding the interpretation and reliability of the uncertainty bands.


Passage number 163.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I have no objection to that statement at all.  I think it is completely right.  All I wanted to indicate is our limited ability to actually forecast inflation with precision at such a horizon.  Therefore, it’s really a statement about whether can we rule that out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Laubach agrees with the statement and is simply emphasizing the limited ability to forecast inflation accurately.


Passage number 164.
 MR. EVANS.  Right.  I know you’re aware of that, and I think I raise it in part because I don’t know exactly how likely this particular experiment is without additional tabulations.  But if we’re contemplating providing bands, I think we need to understand the kinds of statements that we could have firmer confidence in and ones in which we are not quite so sure.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Evans is asking for additional information and Chairman Yellen acknowledges his point.


Passage number 165.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is not providing any information or opinion that can be disputed or create disagreement. It is simply an abbreviation, "MR," which does not have a clear meaning or context on its own.


Passage number 166.
 WILLIAMS.  I have a question on the last bullet point in the lower-left box.  I just don’t know what the literature tells us about this last bullet point.  This is “Rise in longer-term yields could be associated with dollar appreciation.”  I do know that there is a literature that says that if inflation is above expectations, that will cause a reassessment in the market of the future path of interest rates, and that usually, even after you work it all through, it will indicate an appreciation of the currency.  I think there is some literature on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are unsure about the specific literature regarding the last bullet point, but they do mention that there is literature supporting the idea that higher inflation can lead to a currency appreciation.


Passage number 167.
 MR. LAUBACH. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 168.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 169.
 WILLIAMS.  So that’s a clean example.  But what you’re doing here is layering on an additional factor, that somehow the term premium today is at an unusually low level, which might, in addition to or as part of this response, move up quite a bit.  My question is, first of all, what’s the empirical evidence on that. And, second of all, would an increase in the term premium on longer-term yields, like the 10-year yield, due to fears of higher inflation actually cause an appreciation or a depreciation of the dollar.  That last bit isn’t as obvious to me as it seems to be stated here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 170.
 MR. KAMIN.  I have something quick.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kamin, states that he has something quick to say, but there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 171.
 MR. LAUBACH.  I apologize for creating work for Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the apologetic tone used by Mr. Laubach and the acknowledgement of creating work for Steve without any objections or negative response from Steve.


Passage number 172.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR" as it is only two letters and does not provide any context for an argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 173.
 WILLIAMS.  It’s just a factual question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply stating that the question being asked is a factual one. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 174.
 MR. LAUBACH.  Why don’t you go first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the other person should go first.


Passage number 175.
 MR. KAMIN.  Well, let’s put it this way.  I actually share some of your curiosity about this issue. In principle, of course, if you have an increase in yields that reflects an increase in expected interest rates, that should have a standard effect of appreciating the currency  When you have a change in the term premium, I think it’s logical to expect a different effect.  Because that increase in the term premium in some sense reflects people being less happy to hold the asset, you could imagine that that would actually depreciate the currency.  But, looking at it from the other side, you could also imagine that by reducing the price of the bonds, the increase in the  term premium basically encourages some portfolio shift into those assets that again raises the dollar. As far as the empirics go, this is actually a topic of active investigation right now, and there are different ways to slice it. One approach is to look at the effect of both, let’s say, shorter-term yields and longer-term yields on the dollar, with the assumption that the longer-term yields hold more term premium in them.  And at least one study finds very mixed results, looking at different actions of central banks.  It’s all over the map in terms of which of those affects their currency the most. Another approach that we’ve been taking is to try to use actual term structure models to look at central bank actions and figure out how much of the resultant change in interest rates after these events reflects the changes in expected rates and changes in term premiums.  Some initial results we found for the Federal Reserve suggest that the expected rate part affects the dollar more than the term premium part, but that’s pretty preliminary. But I think the bottom line is that both of those do boost the dollar.  So the term premium seems to go in the same direction as expected rates.  Whether it has more of an effect or less seems to be still a matter of research.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 176.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 177.
 WILLIAMS. Thanks.  That’s helpful. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement between Williams and Chair Yellen. Williams expresses gratitude for the information provided by Yellen and there is no indication of any disagreement in their exchange.


Passage number 178.
 MR. LACKER.  Thomas, you noted that these estimates use the internal measure of labor utilization from Laubach–Williams. What is the internal measure of labor utilization—I mean numerically—right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There isn't any contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Lacker is simply asking for clarification about the internal measure of labor utilization.


Passage number 179.
 MR. LAUBACH. Yes.  First of all, it’s resource utilization. We estimate a GDP gap; we don’t have a granular labor market. There’s no unemployment rate, for example, in here.  Right now, the estimate from our model for the output gap stands at about 1½ percent.  One key thingto understand why the gap stays so flat once you add the SEP forecasts is that the Laubach– Williams estimate of the trend rate of potential GDP growth at this point is about 2¼ percent. So that means that if the median SEP forecast comes to pass, in fact, the output gap edges down a little bit. It does not rise over the projection period. That’s a key part.  At that level, there is a tension here between this model’s view of the world and the SEP medians’ view of the world.  So what I would like to focus on is basically just the revision in the r* estimate, because that’s an apples-to-apples comparison.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining different estimates and forecasting methods related to resource utilization and the output gap.


Passage number 180.
 MR. LACKER. I guess I was also interested in this broader question about r* estimates and whether placing weight on the Laubach–Williams r* should also cause one to place weight on their estimate of the gap and trend growth.  Is that a corollary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about the relationship between r* estimates and the gap and trend growth estimates.


Passage number 181.
 MR. LAUBACH. Obviously, these things are estimated with a fair dose of uncertainty.  So I think, statistically, it’s quite hard to make a strong deduction about whether the output gap now is zero or 1 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges the uncertainty and difficulty in making a strong deduction about the output gap.


Passage number 182.
 MR. LACKER.  Okay.  Thanks. CHAIR YELLEN. Are there other questions for Thomas.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers seem to be having a regular conversation about questions for Thomas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 183.
 MR. KAPLAN.  I’ll ask one very basic question.  I could see why higher expected GDP growth would raise the term premium, because higher prospective growth might—to me, would—steepen the yield curve.  In your work, you’re saying that even higher inflation not accompanied by higher prospective GDP growth might raise the term premium.  And I just want to hear a little bit more about why you would assert that, as opposed to raising the level of the entire curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Kaplan is questioning or challenging the assertion that higher inflation, without higher prospective GDP growth, would raise the term premium. He is seeking more information or explanation for this assertion.


Passage number 184.
 MR. LAUBACH. Yes.  One line of logic is suggested by what’s known as consumption-based asset pricing models.  Effectively, you can think about in which circumstances do nominal long-term assets have high payoffs and whether these are circumstances when you value these payoffs most.  So it’s basically an insurance or hedge property.  In a time when you are very concerned about negative surprises about inflation, combined potentially with monetary policy becoming constrained again by the effective lower bound in a period of economic weakness, that would depress the term premium because it would raise demand for these assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply explaining one line of logic suggested by consumption-based asset pricing models.


Passage number 185.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Okay, got it.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN. Are there any further questions.  [No response]  Okay.  Why don’t we begin our policy round.  President Rosengren.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The interaction between Mr. Kaplan and Chair Yellen is respectful and there is no indication of any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 186.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair. While I would have preferred to move at the September meeting and I would have gladly supported a move at this meeting, I’m willing to support alternative B today.  I am comforted that market expectations and the statement are clearly consistent with moving in December unless incoming data dramatically change our forecast.  Had the statement not been consistent with a high likelihood of moving in December, I would not have been able to support alternative B. Because of the slow pace of increases to date, we have the luxury of waiting for a press conference meeting, because a six-week delay under current conditions is unlikely to be particularly costly. No econometric model would argue that moving at the beginning of November rather than the middle of December would make a significant economic difference. However, that does not imply that deferring much beyond this meeting would be without costs.  At the previous meeting, I suggested that there were potential costs to waiting too long to raise rates, and that moving gradually may be possible only if we do not get too far “behind the curve.”   Furthermore, my modal forecast indicates that we risk plunging past full employment rather than gently probing for the natural rate unless we adopt a higher funds rate path than is currently assumed by the market.  This, in turn, implies a significant risk that, the longer we delay raising rates, the steeper the federal funds rate path will have to be and the more likely that financial markets will overreact to the surprise relative to their expectations. Moreover, the further we fall below the natural rate, the higher is the probability that our attempts to get back to full employment will entail a more severe slowdown than we expect.  Such a course for policy may thus be much riskier for the economy than a more gradual path that begins sooner.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Williams.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their willingness to support alternative B and discussing their views on the timing of rate increases.


Passage number 187.
 MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the provided passage.


Passage number 188.
 WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  At the risk of sounding like a broken record, I favor alternative C.  Economic conditions are ideal for a rate increase.  The employment and inflation data have been consistent with our forecasts, financial markets are tranquil, and we’re already very close to full employment and on a trajectory to overshoot that mandate.  Both employment and output growth have been well above trend. Our past decisions to delay tightening have relied on the low pace of inflation, but there are signs that the tide is turning.  The effects of past dollar appreciation and the drop in oil prices have dissipated.  Indeed, energy prices have now turned around and are trending up.  Furthermore, evidence of increased wage pressure is more apparent.  This suggests that there’s not much more room to run in the labor market. Now, several years ago, Chair Yellen compared the state of the economy to a car driving from coast to coast.  She used metaphors like “We’re about in Kansas now” to convey that, although we’d made a lot of progress, the recovery was far from complete.  In terms of our dual-   mandate goals today, the Long Island Sound is now in sight.  [Laughter]  That contrasts starkly with the stance of policy, for which we seem to have run out of gas somewhere outside of Reno, Nevada.  The current economic situation favors tightening, and our policy stance has over time built up considerable insurance against unforeseen risks to the downside.  And, of course, should we encounter surprises to the downside, those can be offset through normal adjustments in our policy rate. Given that alternative C is not the decision the Committee is taking today, the language in alternative B does a very good job of acknowledging our progress to date and leaves conditions proximate to warranting renewed policy normalization. Now, the last comment I’ll make is, President Kashkari yesterday brought up the issue— and his remarks were partially addressed to me, I felt—of, how can one both be for gradual policy normalization and have a view of very low r* and concerns about our long-run policy framework. And it’s a question I’ve been asked a lot, so let me just very briefly comment on that. First of all, I think President Rosengren laid out the argument just a minute ago—that is, under our current policy framework, which the Committee has agreed on and has reiterated every January, we have a 2 percent inflation objective with a balanced approach to our dual-mandate goals.  That’s the strategy we’ve agreed to, and the one that we are making decisions on how to execute—whether we should raise rates or not.  As President Rosengren explained—and I agree 100 percent with what he said—in that context, how do we best achieve what I would think of as sustainable maximum employment.  If we allow the economy to overshoot full employment by too much for too long, I think that does create greater risks of a reversal through different possible mechanisms, including the one President Rosengren just laid out—that by, in a sense, going for too low of unemployment, we basically undermine the sustainability of the economicexpansion to the harm of achieving our maximum-employment and inflation goals. So I agree completely with Chair Yellen’s characterization—that we want to run a moderately hot economy for some time.  That will help us get inflation back to 2 percent quicker, and that’s consistent with our strategy.  But I just worry that if we try to go too far on running a hot economy too hot for too long, it creates some of the risks that President Rosengren laid out. So I just think, in terms of balancing the risks, a gradual path of policy increases makes sense. I do think that we should be having a serious discussion of the strategy, which I think of as different than the tactical or execution decisions we’re making about whether we should raise rates or not.  I think we should have that discussion, and we should involve a lot of experts and economists and others in thinking through this over time.  That discussion should eventually lead to a decision by the Committee and to a communication of that decision.  Then that might imply different policy decisions in the future.  But until that discussion has happened and until whatever decisions come out of it, I think it’s important for us to execute on the policy strategy we have laid out.  I don’t think, through our tactical decisions about whether to raise rates in December or not or in September or not, we’re really addressing at all these longer-run issues that I’m raising.  I mean, I don’t think those are really related to that.  The longer-run issues are, to me, not just about raising rates or not.  They’re really more about thinking about what our strategy is and how we communicate that strategy, and then from that follows the actual policy decision.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Williams is expressing his opinion and providing analysis on the current economic conditions and the appropriate stance of policy. There is no clear disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 189.
 MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I don’t think it makes sense to change the interest rate this month.  There’s such a great deal of uncertainty about future nonmonetary   economic policies.  That degree of uncertainty will probably, but not certainly, be reduced by the time of our next meeting, and we should therefore not change the interest rate at this meeting. Our Committee has been extremely cautious about raising the federal funds rate during the period since 2009.  That’s an understatement.  Two arguments have carried the day.  The first is that we should not raise the rate, because we could soon be forced to reduce it and return to the effective lower bound, thereby suffering a loss of credibility.  The second is that there’s very little difference between making the decision at this FOMC meeting and making it at a subsequent meeting. With regard to the credibility loss of having to return to the ELB, we need to weigh the expectation of that possible loss against the potential credibility loss of hesitating too long.  The argument I’ve made is liable to be countered by the statement that it’s only because we kept the interest rate so low for so long that the U.S. economy has performed so well since 2009.  I do not disagree with that point, except at the margins.  It remains to be shown that the performance of the economy would have been significantly worse with an interest rate path that was now 50 or so basis points above the path that actually obtained—and thus 50 basis points or two interest rate decisions further away from the ELB. We need to consider the possibility that our superlow interest rates have encouraged financial transactions, particularly mergers and acquisitions and stock buybacks, as much as they have encouraged physical investment.  We have been sending a message that says the U.S. economy still requires the support of superlow interest rates to keep itself growing, even at the moderate 2 percent rate to which we’ve gradually become accustomed.  I do not believe that to be the case, for, as I argued yesterday, the recovery of employment has been powerful, and I should have added that it’s been robust.  I do not believe that maintaining the federal funds rate  so close to the ELB for so long sends the right message to potential investors and others facing intertemporal decisions in the economy.  And I do believe we should very soon take the second step on our gradual path away from the ELB and toward normalization. Finally, as we look to our December decision, we will be navigating treacherous waters.  When we make our decision in December, we should be looking ahead and choosing an interest rate that reflects our expectations of future economic policies and of the future state of the economy.  Those expectations will and should reflect our expectations of the nonmonetary economic policies that will be followed in 2017 and later. Are we, therefore, going to be making decisions that reflect our political preferences.  Absolutely not.  As the Chair has emphasized, we will be making decisions that the Committee believes, on the basis of its professional judgments, are in the best interests of the United States.  I’m confident we’ll continue to follow that principle, as is both our legal obligation and our standard practice.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It consists mainly of the speaker's opinion and reasoning about whether or not to change the interest rate.


Passage number 190.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My medium-run outlook is unchanged since our September meeting, and I continue to support alternative C, on the basis of realized and projected progress on our dual-mandate goals. Labor market conditions continue to strengthen, the unemployment rate is at its longer-run level, and labor force participation is at or above trend.  The economy is essentially at full employment from the standpoint of what can be achieved using monetary policy.  The unemployment rate is projected to fall below its longer-run level over the next two years, suggesting that the labor market will continue to strengthen.  Inflation is moving up, and we’re close to our goal.   The risks to the outlook are basically balanced, but they won’t remain that way if we fail to remember a lesson from history—that policy should be forward looking.  Various forecasts, optimal control exercises, and our own statements indicate that, to promote our longer-run policy goals, it’s appropriate that we gradually increase the federal funds rate from its current low level. The path anticipated is quite gradual.  This will allow monetary policy to remain accommodative for some time to come, lending support to the economic expansion in the period ahead, allowing u to fall below u*, and allowing the Committee to calibrate policy better over time as it learns more about the underlying structural aspects of the economy. I’d be concerned if we started to change our strategy to try to run the economy too hot in an attempt to drive the unemployment rate well below our current estimates of the longer-run rate as a prudent course of action.  In the 1960s and 1970s, when this was tried, it resulted in poor economic outcomes.  While there are many differences between today’s economy and the economy back then, I don’t think we should ignore historical episodes that illustrate the risks of trying to use monetary policy to change structural aspects of the economy.  But if we were going to attempt the “hot economy strategy,” then it would behoove us to change our communications.  Such a strategy is inconsistent with a gradual upward path in interest rates.  It would more likely entail a much steeper path once rates began to rise. So in assessing the costs and benefits of our policy actions, I believe it’s appropriate today to take the next step on the gradual policy rate path we have been communicating is the appropriate one.  I realize that I will likely be in the minority today, and that alternative B will win the day.  But I anticipate the Committee will take action in December unless economic conditions come in considerably different than expected.  I believe the language proposed in alternative B is consistent with that anticipated action.  But at the same time, the language  doesn’t pre-commit the Committee to action should the economy evolve in a way that significantly changes our medium-run outlook.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker expresses her support for a specific course of action and acknowledges that she may be in the minority, but does not argue against any alternative views.


Passage number 191.
 MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I’ll vote for alternative B, although the language, particularly as understood in the context of the Chair’s remarks yesterday and what Governor Fischer and Presidents Mester, Rosengren, and Williamshave already said, reflects a higher probability of a rate increase in December than I think likely reflects my own probability of favoring such a move at that time. As I intimated yesterday, my own probability is certainly higher than it has been over the course of most of this year, but it’s still not at 70 percent. I’d like to add a couple of remarks to what I said yesterday. First, I want to reiterate my own conclusion, based on having listened to many of you over the course of several meetings and tried to do some of my own work with the help of the staff here, that I don’t think there’s a particularly compelling case to be cited by either side from history regarding why one has to move now or why it would be okay to wait.  I think, actually, the circumstances are different enough today from what they have been in the past that both sides have something they can cite.  But in the end, this is, as I said yesterday, more an intuition than anything else.  It’s an informed intuition, but it still is, I think, an intuition. Second, yesterday I concentrated on my own search for tangible indicators that the economy was moving to the point at which circumstances arguably called for an increase in the federal funds rate.  I didn’t put as much emphasis on the other consideration I mentioned, which is the balance of risks with respect to adverse outcomes conditional on the path that we eventually take. And, as everyone knows, I and others have been concerned with the so-called asymmetric toolbox—or the range of instruments—we have to respond should the economy   underperform or fall into recession over the near to medium term, as opposed to whether it might run a little bit hotter than anticipated. I have to say that yesterday’s conversation on the implementation framework, which I thought took a welcome diversion to thinking in more general terms about monetary policy, reinforced for me the absence of anything approaching a viable consensus on an efficacious response that we would have if the economy slipped into a recession because of some exogenous shock in the near to medium term. With the yield curve relatively flat now, it seems as though the utility of an additional LSAP would be quite limited—except perhaps in a very substantial amount, which I’m sure would elicit some concerns for other reasons among members of the Committee. I heard yesterday among numerous members of the Committee an aversion to the use of negative rates, the reasons for which I can understand.  But I was left thinking that we really are not particularly well suited to respond should there be—unexpectedly—a recession. And as Eric indicated yesterday, if you just go out a couple of years, the risks of a recession are nontrivial. So that’s still influencing my thinking as well. Having said that, alternative A doesn’t quite capture my views, either.  And I’m not going to propose any changes to the language of alternative B that would make it more compatible with my views, because I’ve already heard enough and I know where everybody else is.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lockhart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Tarullo is expressing his own thoughts and opinions, but he does not appear to be disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 192.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our newer presidents—Harker, Kashkari, and Kaplan—may not be aware that we each have a cumulative word quota for our time on the FOMC.  And my balance is running low, so I support alternative B and the statement as it stands. Thank you, Madam Chair.  [Laughter]  CHAIR YELLEN.  Wow. President Bullard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. Mr. Lockhart is simply stating that he supports alternative B and the statement as it stands. The laughter that follows is likely due to the humor in Mr. Lockhart's comment about word quotas. President Bullard's response is not provided in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 193.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B for today.  In my view, our normalization program is not proceeding as planned.  One rate increase per year and no change in the balance sheet is not meaningful in the macroeconomic sense. I think it’s becoming increasingly apparent that we should de-emphasize the idea of normalization as we go forward.  My basic recommendation is that we should plan to go ahead with a rate increase at the December meeting.  I think that’s necessary at this point to maintain credibility.  But I think we should accompany that move with language that further moves in 2017 are not anticipated, and that the next move is as likely to be a decrease in the policy rate as it is to be an increase in the policy rate. So let me turn to what I see as the problem with our normalization rhetoric.  Policy is mostly about the intended path of policy and not the level of the policy rate today.  Our rhetoric is that we are on the cusp of a 200 basis point or more move upward in the policy rate. Our forecast is for economic growth near 2 percent over the forecast horizon.  In my opinion, this is not meaningfully different from trend, in view of the degree of precision with which we can measure the trend.  Our forecast is also for unemployment near the Committee’s estimate of its longer-run value, and inflation forecasts are generally centered on the Committee’s inflation target.  The general contours of this forecast are very similar whether one is looking at the Tealbook, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Fed forecast, or private-sector forecasts.  What is different about private-sector expectations is the policy rate path, which is very flat in the private-sector view in order to achieve the same forecast outcomes. So let’s take the private-sector perspective for just a moment.  From that perspective, it looks like any surprise in the form of faster output growth, lower-than-expected unemployment, or higher-than-expected inflation will be seen by this Committee as a reason to embark more rapidly on a 200 basis point normalization program.  From the private-sector perspective, this would be inappropriate.  This is like holding a hammer over the economy, as deviations from our forecast expectations will be met very aggressively in the private-sector perception. I think that this is the wrong approach.  With the type of forecast that we currently have and the type of private-sector expectations that we can measure, I think we would do much better to characterize current policy settings as approximately correct, in light of the current state of the economy and its expected trajectory. To conclude, I would say, go ahead for December, but use that moment to realign expectations for 2017 and beyond.  In particular, use the December opportunity to get rid of the perception that we are on the precipice of a major policy rate move.  I just don’t think that that’s an accurate description of the Committee’s intentions.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement with the current normalization program and advocating for a different approach.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 194.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I do believe we’re at the point at which it is appropriate to remove some amount of accommodation.  I would support doing this, if not today, then very soon.  I recommend this in the context of believing that the path of rates over the next few years ought to be very shallow, and the terminal rate is likely to be much lower than we’ve historically experienced. I believe, therefore, that further removals of accommodation should be done very gradually, with an appropriate amount of patience and caution.  I also believe that in the absence of other economic policies, such as infrastructure spending, fiscal policy, and other structural reforms, prospective GDP growth is going to be very sluggish.  This is due to persistent secular headwinds I discussed yesterday that do not appear to be abating. All of this means to me that we can afford to be patient regarding further removals of accommodation.  However, I do believe some amount of removal would be healthy in light of building imbalances I see in terms of the effects on savers as well as the distortions regarding asset allocation and other business decisions.  These imbalances may not only be difficult to ultimately unwind but also have some behavioral effects that, if allowed to persist, could undermine future sustainable economic growth.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Harker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two contrasting viewpoints. Mr. Kaplan argues for removing some accommodation and recommends doing so gradually, while expressing concern about imbalances and the need for caution. On the other hand, President Harker does not express a clear opinion in the given passage.


Passage number 195.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair. Reflecting my view that there remains little to no slack in the labor market and my fairly upbeat outlook for the economy, as well as the persistent gradual progress of inflation moving close to target, I remain committed to the need for a rate hike this year.  Benchmark interest rate rules indicate we are getting behind the historical norm for our interest rate setting. The staff’s projection of how policy will proceed over the forecast horizon is in line with my own, and, adhering to that, very gradual removal of accommodation needs to begin this year. I also share some of President Rosengren’s concerns that our overly accommodative policy may be creating some financial stability concerns.  At this juncture, I tried to ask myself what it would take not to move by year’s end, and I could come up with only some extreme events that are very unlikely.  In view of the timing of this meeting, we should probably wait until December, but it is essential that we communicate that not moving in December would take a rather severe deterioration in our economic outlook. My reading of alternative B is that it comes close to doing that.  So I can support alternative B at this time.  The signal we are sending will, in itself, start the process and will achieve some measure of tightening in financial markets.   So, Brian, please deduct 220 words from my word “Lockhart”—I mean, lockbox.  [Laughter] Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  President Evans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 196.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  I do not think a move today is appropriate.  As I noted yesterday, I think we have to keep an eye out to make sure that the recent softer tone in private domestic final purchases is just part of the typical ebb and flow in the data that we see in an economy growing modestly above trend.  I believe this is the case. With regard to price stability, core PCE inflation has improved somewhat over the past couple of rounds.  I’m pleased to see that the 12-month change has made it up to 1.7 percent for two months in a row.  But, as Governor Fischer said yesterday in a different context, “Good.  Nice job.  But now is not the time for complacency.”  I remain concerned about inflation expectations.  Core inflation has risen 0.3 percentage point since the turn of the year, and total PCE inflation is up about ¾ percentage point.  But instead of firming, household inflation expectations have fallen to new lows, and, even with the slight pickup since our September meeting, TIPS breakevens are still down a touch, 10 basis points, since late last year. Furthermore, futures markets continue to indicate that investors are clearly much more concerned about low-inflation outcomes than they are about above-target inflation.  This lack of improvement in expected inflation weighs heavily on my assessment of appropriate policy. In my opinion, unless core inflation overshoots 2 percent by some amount in this cycle, I don’t believe the Board’s inflation attractor will get back to 2 percent.  And I view that perspective as in line with the long-run strategy that overshooting is consistent with a symmetric inflation objective and trying to get inflation expectations up to 2 percent.  If our primary policy objectivenow is to get core inflation back to 2 percent sooner rather than later after so many years of undershooting, I would not advocate a December rate hike. But the Committee has pretty firmly signaled that a hike is important, relying on inflation confidence.  Our communications have been pointing fairly forcefully to a rate increase sometime this year, unless there was a clear softening in economic activity. In light of this virtual commitment, if economic conditions remain as they are today, the communications and credibility risks of not moving in December would be significant without a very different policy statement and plan.  Hence, I can support the changes in paragraph 3 language that will further validate market expectations for a rate increase in December unless the data strongly object. What about beyond December.  My last SEP submission had three rate increases between now and the end of 2017.  For me, I feel that we should not get ahead of this pace unless we see a marked improvement in the data, particularly in the factors underlying our inflation outlook, and I agree with President Bullard’s viewpoints on that for characterizing 2017. I found it useful in my public speaking to communicate about inflation through the lens of the canonical model the Chair spelled out in her Amherst speech last year.  Basically, the model’s inflation determinants are inertia, slack, transitory factors, and inflation expectations.  I find this breakdown helpful for explaining the overall inflation outlook and how this outlook motivates the rationale for my appropriate policy rate path.  I think this taxonomy also could be a useful tool for the Committee to use to describe more explicitly the economic conditionality governing our moves after December.  Our communications should reinforce that future rate increases will depend on the weight of these factors pointing to attainment of our 2 percent objective sustainably, symmetrically, and sooner rather than later. We should be able to point to data-based signs of improvements in these indicators when we actually do raise rates in 2017, assuming the data are willing.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

This passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is one individual expressing their opinion and providing rationale for their views.


Passage number 197.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  At our September meeting, I argued that the data since the beginning of the year had essentially met our expectations as expressed in the December SEP.  If anything, the real output and productivity data surprised a bit on the low side, and the inflation data have surprised repeatedly on the high side.  Intermeeting events caused us to delay the rate increases that the December SEP had envisioned for this year in order to wait for additional data to confirm that these events would have no material effect on the economy.  Fortunately, they have not, and the data since the September meeting have just strengthened the case for a rate increase. Some Committee members have argued that the data came close to confirming our December projections precisely because we delayed rate increases and pulled down the expected policy rate path.  I don’t find this convincing, however, because the timing isn’t consistent with the conventional views about the lags in the effects of monetary policy. Looking forward to our next meeting, I agree with you, Madam Chair, that some weakness in the upcoming economic data should not stay our hand.  This is especially true when we are in the process of converging to a path with lower trend productivity and employment growth.  The relevant question is whether incoming data are inconsistent with fluctuations around such a lower trend growth path.  As I pointed out yesterday, for example, a payroll employment number as low as 60,000 is compatible with constant unemployment and labor force participation rates.  And, obviously, fluctuations within a typical range surrounding such a path  would not be inconsistent, either.  As a consequence, it should take an exceptionally dismal data flow for us to delay raising rates yet again.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different interpretations of the data and expresses a personal opinion.


Passage number 198.
 MS. GEORGE. Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative C, as I view an increase in the federal funds rate as having been appropriate for some time.  Core PCE inflation is now running at 1.7 percent year over year, and we’re moving past the window when the decline in energy prices has held down headline, as the annualized six-month change in headline PCE inflation is now 2.1 percent.  In addition, labor utilization has increased this year, leaving the labor market near full employment.  Accommodative monetary policy certainly supported achieving these objectives, but leaving the funds rate at its current level raises concerns. Without gradual adjustment, it seems we risk returning to “go-stop” types of policies that can create volatility rather than subdue it. Monetary policy has also, perhaps arguably, become more accommodative this year.  The funds rate has not changed, but we’ve signaled a shallower path of the funds rate and a lower terminal rate, this in the context of roughly full employment and inflation near 2 percent.  In addition, the real rate remains well below measures of the equilibrium real rate. Even with some adjustment to the level of accommodation, I expect to see labor utilization rise above its neutral level, which history shows can end poorly.  I accept as reasonable the arguments that current conditions are different than those of the past.  But this approach sits uneasily with me and, I think, with our statutory objective of effectively promoting maximum employment commensurate with the economy’s longer-run potential to increase production.  Bringing more people into the labor force and having stronger attachment is, of course, a desirable feature of a tighter labor market, but I question its long-run benefit.  Research by Christina Romer and David Romer published in a 1998 Jackson Hole conference volume argues that the cyclical effects of monetary policy on unemployment are inherently temporary.  They conclude that compassionate monetary policy is simply sound monetary policy, policy that aims to keep inflation stable and minimizes output fluctuations. The possible benefits of continuing to let the economy heat up in terms of reversing past supply-side damage are highly uncertain.  Research by my staff has examined the effects of expansionary monetary policy on indicators of the economy’s productive capacity in the pre-crisis period.  Their findings indicate that after a period of expansionary monetary policy, labor productivity tends to rise because of an increase in capital and labor utilization, but it does not have benefits in terms of capital deepening or TFP.  The implication is that the effects are transitory and are consistent with the idea that monetary policy cannot affect the longer-run growth potential of the economy. Overall, as the economy strengthens, I see growing risk associated with a wait-and-see approach and a stronger case for continuing to normalize policy.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Ms. George, clearly supports alternative C and provides reasons for her view. She discusses factors such as inflation, labor utilization, and the impact of monetary policy on the economy. While she acknowledges that there may be arguments for a different approach, she ultimately concludes that continuing to normalize policy is the best course of action.


Passage number 199.
 MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today I will support alternative B as written. In my view, it is fair to say that the economy is not so far from full employment and is making reasonable progress toward 2 percent inflation.  Nonetheless, other features of the landscape have also weighed in my thinking, including uncertainty about the natural rate of unemployment, the presence of pockets of slack in the labor market, inflation running persistently below target for a long time, inflation expectations at low levels, a weak and threatening global economy, adollar highly sensitive to expectations about U.S. policy, and a constrained scope for further easing at the effective lower bound. So, with all of that background, the Committee’s patient approach has, in my view, been the right one, and that patience has paid dividends and continues to do so.  There has seemed to me to be little risk of falling “behind the curve” and plenty of reason to move cautiously.  To say it differently, I’ve seen the risks for policy as clearly one-sided. But, as the economic outlook continues to slowly improve, the risks facing monetary policy are also gradually shifting.  Today, with job growth continuing at a healthy pace, pockets of slack being gradually used up, and positive news on inflation, I think the risks are beginning to become more two-sided.  For example, if measured labor force participation ticks down again, then the unemployment rate could quickly fall well below 5 percent, suggesting less “room to run.”  And the volatility in labor force participation measurement this year and over the years suggests that current measurements could be transitorily high.  Time will tell. On inflation, I expect to see inflation move gradually up to 2 percent in the near term, and I see some risk that both headline and core could move up faster than expected. The recent rise in inflation compensation and flows into TIPS suggests that some investors are coming to the same conclusion.  Of course, inflation has run below target for so long that it shouldn’t be unwelcome for it to run a bit above target for a time. I am no longer inclined to put, in effect, zero weight on the possibility that upside surprises in inflation and unemployment could require a more aggressive response and put the recovery at risk.  To me, that means that if the economy continues on its long path of output growth modestly above trend, a tightening labor market, and progress toward 2 percent inflation, I would gradually raise the federal funds rate along the lines of the September SEP.  And for that   reason, I see it as probably appropriate to move in December if the economy performs roughly in line with expectations and there are no materially negative developments here or abroad.  Thank you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Kashkari.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Powell, is expressing his support for alternative B and explaining his reasoning behind it. He discusses various factors that have influenced his thinking and states that he believes the Committee's patient approach has been the right one. He also acknowledges that the risks facing monetary policy are gradually shifting, but does not express any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 200.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B.  As we talked about yesterday, the recent uptick in inflation and inflation expectations, at least market-based ones, makes me more comfortable about the possibility of raising rates in December. Looking forward, I think we need to remain very open to the possibility that labor force participation might continue to rise, and we might, therefore, see continued strong job growth in the context of stable unemployment and subdued inflation.  Taking into account our dual mandate, this offers a strong case for moving cautiously with rate increases. In September, I talked about three metrics that I was looking at:  one, a sustained upward movement in core PCE—we’ve seen an uptick; two, rising inflation expectations—we’ve seen an uptick; or, three, a significant decline in the headline unemployment rate.  I still feel like those are the right three measures for me to have some confidence that this labor force participation story either is continuing or has run its course.  So, for me to support a move in December, I’m going to want to see continued evidence along those three measurements to understand where that story is and how much more it has to run. Let me just thank President Williams for responding to my question from yesterday.  One of the reasons I like to go late is that it gives me a chance to respond and it makes it harder for the other person to respond to my response.  [Laughter] CHAIR YELLEN.  You can have a two-hander.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kashkari expresses his support for alternative B and discusses his reasoning based on recent inflation trends and labor force participation. He also mentions the three metrics he considers important in evaluating the labor force participation story. The mention of thanking President Williams and the humor at the end of the passage do not indicate disagreement.


Passage number 201.
  MR. KASHKARI. Yes, unless you go for a two-hander, which I understand and which is a stronger intervention. But I understand the point you made—that there’s a short-term consideration, and then there’s a longer-term question of what framework we’re operating under. I just feel like now is a curious time.  If we were at the effective lower bound and there was consensus on the Committee that we were going to be at zero or near zero for the foreseeable future, and we’re looking for new ways of achieving accommodation, I could understand exploring a different inflation target or a different regime, like nominal GDP targeting.  Or if we were well off the lower bound, in a more normal economic environment, I could understand raising the question “What’s the best long-term operating framework for this Committee or for future Committees.” But I feel like it’s a curious time, when we’re debating whether now is the time to start raising the funds rate, to then say, “Well, maybe we should also be raising the inflation target or changing to a nominal GDP target.” I just see those two things as in conflict, but I understand conceptually that they are separate questions, so thank you for responding to my question. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of Mr. Kashkari expressing his perspective on the timing and appropriateness of exploring different inflation targets or operating frameworks for the Federal Reserve, while acknowledging that these are separate questions. Chair Yellen simply thanks him for his comments.


Passage number 202.
  MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Since the September meeting, we’ve received welcome indications of a continued improvement in labor market participation, as well as some progress on inflation and inflation expectations after a long period of troubling weakness on both.  These developments lead me to believe that our prudent risk-management approach has served us well this year, supporting continued gradual gains in employment and progress on inflation while helping to navigate a number of material risks. Looking ahead, in view of the signs that there may be scope for further improvement in the labor market; the fact that inflation continues to run persistently below our target, which is   symmetric; the weakness in the PDFP components of spending data; and the presence of several important adverse medium-term risks coming from abroad, I believe it’s prudent to wait for more evidence that we are near full employment and that inflation is going to be sustainably at our 2 percent target. In the weeks ahead, we’ll have several important pieces of data in hand that will help with that assessment. Conversely, I’ve listened carefully, but I would be hard-pressed to identify convincing evidence that the economy is currently running hot. When the Committee decides it is appropriate to take a step in removing policy accommodation, it will be important to emphasize, again, that the rate path forward is likely to remain gradual and shallow due to several key features of the post-crisis new normal. A combination of a neutral rate that looks to remain persistently low, the elevated sensitivity of the exchange rate to any perceived divergence in U.S. and foreign economic conditions, and somewhat greater room to run in the post-crisis labor market than had been anticipated suggests the amount of accommodation to be removed is likely to be relatively modest.  I continue to be very concerned about the asymmetry in our ability to respond using conventional tools to counter shortfalls in demand relative to unexpectedly strong demand.  This also suggests the value of removing that accommodation at a gradual pace. As we look forward to a time when something akin to alternative C will be appropriate, I want to highlight two areas for consideration.  First, as risk events emanating from Europe just since our September meeting remind us, we should be very cautious about characterizing risks to the outlook as balanced.  Risks arising from developments abroad unquestionably remain tilted to the downside, and we’ve seen repeatedly over the past two years that global developments can importantly affect U.S. financial conditions and the outlook.  As we’ve seen in Europe and Japan, proximity to the effective lower bound imposes important constraints on monetary policy,   limiting its ability to offset adverse demand shocks.  So if we were to go further and characterize risks as fully balanced, as in the current alternative C, I believe we might be perceived as not adequately sensitive to important features of the current economic environment. In addition, we haven’t altered the language in paragraph 4 since December 2015.  In the meantime, the Committee has significantly lowered its estimate of the longer-run neutral funds rate.  In December 2015, when the sentences describing the future path were last modified, the median longer-run rate in the SEP was 3.5 percent.  It is currently nearly ¾ percentage point lower.  As a result, I believe it would be helpful to update paragraph 4 in alternative C to reference the lower projected level of the longer-run funds rate, reinforcing the message that interest rates are likely to rise only gradually and to a level likely well below previous norms.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  Vice Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreements or contention. It is simply a statement of the author's views and opinions on the current economic environment and the appropriate approach to monetary policy.


Passage number 203.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B as written.  I wanted the statement to suggest that we now have greater confidence about reaching our inflation objective, and I think we’ve accomplished that by the changes in the language in paragraph 3.  I think that will be useful in reinforcing the notion that a December rate hike, barring some unforeseen change in the outlook, is likely. At this juncture, I don’t view a December rate hike as particularly risky in terms of provoking a sharp tightening in financial conditions, such as what happened in January this year, which followed our first rate hike last December.  First, I don’t think the market turbulence we had early this year was mainly attributable to that rate hike.  But, second, and more important, unlike a year ago, market participants should now better recognize that we’re not on a tightening campaign similar to what occurred during the period from 2004 to 2006.  The median forecast  last December was for four rate hikes in 2016—we may get one, and the forward curve is very flat.  The probability of tightening in December, based on January federal funds rate futures, has climbed to about 70 percent right now.  That has not unnerved market participants. I find it hard to imagine that the last 30 percent of the probability, should we move, would have an outside effect in financial market conditions. So I think that we can do this without great fear that this is going to provoke an outsized market reaction.  Thank you, Madam Chair. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. Thank you very much for a good discussion of the policy move for today.  And we did solicit suggestions concerning alternative C, thinking that if we do move in December, it might be a draft.  I’ve heard some further suggestions, and I would just say, as we come closer to December, that if things seem to be proceeding in a direction of a move and others have thoughts about what would be valuable to see in alternative C, I would really encourage you to contact us with ideas you may have.  For now, I’d like to put up alternative B for a vote, with the language unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and discussing their confidence in reaching the inflation objective and the likelihood of a December rate hike. They also mention that market participants should now better recognize the current tightening campaign is not similar to the one in 2004-2006 and that the probability of tightening in December is around 70 percent. There is no opposing view presented in this passage.


Passage number 204.
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As you indicated, this vote will be on the draft statement for alternative B, as included on pages 6 and 7 of Thomas Laubach’s briefing materials.  It will also be on the directive to the Desk as included in the implementation note on page 10 of those briefing materials.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing information about what will be included in the vote, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 205.
 Chair Yellen Yes Vice Chairman Dudley Yes Governor Brainard Yes President Bullard Yes Governor Fischer Yes President George No President Mester No Governor Powell Yes President Rosengren Yes Governor Tarullo Yes MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you.  CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you, everybody.  It’s still incredibly early.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a list of names and their agreement on a certain topic. There is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


