
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

Housing obviously involves people looking forward and deciding what commitments they’re willing to make.
I would interpret housing as being a combination measure of people’s attitudes toward the future, the security of their income flows, and the commitments they’re willing to make
—to include obviously not only the households themselves but also the lenders that are responsible for making mortgage decisions.
So I would downplay housing as a direct component of GDP.
Thank you.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Mr. Chairman?
May I ask Mr. Poole a clarifying question?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Certainly.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
So, Bill, you would want to do what to expectations?
How would you want expectations to evolve in response to your preferred version of the language associated with a pause today?
Do you want them to be flat going forward?
August 8, 200697 of 158 MR. POOLE.
Well, in terms of what we know today, I think we ought to be noncommittal.
<START>If we continue to get information that leads to extending the inflation risk or maybe indicating that it is more severe even than we think today, then we ought to be responding to that, and we ought to leave ourselves open to be responding to that.<END>
We shouldn’t write ourselves into a box by focusing on resource utilization because those numbers are in many ways the most visible ones to lots of people.
Suppose we get another low number on the August employment report, and we have pointed to resource utilization as one of the things that we’re counting on?
Are we then writing ourselves into a box in terms of the expectations we create by emphasizing resource utilization?
So that’s why I’m arguing for a very, very general and rather vague statement.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>Like others, I think the policy action at this meeting is a very close call, but in the end I support a pause, even in light of the continuing unfavorable inflation situation.<END>
<START>I think that there is a real possibility that slack could be greater during this projection period than the staff’s baseline projections expect because of weaker demand, stronger potential, or some combination of the two.<END>
I am encouraged that inflation expectations remain anchored.
In light of all of the uncertainties attached to the current outlook, I would just like to take a pause and see how things play out.
Now, as many have said, there is a chance that the data are going to reveal that this is not a good stopping point.
<START>If the data do reveal that more rate hikes are in order because inflation may reaccelerate, because inflation expectations begin to increase, or because economic activity appears to be more robust than our current projections, then I think we will need to consider the possibility of a more aggressive move.<END>
<START>Unfortunately, I think it’s unrealistic to expect that some of these issues are going to be August 8, 200698 of 158 resolved in one or two future meetings.<END>
<START>But we have market-based measures of inflation expectations that are available to us on a continuous basis, and for that reason, it seems important to me to be especially focused on inflation expectations in the coming months.<END>
I favor alternative B. I support Governor Kohn’s suggestion that we move language from alternative C, section 3, to emphasize our concern about the inflation risks.
I also want to add that, like President Guynn, I am not going to dissent if the consensus is for a move of 25 basis points.
I came into the meeting leaning toward a pause.
I have to say, after listening to many of my colleagues’ statements today, that inclination is less pronounced.
It’s just a very close call today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don’t think I’ll surprise you.
I agree with Governor Kohn that a pause is appropriate.
In terms of some of the comments, I do suggest that we need to recognize that we often say that monetary policy operates with a lag.
In fact, moves that we have made have not yet worked their way through, and we ought to see how they develop.
A pause is appropriate to do that
—it’s not shutting off further moves but letting us look at the facts that are in play.
<START>With that, I am bothered that the markets are already projecting that, sometime in the future, we will reverse and begin to lower rates, which I think is not something I would like to see.<END>
Also, because I recognize that there are genuine and serious inflation risks, we need to be
— and to express that we are
<START>—very sensitive in watching inflation expectations.<END>
Part of our judgment will be not just on real economic data but on these expectations and on what inflation does, since that is our business.
If I could say something in this language, it would be to the August 8, 200699 of 158 effect that I think we are restrictive, maybe moderately restrictive, and that we’re going to stay that way until we see systematic declines in inflation.
I think that would do a lot for us.
Having said that, in terms of the language, I would then be comfortable with alternative B, with the modifications that Governor Kohn has suggested, as we try to clarify our intentions, if that’s what we want to do with this statement, moving forward.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Mr. Chairman, I think it was in March that I referred to Pascal’s famous wager about the existence of God.
<START>Pascal’s view was basically that if you look far out in the future from a risk-management standpoint, the answer was in the affirmative.<END>
<START>[Laughter] I happen to accept the existence of inflation, and I admire President Lacker, President Minehan, and others who have made very strong arguments.<END>
I take note of one thing that is very different at this meeting from what I have heard in my year-plus at this table.
This is the first time that many people have said
—and I certainly have heard this from the people I have talked to in the field
—that they are moving on prices instead of being tamped down in terms of their desire.
In other words, they have pricing power, and it is being realized.
This is the first time we’ve heard that in the discussion, and it worries me.
It’s very, very important that we signal our anti-inflationary resolve.
I generally always agree with President Poole.
I happen to be a minimalist as far as the statement is concerned.
But if we pause here, it is very important that we use the kind of language that Governor Kohn suggested and that we make it very clear that this may not be the end of the process.
Even more important, Mr. Chairman, is that we agree at this table that we’ll be fearless in moving if we have to.
August 8, 2006100 of 158 As to the market, I think President Minehan made a very good comment.
Having been a market operator for thirty years of my career, I have found that markets are usually wrong.
Our job is not to satisfy the markets.
Our job is to get the economy right
—that’s our mission.
So I would accept a pause, Mr. Chairman, under the conditions I just mentioned.
I like Governor Kohn’s suggestion on language although, like a broken record, I would put the word “global” in front of “resource utilization” because I think that reflects reality.
Having said what I just said, I would also say that, if the group decides to raise the rate 25 basis points, I won’t dissent because I don’t have a vote.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Excellent reason.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The incoming data have heightened my concerns about inflation.
<START>I think it’s true, as a number of people have mentioned around the table, that inflation expectations have not moved up.<END>
The markets seem pretty confident that we’re going to be successful in fighting inflation.
But as Kevin Warsh said, the markets can be pretty fickle.
<START>We’re going to get some further bad news on inflation in the coming months, and I hope the markets will maintain their confidence in the Federal Reserve.<END>
But their confidence in us could change as the news continues to be bad in the coming months.
Also, I think we have to ask whether our failure for two years now to keep inflation inside what many of us have said is our comfort zone
—1 to 2 percent
—is going to weigh eventually on the assessment of the markets and their confidence in the Federal Reserve.
<START>I’m concerned that the public’s confidence in us may begin to waver if we don’t express our readiness to tighten if inflation doesn’t head down soon.<END>
It’s not clear to me that we’ve put restrictive-enough financial conditions in place to put inflation on much of a downward path.
According to the Bluebook, the fed funds rate is close to neutral.
In the Bluebook’s longer-run simulation, the optimum policy requires further August 8, 2006101 of 158 rate increases to put us on the path to 1½ percent.
We won’t get there just staying where we are now.
I realize it’s a very close call, and everyone has mentioned that;
but on balance, I would prefer to raise rates 25 basis points at this meeting.
I won’t repeat all the comments that Cathy, Charlie, and Jeff made.
I think they were very persuasive.
It would surprise the markets, but we shouldn’t be doing what the markets expect us to do.
We should be doing, as someone said, what’s right for the economy and for the American people.
It doesn’t appear that an increase will be the consensus coming out of this meeting.
I’d just add that, if we do pause, it’s not going to be easy for us to start again.
I don’t think we should kid ourselves about that.
We’re going to be accused of whipsawing by the markets, and we’ll take a lot of criticism.
So we’re going to have to take a very tough stand if we decide to raise rates again.
It’s not going to be easy, and we should just be prepared to do that.
<START>Looking ahead, I’d say that if we determine that factors are not reducing growth too much and if inflation does not appear to be moderating, then we’re going to need to increase rates further to coax inflation back toward price stability.<END>
We have to make it clear in our public statements that we’re prepared to do that.
If we do go with the pause, then I certainly agree with Don Kohn’s recommendation that we should use the language from section 3 of alternative C and move it to section 2 of alternative B. To omit the reference to high levels of resource utilization, when we’ve had it in our past statements, be a serious error.
would Well, I’m like everybody else around the table
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
— I have found the decision about which way to go to be a very tough call.
I’m coming down on the side of a pause right now, partly because I’m more pessimistic than the staff forecast on the August 8, 2006102 of 158 second-order effects of the slowdown in housing.
<START>We’re hearing from some bankers that subprime borrowers especially are having more difficulties and that delinquencies in that sector are going up.<END>
Although I don’t see a prolonged problem, as housing slows, the effects are going to bleed into other sectors, and whether into home furnishings or other things, I think there will be wider implications.
I also think the optimism about the housing sector is so important to people because it’s a big chunk of their net worth.
So I’m just not as positive about the outlook here.
Another concern I have is what is really happening with the disruption of oil supply around the world.
I think that situation is potentially more disruptive.
We don’t put political things in our forecasts.
A good friend in the oil industry is very concerned, aside from the political risk, about the operating risk in the industry right now, as I mentioned awhile ago.
<START>So I think there is enough uncertainty out there that I’m on the edge, and it’s that uncertainty that leads me to say, “Let’s take time out and pause.” I like Governor Kohn’s suggestion for the change in alternative B. It’s important that we signal resource utilization.<END>
It’s also important to signal that this is a pause and not a permanent stop because, when you look at the futures curve, it’s as though the market figures that once we stop we’re going to stop forever.
It’s also important that we signal that we are pausing to see what the lagged effects will be.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
From a capital markets perspective, as I think about this decision, what matters more than the pricing of this issuance
—that is, the decision on 25 basis points
—is really what the after-market effects are.
How is this security going to trade over the next weeks and months?
When I think about the decision in that context, it puts the August 8, 2006103 of 158 burden on the communications, which are only in small part in the message of our statement today.
At the end of the day, I am willing to agree to a pause.
But, again, I think that puts the burden on laying the predicate that we are in fact poised and prepared to act as necessary.
That begins with our statement, but it doesn’t end there.
Given the data that are likely to come in between this meeting and the next (a couple of CPIs, a couple of PPIs, maybe a revised PCE) and what’s likely to happen to some of the forward-looking market indicators (TIPS spreads, some of the commodity prices), I think it is very important that the markets understand, before the trading in the security gets very significant, the depth of our thinking on the subject and of the discussion around this meeting.
The minutes can be part of that communication.
Such communication is important so that they don’t perceive us when we meet next to be reacting to one or two pieces of data, the way they seem to have overreacted to one or two pieces of data last week, but really recognize the depth of our thinking on this subject.
<START>To be consistent with that view, I think Governor Kohn’s suggestion of indicating a pause as powerfully as we can is critical.<END>
The markets, in the first days, are going to take our pause to be a stop, as reflected currently in the Eurodollar futures contracts and the fed fund futures contracts.
But we need to disabuse them of that view as quickly, as frequently, and as consistently as we can so that the pause does not become read as a stop.
We will then have set out the conditions for the ways in which we might react if different data arise.
Again, I think that the decision today is not an easy one.
It’s important that the markets recognize that it is unlikely that our work here is done.
With all that said, I’m prepared to support Governor Kohn’s suggestion.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kroszner.
August 8, 2006104 of 158 MR. KROSZNER.
<START>As I said before, obviously this is an extremely difficult decision, and I agree with many people around the table who have said that very respectable arguments could be made on both sides.<END>
<START>So I would say that, on net, there are some advantages to keeping policy unchanged but communicating very, very strongly our wariness about inflation.<END>
I think there is value in pausing to see what is going to happen with growth.
Around the table, we certainly expressed different views about what is happening to growth.
<START>We know that we’re likely to continue getting somewhat unfavorable numbers on inflation, but I think the markets are well primed for that.<END>
<START>We’ve gotten some numbers that have been worrisome or unwelcome and not particularly favorable on inflation, but we haven’t seen inflation expectations become unanchored.<END>
Also, we’ve been seeing that the markets have apparently been assuming that we are not going to move now and that we’re not going to move in the future, if you look to the fed funds futures markets;
but that assumption hasn’t manifested itself in any increase in the short-term or longer-term inflation prospects.
That’s very heartening to me.
If that weren’t the case, I would not feel comfortable in moving toward supporting a pause because, as many of us have discussed, the expectational context and credibility are very important.
<START>Credibility is an easy thing to lose and a difficult thing to recapture, but I don’t think having a pause now would lead us to lose credibility.<END>
<START>I think also that it’s important that we see a pause as not being just until the next meeting but as possibly going over multiple meetings because a lot of information, particularly with respect to inflation, will come out over time.<END>
I expressed my view that we may be seeing some transitory effects on inflation that are due primarily to shelter services.
Within two or three meetings we’ll have a better feeling for whether or not those effects are likely to be transitory, and I think keeping our powder dry is very valuable.
August 8, 2006105 of 158 We’ve been emphasizing not just that we are data dependent but that we are forecast dependent.
What do the data say about what is likely to happen in the future?
<START>Saying that we are forecast dependent helps to underscore that, even though the current data or the recent backward-looking data are not favorable, we are looking to the future to what the evolution of inflation and growth is likely to be<END>
—exactly what the last line of alternative B emphasizes.
I think, one, it’s what we should be doing and, two, it’s important for people to see that.
<START>So I would favor going with alternative B or having the language in alternative C. I’m not sure the alternative C language adds all that much more, given the fairly strong statement that we have in the assessment of risks, because I think that is likely to lead to a somewhat changed expected feds funds futures curve<END>
—to leave some probability that we may move and that this is not a stop.
<START>Certainly, if our pausing is interpreted as a stop, we need to pursue a communication strategy to convey that it is not a stop and that a pause does not mean just one meeting but possibly multiple meetings as we are gathering more information, particularly about the transitory versus persistent effects of inflation, and are keeping a very careful eye on the effect of both short-term and long-run inflation expectations.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We could obviously justify moving today, but we don’t need to move today.
<START>We don’t need to move today principally because we have an economy that has already slowed to what we think is trend and because we have inflation expectations at the long horizon staying relatively stable despite adverse inflation news and a fair amount of uncertainty about the path of inflation going forward.<END>
That has happened, as many of you have said, in the context of substantial downward revisions August 8, 2006106 of 158 of the expected terminal fed funds rate.
That’s a bit of an experiment in credibility.
<START>We don’t want to take too much reassurance from that, but it’s positive.<END>
I think we have to signal that inflation remains the predominant risk and that we may have more tightening to do.
We have to make it clear that, if expectations deteriorate or if our forecast for inflation changes materially, we are prepared to tighten further.
Many of the prisms we look through to judge the appropriate path of policy going forward suggest we may have more to do.
They don’t tell us with any certainty that we have a lot more to do;
they suggest that we may have more to do.
If you choose the 1.5 percent target for core PCE and take out the inertial preference in the optimal policy rules, the case for going significantly above 5.25 on the funds rate is pretty strong.
We need to look for the combination of action and message in the statement that gives us the most flexibility going forward.
It’s hard to know with confidence what that combination is.
My own view is that, if we don’t move today but we have a strong statement about the asymmetry around the risks, we preserve the possibility of tightening further.
If we move today and the world unfolds as we expect, I think in some ways it’s harder at the margin to tighten further.
But none of us knows that with total confidence because we don’t know how the market is going to interpret the statement.
Credibility is a very complicated thing.
<START>If we look as though we’re moving out of fear that we’ve lost it, you could say that might be more damaging to perceptions about our credibility.<END>
<START>You can think about the dominant option on the table as a pause coming from a position of strength and confidence and a move in these circumstances coming from a position of greater tentativeness and weakness.<END>
I don’t think that would be desirable
—it is something we should try to avoid.
August 8, 2006107 of 158 Looking at market expectations today, I see three things that make me uneasy.
One is the high degree of confidence that we’re pretty close to being done.
The second is the inversion
— the speed with which they have us removing a bunch of policy tightening ahead.
The third is the degree of certainty or confidence in the path for interest rates.
I don’t know why they have that degree of confidence and certainty;
[laughter] I don’t think we have it.
It’s hard to know, however, how to get us out of that mix.
<START>I think that, as several of you have suggested, it would be nice if we made the market a little less confident that we’re going to be taking out the last move or two of tightening pretty quickly.<END>
How to do that is difficult.
Alternative B, as modified by Don Kohn, comes the closest to doing so.
I would also favor a second suggestion, which is putting back in the reference to ongoing productivity gains, for the following reason.
We revised down our estimate of structural productivity growth a bit, and that’s a material change in our view about productivity.
But the basic forecast, as we best judge it, is still a pretty good one for productivity growth.
We don’t want to look as though we’ve lost conviction about that basic positive outlook for productivity growth.
Its omission would be very conspicuous, and I don’t think we’ve learned enough to justify the risk of creating the signal that we’ve lost confidence that we’re going to have productivity growing in the vicinity of 2, 2½, 2¼ percent.
For those reasons, I’d favor putting that back in.
<START>Just to summarize, I’m reasonably comfortable not moving today, but I think we should send a strong signal that the risks are still predominantly to the upside on inflation.<END>
I also think that alternative B, as modified by Don, does the best job of communicating that message.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you very much.
First of all, I’d like to thank everyone for a really helpful and thoughtful discussion.
It was very useful.
Let me just make a few comments.
August 8, 2006108 of 158 First, we do need to be careful to think about what the optimal policy looks like.
<START>It doesn’t take the form that we keep raising rates until we’re happy with the inflation rate.<END>
Instead, what we need to look for is the rate that, if maintained, will ultimately give us a good trajectory in the economy.
I would submit that we don’t really know where that is yet.
<START>President Lacker made some very interesting arguments about the real rate of interest in the late ’90s.<END>
<START>Those are good arguments, but I would reply to him, first, that we’ve seen very low real rates in the past decade, a global savings glut and all of that, and, second, we have at the moment an IS shock of very significant and unknown size<END>
—the housing market, which is declining very sharply.
So I agree that we may well want to go up from where we are.
I think that’s, in fact, a more likely outcome.
<START>But we really can’t be sure at this point where we ultimately want to stop, and we need to be a bit cautious and try to learn about exactly where that level is going to be.<END>
<START>For those reasons, I’m not comfortable with alternatives A or C because they basically say that we’re done, either at 5.25 or 5.50, and so the choices then are between alternative B and alternative D. I’m concerned with alternative D because, besides raising the rate to 5.50, it signals further increases.<END>
After seventeen consecutive moves, we would be tightening into a housing decline.
<START>We don’t have that much confidence that we need to be so strong at this point.<END>
<START>Signaling a strong concern about inflation but being more cautious in groping for the optimal level of the interest rate is probably a wiser course.<END>
<START>I remind you that the Fed has not been terribly successful with soft landings.<END>
We have a chance to get one.
All else being equal, I think it would be good if we could achieve that.
So I’d recommend alternative B. I’ll come back to the language in just a moment.
I characterize this as a hawkish pause.
I think it has several advantages:
The first is to gather August 8, 2006109 of 158 information.
With respect to some of the points President Poole raised, I think the key information we want to look at is, first, activity;
we want to look at employment, housing, and consumption, in particular, which will give us some indications about growth going forward.
But we also want to look at inflation data and inflation expectations data.
Inflation expectations, specifically, are mentioned in the statement, and an untethering of inflation expectations would be, on its own, grounds for us to respond.
The risk of our falling behind the curve by pausing is relatively small.
Again, I think that we’re not more than a couple of moves away from the optimal level.
<START>Therefore, if we miss a meeting or two and then move again in November or December, we will be able to reach still this optimal level within a reasonable period of time.<END>
Moreover, we have a degree of freedom on the other end, so to speak.
If the markets expect us to begin to cut, we can always maintain the rate at the level for a longer period than expected to get some further restriction.
So on the substance I think there are grounds, after seventeen moves and with the housing market in an indeterminate situation, to pause and to get more information.
I’d like to say a word about the tactics as well.
President Minehan was correct that my introduction of the idea of a pause was not particularly well received.
But we have now, at least reading the commentary, explained the difference between a pause and a stop.
It’s useful for us to get the flexibility that will allow us not necessarily to move at every meeting but to move as the data require.
A demonstration of that flexibility has some value in terms of creating some more optionality for us in the future.
Also, we have been talking about data dependence.
By creating this flexibility, we’ll be able to increase the relationship between what we do and what the data say, and I think that’s already working.
For example, I would note the wide dispersion of views among the dealers about where we’re eventually going to stop.
That dispersion of views comes from differences about where they think the economy and inflation are going.
It is August 8, 2006110 of 158 very encouraging to me that they are now not looking to us for forward guidance but rather looking at the state of the economy and trying to judge where the Fed will have to go to achieve its objectives.
So recognizing the concerns that have been raised and taking them very seriously, I think that our best option, of perhaps not very many great options, is a hawkish pause, which I associate with alternative B. With respect to the language, I think it is an improvement to take at least the first sentence of section 3 in alternative C, which includes high resource utilization, and use it in place of the first sentence of section 3 in alternative B. I have two questions for the group.
One, do we want to reintroduce or go back to our old language of including productivity gains?
If so, that would require the second sentence of alternative A, section 3.
If not, we just use the whole section 3 of alternative C. That’s question one.
Two, President Poole has expressed concern about the housing reference.
We could simply say “reflecting the lagged effects” and leave out the housing part.
I would take suggestions on that.
I would note that we have used this housing phrase in the past few meetings, and so it would be a change.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
The unit labor cost figures suggest leaving productivity gains out of this.
That’s just my opinion.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay.
Other comments?
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
If we were to keep productivity gains in, I would suggest striking the word “ongoing.” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Any others?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
May I say something on the mention of housing?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Certainly.
August 8, 2006111 of 158 VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
I think Bill’s reservations about it are right.
Of course, they would have applied the last time we used it, too.
I guess I would argue for keeping housing in on the grounds that it’s happening.
It is the principal area in which we see some weakness going on in the economy, and not to make reference to that reality seems a little awkward.
It would be like having a statement that didn’t mention what’s happening in either energy prices or housing, and that would be hard to justify.
So I would keep it, on the simple grounds that it is happening and it’s an accurate description of reality.
I don’t think it’s a problem.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Section 2 can reasonably be interpreted as referring to second-quarter GDP.
That’s the news that we have, and there has been a slowing in a wide range of sectors.
So I think that that’s a sensible interpretation.
There are continuing concerns about housing going forward.
I understand that.
But it seems to me that section 2 is really a statement about what has already happened in the economy
—that’s the essential element of it
—and housing is just not the biggest thing that has happened.
<START>I would also agree with Jeff that we should keep productivity out because people logically say, “Well, unit labor costs are what are really important here,” and we don’t have a great story to tell on unit labor costs.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Kroszner.
MR.
KROSZNER.
I think it would be odd to take out the reference to housing, given that we have mentioned it a number of times in the past.
The rationale clearly says that it’s “partly reflecting” and then gives a number of factors.
It is not saying that those factors are the only ones.
Also, I don’t interpret this language as being simply about what happened in the past;
“has moderated” is also talking about where we are
—that growth is not as strong as it was.
I see August 8, 2006112 of 158 that language as having a forward-looking aspect to it.
I think it would be very odd to take housing out, partly because it’s factually accurate, even if you take the historical view, and partly because, given our discussions around the table, we are concerned about “gradual cooling.” It is appropriate to leave the reference in.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I agree with Randy on this.
It would be very strange to take housing out now because it was in last time and because it is so important to the future of the economy.
The productivity question is a close call.
On balance, I’d leave it out because it does raise the whole question about unit labor costs.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Any other views?
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
I’m new to these language nuances about housing.
It occurs to me, however, that one question you ought to ask is whether by including housing or continuing to include housing the Committee is putting itself in a position where it can’t raise rates until housing comes back.
Are we unfairly locking ourselves in, or at least are the markets going to interpret it that way?
That’s just another question to think about in deciding how to include it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I think that President Plosser has a good point there and President Poole did as well.
Section 2 is aimed at explaining what has happened with growth in the past.
Everything moderated.
To me, the most surprising thing was how slow business fixed investment was.
It was not so surprising that housing was slow because we expected housing to be slow, so I think you could easily take housing out of there.
You have the lagged effects of increases in interest rates, which affect housing as well as a whole range of other things.
I also think that Charlie has a good point.
We don’t want to hang our action on one piece of data August 8, 2006113 of 158 versus another piece of data going forward.
I’m agnostic about productivity, to tell you the truth.
I think the unit labor cost numbers are not good news
—we have some problems there
—and to hang it out as a saving factor again and again may not be what we want to do.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
I think we need to come to resolution.
Oh, sorry.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
I would prefer to leave housing in because housing resources aren’t readily substitutable for other parts of the economy.
If we leave resource utilization in, we’re sort of acknowledging that, although housing is soft, there are still resource pressures in other parts of the economy.
I think the picture is better balanced that way.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay.
Thank you.
Let me just say that I think this language is purely descriptive.
I don’t think it’s conditioning our action on anything having to do with housing.
I don’t think the market will tie our move to housing.
Let’s just take a straw vote.
How many would like to keep the statement as it is with housing included?
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven.
Okay.
I think that’s a majority.
So we’ll leave section 2 as it is.
Is there any sentiment for going back to alternative A, section 3, second sentence, which includes ongoing productivity gains?
Are any of you in favor of that?
[Laughter] All right.
The statement, then, will be exactly alternative B, except that the third section of alternative C will be substituted for the third section of alternative B. Would you please call the roll?
MS.
SMITH.
Yes.
The directive would be, “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks August 8, 2006114 of 158 conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 5¼ percent.” Then the risk assessment is, “Nonetheless, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain.<END>
<START>The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth as implied by incoming information.” Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Geithner Yes Governor Bies Yes President Guynn Yes Governor Kohn Yes Governor Kroszner Yes President Lacker No President Pianalto Yes Governor Warsh Yes President Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.<END>
Thank you very much.
We have a lunch break now for about half an hour, and then we’ll reconvene to discuss communications.
[Lunch break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I know some people have flights and so on, so why don’t we continue eating here.
If you’re still eating, we can just reconvene.
Before we get going, I just want to recognize Barbara Driggins over here.
Barbara is retiring.
[Applause] Thank you, Barbara, for thirty-six years of service, and we hope this display of affection will cause you to reconsider.
[Laughter] MS. DRIGGINS.
I don’t think so.
[Laughter] August 8, 2006115 of 158 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Best of luck.
Our afternoon session is on communications.
I’d like to turn it over to Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We are in a hurry, and I don’t have anything really in the way of introduction.
I just want to say that we sent a list of questions, but we didn’t expect answers to every question.
We hope that the questions helped to spark thinking about some of the broad issues related to communications
—what we’re trying to do and the broad strategy of how we should go about it.
I remind you that, as the memo says, this is an initial discussion.
Time is limited, so we’d prefer not to get into the details of various proposals but to think about broad issues of strategy and goals.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay.
We’re just going to have a go-round.
Please raise your hand, and Brian will take your name.
MR.
KOHN.
<START>If no one wants to start, [laughter] I can start.<END>
I actually have just a couple of things to say.
We need to keep in mind that communication is not an end in and of itself.
It’s a means to an end.
Where we rank on some professor’s table of transparency isn’t really what it’s about.
It’s about meeting our legislative objectives for stable prices and maximum employment.
As we think about our communication, we ought to concentrate on that
<START>—what our goals and objectives are and where inflation and activity are going relative to those objectives, given the shocks and dynamics of the economy, and the broad policy outlines for strategy to foster those objectives.<END>
If we do that well, we’ll help achieve those objectives, both by building public understanding of, confidence in, and support for a politically independent central bank and by giving private agents, in financial markets and in labor and product markets, information that should help them act in ways that will promote achieving our goals.
I think we’ve done a good job of this.
Certainly, this institution for the past twenty-five years has been pretty darn successful at achieving our congressional mandates, and our communication has contributed to that.
At least around the edges it certainly has helped, in both August 8, 2006116 of 158 the political and the economic dimensions.
So I don’t think we have a communication strategy that’s seriously broken, that needs radical surgery.
But I do think it has grown in an ad hoc way, separately in each area of communication
—the announcement and the minutes, for example.
This is a good time to step back and see how things are fitting together
<START>—whether we can tailor some things to some audiences and other things to other audiences that we want to attract and whether anything is missing from the strategy.<END>
The discussion this morning reinforced my view that we do need to talk about goals and about whether we should be numerically defining price stability.
There’s a presumption around the table that we have already done this to a certain extent, but we haven’t as a committee.
We’re in a kind of untenable position right now in which the outside world doesn’t know how we look at our objectives and how we would act.
<START>So we need to have that discussion, and I’m glad that we’ve scheduled it for the first part of the discussion in October.<END>
How the economy is doing relative to our goals, objectives, and strategy does require forward-looking language.
We tried to indicate in this memo that the forward-looking language has pitfalls that we need to keep in mind as we go forward.
What we know is limited.
That certainly was a theme this morning about our uncertainty, and conveying that uncertainty is really, really hard.
How we indicate the risks, which are almost as important as the central tendency forecast, is something we’re going to need to work on.
There are issues about the market’s putting too much weight on what we say.
I was surprised, Mr. Chairman, by the reaction to your testimony and how much emphasis they seemed to put on our projections, indicating where they thought things would be going forward.
<START>In retrospect, I wonder whether there are ways of indicating our degrees of uncertainty around those August 8, 2006117 of 158 projections, and I think we need to honor and encourage the diversity and exchange of views in the Committee.<END>
All those issues are hard with respect to the outlook for inflation and economic activity, and they are even harder with respect to the outlook for interest rates and our policy path in particular.
The issues of conditionality, overweighting, and flexibility become even more acute when we start talking about our own policy path.
<START>There are times, and the summer of 2003 was one of those, in which the market’s interpretation of where our policy path might be has the potential for impeding our ability to meet our objectives.<END>
In 2003 and the subsequent year or two years, I think we were right to put some emphasis on that because, if we hadn’t, it would have been harder to meet our goals.
<START>But for the most part, I think the markets should be able to infer what we’re going to do from how we talk about our goals and our assessment of the economic developments, and we don’t need to discuss the immediate outlook for policy.<END>
<START>It would be nice to think about ways of getting away from this business of signaling what we’re going to do exactly at the next meeting, partly because we don’t know but also because it does sometimes build in expectations that affect our decisions and dynamics.<END>
Those are some broad thoughts I had.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Oh, dear.
So you didn’t want answers to all of these questions?
This homework assignment was significant.
[Laughter] I agree with a lot of what Governor Kohn has said.
<START>In my view, anyway, the principal goal behind central banks’ communicating what they’re doing and why is that they need to be accountable for their actions in a democratic society.<END>
I see that as the primary goal of all forms of central bank communication
—that is, the preservation of the legitimacy of the central bank.
We’re not elected officials.
We’re appointed August 8, 2006118 of 158 officials.
We’re doing something that’s critical as far as the economy’s performance is concerned, and we need to be accountable for it.
A secondary goal is to facilitate the transmission of monetary policy by better shaping the market’s understanding of what we’ve done so that their actions can help the direction of policy.
But in that regard, in terms of the market’s facilitating the direction of policy, what we do really ought to be more important
—and I think Don was saying this
—than what we say about what we’ve done.
<START>Communication can help, but it can also hinder short-term market perceptions.<END>
Over the longer run, what we actually do will create or destroy our credibility.
We also need
—and I think this is consistent with what Don was saying
—to think about constraints.
I would be very concerned if we ended up trying to convey the future course of policy with certainty except in very unusual circumstances, like those that began in mid-2003.
In that regard, I took a measure of confidence in some of the Chairman’s discussion in the policy round with regard to being encouraged that major market participants weren’t unanimous in what they thought we were going to do, that there was a range of thought out there.
I think we can learn from that.
If we force everyone to have a certain view about what we’re doing and then they just feed back to us what we’ve told them, we’re losing a lot in terms of understanding what’s going on in the market.
About some of the other questions here, I’ll just try to hit the highlights.
On quantity
— we ought to think not about how much we communicate or how many instruments we have or how different they are but about their effectiveness.
<START>It seems to me that we ought to try to convey the uncertainties in the policy process in the most flexible and expansive of our communication instruments<END>
—our minutes, the semiannual reports, the Chairman’s testimony, and the speeches that we give.
<START>The least flexible and least expansive forms of communication, in August 8, 2006119 of 158 particular the statement, ought to be used to convey less-subtle information.<END>
Thus, as I’ve often said in the past
—and I think President Poole’s recommendations have been in the same direction
—we ought to focus more in our meeting statements on what we did and why and leave the longer, more-nuanced discussion to the minutes or the semiannual reports.
If I had had a vote at this meeting, I wouldn’t have dissented on the pause, and I was in favor of alternative B with the enhanced section to make it more hawkish.
But when you step back and you think about a hawkish pause, you wonder whether you’re asking your statement to do a lot of work for you, particularly if you think you’re going to have to fill in exactly what you meant by that statement in subsequent communications over the following weeks.
So I think some of that is a little tough.
On content
—I don’t want to get into inflation targeting.
Yes, we have to talk about it, and we’ll get into that later in the year, I suppose.
On forward-looking information
—that goes back to uncertainty.
<START>I would not like to get into the process, like some central banks, of giving a future policy path.<END>
There are ways of facilitating the market’s understanding of what our forecasts are and where we see the risks.
<START>Maybe we can do a better or more complete job with our semiannual information, but I wouldn’t like to get into communicating a policy path.<END>
Finally, on the subject of individuals versus a committee
—I don’t think the Committee should constrain individuals.
That’s what the committee process is about
—that we ought to feel free to express our opinions here as well as outside the Committee.
However, I also think that, at times, circumstances are such that a number of us are speaking around the same time, which creates the impression of committing the Committee.
I would want all of us to think hard and long about how we shape our public statements.
Even though we all are very careful about not committing the Committee by saying that these are our views and not the Committee’s views, August 8, 2006120 of 158 there are lots of ways of saying things within our various statements that can act more or less to bind our hands going forward, and I’d like us all to be sensitive to that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Don, I appreciate the outline that you gave in terms of raising the questions.
I’ll be straightforward.
As far as goals
—what we are doing and why is the important part of communication.
That’s our obligation.
That is part of transparency, and it serves us well.
Regarding our view of the future
—I think we should outline that in terms of the balance of risks.
What we’re doing now is just about right, frankly.
We need to get away from the idea of trying to signal or giving a policy path.
I think that gets us into some difficulties.
In addition, it binds Committee members who may not agree into the future, and that’s a disadvantage to the Committee in the long run.
Having said that, I still think what we’re doing right now is pretty darn good.
Having the statement to say here’s what we did and why and the minutes to show the nuances of the views gives further information to the markets and serves us well.
Speeches may sometimes raise the media’s attention, but I think they have served us well;
I don’t think that we’ve gotten ourselves into too many problems with them.
Once we get through the discussion in October in terms of the price goals and that sort of thing, how we communicate may change.
So we may need to have another discussion of this.
But for the moment, with those comments, I’m pretty satisfied with where we are.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll comment on just three areas, in the spirit of being general here.
First, on the goals
—I thought the goals that you put into the document you distributed were very good.
They were very well stated and had an appropriate August 8, 2006121 of 158 balance.
I didn’t think that they constrain open discussion at the meetings.
<START>The communication of uncertainty and conditionality is difficult, but part of our goal should be to do it better.<END>
Second, on the quantity of information and the forward-looking content
—that whole series of questions that you asked
—I’d divide my comments into two parts.
One, if we do go with some type of quantitative guideline, we will need to release more information.
We’d need something like an inflation report, maybe quarterly, such as other central banks have, just to explain and elaborate on the guideline and how the economy was doing versus that quantitative guideline.
I don’t think we could just stay with the twice-a-year report that we give now in detail.
Third, we should talk about longer-term forecasts than we do now.
That’s an important part of this.
In fact, if this Committee decides not to go with quantitative guidelines, we could accomplish many of the objectives by just having longer-term forecasts for the economy.
If we did these longer-term forecasts, we’d have to address many of the issues that are discussed in the sections here
—the policy assumption question, for example.
We now do that based on appropriate policy, but we could do that in different ways.
But the longer forecasts would allow us to convey policy goals, to discuss expected paths to achieving those goals, and to take into account the range of opinions regarding the paths and goals without necessarily having us agree to a quantitative guideline.
At this point, I’m agnostic on the question of whether we should have a quantitative guideline.
I should say that I really haven’t decided yet and that the topic is for further discussion.
In any case, longer-term forecasts would be one option to consider if we did not go with a quantitative guideline.
Of course, if we did go with a quantitative guideline, we could also have longer-term forecasts.
But I think the longer-term forecasts would help us improve our formulation of monetary policy, either with or without a quantitative guideline.
August 8, 2006122 of 158 I want to mention just one other point about the policy conditioning.
I hope someone could do research on the Bank of England approach.
Don, I know you’ve been there.
They present a forecast conditioned on the market expectations for policy interest rates.
They also do an alternative based on an unchanged rate path.
They’ve given us an example of one case in which the forecast based on the market showed that inflation would be outside the guideline when they published it, and the market immediately reversed its view as to what the Bank of England was able to do on policy without the Bank’s saying anything.
Just the publication of that forecast itself accomplished a lot of their objective.
Of course, we’d have to be explicit about the technical details underlying the market expectations of the forecast, but that’s sort of a technical part of this.
We’re off to a good start, and I particularly like the goals that you set forth.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me make just a few comments.
I, too, like the goals.
To me, the overarching objective of our communication policy should be to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy.
The goals that have been identified in this latest paper
— which I take to mean making sure that, insofar as possible, we build public support for our policies and we work toward anchoring expectations
—both work in that direction.
It’s very important that the public broadly defined understands what we’re doing and why.
One implication of that thought is that we don’t want to make the statements too terse.
Now, I agree that they are supplemented by the minutes, testimony, speeches, and so on and so forth, but many people are wedded to the 2:15 p.m.
announcement and the interpretations of that announcement, both immediately in the afternoon on CNBC and so forth and the next morning in the newspapers.
If we make the statement too terse, we’re going to leave people sitting around August 8, 2006123 of 158 saying, “Well, we know what they did, but we don’t have much of an understanding of why, how they view the world, where they think the risks lie,” et cetera.
So I would be careful about working really hard to shorten the statement.
One place we’ve had a lot of success, in my opinion, is in articulating our price stability goal, why that’s the appropriate goal, and how it relates to the dual mandate.
We’ve had more success than I would have predicted, quite honestly, when we started to articulate that more forcefully a good number of years ago.
There might be something to be learned from that approach because I think we have been pretty consistent about that message and even some of its nuances.
We are going to get to the question about a numerical objective for inflation.
When we do, we’re going to have to think long and hard
—I suspect this doesn’t come as any surprise to anybody
—about how that is going to play out in policysetting, in decisionmaking.
We may need to provide some sort of background paper to the public at large if we adopt it
—in other words, here is what we’re doing, here’s what we think the implications are, here’s how it’s going to play out in a policy role, as best we can see it.
That’s just something to think about for the future.
I think I’ll stop there.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think this Committee has made huge strides over the past decade toward greater transparency and more-effective communication, an example being that
—it was in 1994, I guess
—we actually started issuing post-meeting statements.
I think we’ve seen significant dividends from those innovations.
They have advanced the goals of both policy effectiveness and accountability.
<START>Our communication strategy at this point, in my view, is August 8, 2006124 of 158 not fundamentally broken, and so I hope that what we can accomplish in the coming months is to produce some improvements in current practice without going for wholesale changes.<END>
I thought today I would just touch on a couple of points that I’ve been thinking about relating to communications, without getting into specifics.
Frankly, I think the goals are fairly noncontroversial.
I regard them as pretty much motherhood and apple pie issues.
What’s challenging is figuring out exactly how to use communications better both internally in the Committee and externally to serve our policy goals.
A couple of cautionary notes:
First, I want to endorse the point that Don made that we should not put in our list of goals that our objective is to maximize transparency for the sake of greater transparency.
<START>The research in this area provides very ambiguous advice about how much transparency is optimal.<END>
Second, we need to be careful that our communications don’t actually impede the process of making appropriate policy decisions or our ability to do so.
In contrast to some of you, I have generally favored the inclusion of forward-looking language in post-meeting statements, at least when the Committee has a reasonably clear idea of where policy is going, as it has until quite recently.
But including such guidance does have the potential for building false expectations that can constrain our actions.
I hope that we will continue to provide forward-looking guidance to the public because I think it does enhance the effectiveness of our policy actions.
But I think we will need to be very clear that those kinds of policy pronouncements are not unconditional commitments to future actions, and we need to continue to emphasize data dependence.
I want also to emphasize a point that Cathy made, which is that communication is a two-way street by which we communicate with markets and the public but we also receive feedback from markets and the public concerning economic conditions and expectations August 8, 2006125 of 158 concerning the future.
We benefit from that feedback perhaps as much as or more than the public benefits from the utterances that we make.
That is a kind of independent reality check on our forecast and analysis.
Therefore, we have to be careful to ensure that these outside voices aren’t drowned out by people who parrot back what we say.
There are times when I have very much worried that our communications have turned the markets into a mirror in which we see little more than our own reflection.
Now I’d like to spend just a couple of minutes on what to me is the most critical challenge that we face as we go forward with our communication strategy.
It relates to the apparent dichotomy between speaking with one voice and speaking as nineteen individuals.
The question is how to provide the public with the clearest and most coherent description of our collective goals, strategies, and policies while continuing to promote an environment in which diverse opinions among the nineteen FOMC participants are not only tolerated but encouraged.
In the past we have managed this balancing act in different ways depending on the circumstances, and we’re going to need that kind of flexibility as we go forward.
On the one hand, there are settings in which the Committee provides a reasonably unified view to the public;
that occurs in our post-meeting statements and also in the Chairman’s testimony to the Congress.
On the other hand, we have a number of outlets for the expression of members’ diverse views
— the FOMC meeting minutes, participants’ speeches, and the ranges of FOMC forecasts that are published in the Monetary Policy Report.
I think that type of approach, of having some unified statements and many opportunities for expression of diverse opinions, is useful.
First, it gives the public a reasonably accurate sense of both the areas of consensus in the FOMC and the range of opinion.
Second, taking an “agree to disagree” approach lessens the likelihood that the FOMC will become trapped in a kind of group-think mentality, in which we end up conforming August 8, 2006126 of 158 for conformity’s sake.
Of course, with the freedom to disagree, we do have a responsibility, when we make statements, to be careful that those statements are not interpreted as representing the views of the Committee as a whole.
Finally, an approach that tries to limit the range of issues on which a committee as big as ours attempts to speak with a united voice will end up enhancing the sense of collegiality and cooperation in the Committee.
The post-meeting statement provides a concrete example of the tricky balancing act that we confront.
We all know it’s often easier to agree on a decision concerning the federal funds rate than it is to agree in every detail about why we came to that decision, let alone about what we expect going forward.
It’s impractical for the statement to convey the full range of our opinions and to attempt to give very detailed explanations of the Committee’s thinking
<START>—again, it tends to ignite disagreements about which specifics to include or to exclude and about even the precise phrasing of each and every line.<END>
<START>So in thinking about that, I find myself wondering if a better approach might be to recognize the intrinsic limits of the statement and to focus on communicating only necessary elements that clearly lie within the consensus view, leaving fuller discussion to the minutes and other things.<END>
The same issue about unity versus diversity is going to arise when we come to discussing our longer-term inflation objective.
<START>I do greatly favor increasing clarity concerning the Committee’s long-term inflation objective, but frankly I’m uncertain which approach is going to be the most attractive to accomplish that.<END>
There is a range of possibilities.
<START>One possibility is that the Committee could provide that type of information through the publication of the range and central tendency of participants’ longer-term inflation projections, which presumably reflect ultimately their inflation objective.<END>
Another possibility is that the Committee could try to agree on the specific numerical objective to communicate to the public, assuming that a sufficient August 8, 2006127 of 158 consensus does exist in the Committee.
Certainly, the benefit of the latter approach would be a clearer signal to the public, which would be beneficial.
But the tradeoff here is that we have to be careful not to straitjacket participants into a particular view that they don’t fully endorse.
So as we go forward, I think we’re going to have to approach these issues case by case.
<START>In general, as I think about the question of unity versus diversity in our communications, I am moving to the conclusion that it’s probably better to err on the side of preserving the advantages of the diversity of views at the cost of somewhat less of the clarity and coherence that would come if we could provide a unified voice to the public.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The first set of questions from the subcommittee had to do with goals and principles.
<START>The first principle I’d bring to this is that money is intrinsically worthless and has value only because people expect it to have value in the future.<END>
So, to be a little provocative, I’ll say that monetary policy is about people’s expectations, and everything else is just commentary.
Therefore, I fully support the first goal
—helping people form expectations regarding our future policy actions is a reasonable goal for communication policy.
The second goal seems clear, too
—ensuring accountability to the people who have granted us this monopoly on policy actions.
It’s important to be clear about what’s meant by communication regarding future policy actions.
It may mean saying something about the future path of interest rates
—and we’ve done that several times
—but it doesn’t have to.
An alternative approach is to articulate what objectives will determine our interest rate choices in the future, and in principle, someone who understands our objectives and the constraints we’re under will be able to figure out what we’ll choose in any given circumstance.
I think this offers really good prospects for overcoming some August 8, 2006128 of 158 of the problems that the Committee has encountered with the forward-looking guidance language, when we essentially tell the public what interest rate settings we think will likely be required to achieve our objectives.
It seems as though communicating that would be enhanced by telling them what our objectives are.
In a sense, that would aid efficiency.
The subcommittee asked what constraints affect our communications.
The obvious one that comes to mind is time consistency
—essentially, the idea that our claims about our future actions are credible.
People have to think that our future selves, be they us or our successors, will actually want to follow through on the actions that we’ve implied by our communications
— we are selecting what our future selves are going to select.
The question of whether our communications will constrain our future selves immediately arises.
Now, one can make some stark assumptions about this question.
In the literature, you typically see just two polar cases analyzed:
One is “yes, totally”
—the perfect commitment case;
the other is “no, not at all”
—the complete discretion case.
But for the purposes of our discussion, I think it makes sense to adopt the intermediate view that our future selves are likely to view it as costly to be perceived as taking actions that contradict what we had previously communicated.
<START>So I’m happy to assume that our statements are not cheap talk, to use game theory language.<END>
At the same time, I don’t think the credibility of our communications is perfect or costless.
At all junctures we need to think through whether we will want to follow through on what we’re implying by our communications.
That idea is related to a separate issue that often arises in discussions of inflation targeting and communications, and that is whether communication will reduce our future flexibility.
At this point, let me just say that to stabilize the value of money we have already sacrificed a great deal of flexibility.
I’d claim that we’ve given up the flexibility to inflate or August 8, 2006129 of 158 deflate at 10 percent in any given year, in the near future.
We’ve given up a lot of things to convince people that money should have about the value it has now.
So it really isn’t a question of giving up flexibility;
it’s a question of what flexibility we want to give up.
Here I’d make another point as well.
If communication is going to have any value at all, it’s going to persuade some people to change their minds about what actions we would take in the future.
Well, if that’s true, then in some sense it has to involve our giving up some of the flexibility that the public has perceived us to have.
So while there are flexibilities we would like to preserve, there are flexibilities we’d like to give up.
I don’t think flexibility per se is a trump card in this situation.
The subcommittee asked about what information should be communicated.
I’ll just focus on one thing that I talked about earlier today, and that’s our long-run inflation objective.
Let me be precise about what I mean here.
Averaging across all possible futures, taking into account how we are expected to react in each possible future, what is the inflation rate n periods from now?
It may not be perfectly certain, but what is the average across all of those futures, taking into account how we’re going to react?
Let me define that average as long-run expected inflation, at least the long-run expected inflation associated with the public’s beliefs about our reactions that are built into that thought experiment I just described.
In most of the standard models (except for those in which some learning about the policymaker is occurring)
—models with Taylor rules or some other fixed reaction function plopped in
—if you take n out long enough, like five years or so, long-run expected inflation is a single number that never varies.
As I mentioned earlier this year, I don’t think that’s the world we live in now.
Personally, I think that we ought to try to agree on a value for where we want inflation to be on average and communicate it to the public.
<START>I don’t see the benefit in terms of short-run flexibility of letting August 8, 2006130 of 158 expected inflation n years ahead have a big, wide, and disperse probability distribution around it or having the mean of that distribution fluctuate a lot.<END>
I can see the value of being flexible about how fast
—a couple of years or a couple of quarters
—we return inflation to target or about how far from target we let it drift;
<START>but I just don’t see the value of allowing fluctuation in our inflation objective years out.<END>
Whenever I encounter one of those software programs for calculating your retirement income and they ask for a lot of assumptions
—such as your age, your salary, your age at retirement, and how fast your wages will go up, and all
—and they get to a box where they ask what the inflation rate is going to be, I think to myself, I don’t know what to put in there.
[Laughter] And I think
—that’s exactly right.
I know what I’d like to put in there, but at this point that’s just wishful thinking on my part, and I’m hesitant to do that.
I’m certainly not going to do that for my brother-in-law when he asks.
[Laughter] I think it’s a real tragedy that we don’t have anything to tell the country for circumstances like that.
It’s the one thing that we ought to be able to pin down in the long run;
it’s the one thing we know we can deliver.
We can’t deliver a predicted average real growth rate;
we know we can’t deliver a predicted average unemployment rate;
but we all agree we have a fair amount of latitude about the long-run inflation forecast.
Anyway, that’s what I have to say about this subject.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, since I’m not going to be here in October, I probably should sit quietly;
but I can’t resist.
I think almost everything has been said.
I want just to comment quickly on a couple of things.
I’m not sure we really talked about a very fundamental August 8, 2006131 of 158 question
—that is, who it is we are trying to communicate with.
That deserves a bit of discussion, it seems to me.
<START>Building on the whole notion of trying to quantify our objectives, I think we’ve seen what a box we can get ourselves in.<END>
In the absence of something, we all start offering our own quantitative whatever.
At the current time, we’re in a position in which many of us have specified what we think our comfort zone is.
We haven’t explained how we’re going to measure it;
we haven’t reconciled the differences across people;
we haven’t explained what we’re going to do when we’re not there;
so we’ve gotten ourselves in this kind of halfway house.
Whether we’d like to talk about inflation targeting and all the things that go with it or not, we’re going to have to stop and deal with it.
We haven’t really talked very much about the role of the forecasts
—and I hope policymaking has always been based on forecasts
—but we have been much more explicit about that role in recent times.
That opens up the whole question of whose forecast and how we talk about forecasts at all the different stages.
Finally
—and I can’t resist commenting
—I think the greatest short-term tension regards the issue of what to do with the four-paragraph post-meeting statement and what to do with the minutes.
I’ve more and more come to the view of Bill Poole that less is more.
We simply can’t get very much of the different ways of thinking into that four-paragraph statement.
I think that’s an impossible task.
We all think about it very differently.
We’ve heard it today.
The statement is simplistic.
I would hope when you get around to talking about the issue that it would be clear that the minutes offer a much better way of trying to help people understand not only the uncertainty but the range of views that go with the policymaking and not let that little simplistic statement after a meeting become the most important communication.
End of story.
Thank you.
August 8, 2006132 of 158 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Let me concentrate on the forward-looking information on the federal funds path or something associated with it.
One of the problems I have with Janet’s position is that, every time we put that information in, we need to have an exit strategy of how we’re going to get it out.
As soon as you stop putting it in, you get yourself tangled up.
In fact, I think that’s where we are today and one of the reasons that we have the language in the statement that we do today.
I would put it in only under very special circumstances with a clear understanding of the strategy of how to get it out.
The argument of this whole bias/tilt language goes back to Volcker, I believe;
it was used as a device to try to produce more agreement within the Committee.
Then it was continued under Greenspan.
It wasn’t announced to the public.
So the idea was that you would get some people to go along with what the Chairman wanted by saying that we’ll have a tilt toward X or Y, up or down;
it was meant to produce a larger vote for the consensus.
Once we started to announce it publicly, it started to affect the markets.
I was part of that decision.
I was in favor of it at the time, and I have since had very strong second thoughts about it
—in part because of the experience of trying to get out from under it once we started down that road.
We need to put more thought into explaining in our statement the decision that was reached, which we don’t do very much of really.
We don’t put much text around the reason for the decision, compared with the risks or the foreshadowing of what we might do in the future.
So that’s where I would put my effort in drafting the statement.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree that the goals listed in the subcommittee’s memo are the right goals.
However, in thinking about the next few questions August 8, 2006133 of 158 concerning the quantity and the content of the information and the nature of any forward-looking information that we provide, I find it difficult to make judgments without knowing where we’re going to emerge from our discussion about what policy approach we take, especially the discussion about whether we’re going to adopt a numerical inflation objective.
As others have said, I think that our communication practices need to reinforce our policy strategy.
In fact, we should consider our communication practices to be a part of our policy strategy.
So, for example, if we move down the path of adopting a numerical objective for inflation, then the appropriate communication strategy may simply be to provide the explicit inflation objective with little guidance about specific policy moves beyond reference to our performance against that objective.
In that case, I think there would be less need for information in the statement that follows our meeting.
However, it might require more information in our semiannual report to the Congress.
Then regarding the forward-looking language, again I think it depends on whether or not we adopt a numerical objective for inflation.
<START>A successful communication strategy should first and foremost give the public confidence that we’re going to produce low inflation over the long run.<END>
I don’t think that a good communication policy strategy, as others have already said, necessarily means that we have to make sure the public can anticipate our next policy move.
If we have a numerical objective helping us to anchor long-term inflation expectations, then that forward-looking guidance might be reserved for those times when the Committee has a great deal of certainty in the course of its near-term policy moves or when it perceives that the cost of being misunderstood is just exceptionally great.
Regarding the last set of questions from the subcommittee involving the individual communications or the Committee communications, I believe that whatever communication August 8, 2006134 of 158 strategy we adopt, it is important to preserve our ability to give and express independent views, especially about forecasts, policy strategies, actions, and so forth.
It’s clear that each of us formulates our own independent opinions about policy actions, and we form those opinions from a sense of how we think economic conditions will evolve.
<START>I’d like to preserve the ability that we enjoy today of sharing our independent thinking and the climate that I sense we have today of a Committee that’s very skilled at building consensus around different perspectives but yet sees the benefit of respectful dissent.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Well, Mr. Chairman, we do have responsibility for a fiat currency, and my straightforward and undiplomatic way of describing what we do for a living is that we are performing a great confidence game.
I think that’s important to bear in mind.
As President Yellen said, this is apple pie and motherhood.
The answer is “yes” to the first questions, but there are questions about which agents we are talking about and, when we talk about generating well-informed expectations, how we do so.
<START>I mentioned earlier, to Governor Kohn’s embarrassment, “full frontal exposure,” and I think that’s not an unimportant point.<END>
To maintain the confidence game that we have to maintain and
—if you’ll permit me to say this having experienced the other side
—to maintain the last bastion of integrity in Washington
—and I feel very strongly about that
—we have to be very careful that we preserve a bit of modesty and mystery to accomplish our goals.
The really tough part is how far we go, and that’s what we’re going to have to talk about going down the path.
<START>For example, I’m somewhat uncomfortable, even though I have great respect for President Moskow, about making long-term forecasts.<END>
The further out you forecast, the more probable error is.
I am wary of August 8, 2006135 of 158 exposing our vulnerabilities, and I think we should be mindful of that as we go through time.
That’s just one thought.
Another thought is about the statement.
I may have forgotten my logic here, but I think we should be as straight as Occam’s razor
—that is, we should take as few variables as possible to explain what we decide to do.
I do think the minutes are very important for illumination.
I don’t want to manipulate the minutes, but I think we can use them quite effectively.
In my statement earlier in the meeting, when we were discussing our view of the economy, I said that I think we did that very effectively the last time around.
Then a third point
—I’m a strong believer in partnerships.
I mentioned this at a dinner with the Presidents last night.
I’m also a very strong believer in a strong managing-partner model, having worked all my life in the private sector in partnerships.
But I do think it’s very, very important to have a diversity of views, and so I second what has been said at the table on that front as well.
Those are my three comments, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, too, support the broad goals that are laid out here.
In thinking about communication, I see that one challenge we will have relates to some of the dialogue we had today.
We set some long-term goals.
How do we link those to what we do in individual meeting actions and decisions?
<START>We already talked about how inflation has been above our 2 percent top goal for two years, and it is likely to be so for two years more.<END>
How would we explain that when we were trying to go forward?
<START>This is the sort of problem that corporations have every year, when they set goals for shareholder returns, but then the earnings jump around like crazy quarter to quarter.<END>
Well, we’re going to have the same kind of issue.
It raises the question of whether we want to talk about how we’re going to get from one place to another.
In other words, a August 8, 2006136 of 158 company can say that they took these big chargeoffs, but that will reduce the cost base, or that they are making an acquisition.
We need to have some real dialogue about what a set goal is going to mean for our short-run communications after each meeting and for the policy path.
It’s the difference between setting the goal and implementing and executing it effectively.
<START>If we can’t communicate how we intend to implement effectively, then we ought to have second thoughts about the goals that we’re setting.<END>
Since I’ve been here we really haven’t talked a lot about how to tie those two together.
On the forward-looking information
—it might have been appropriate back when we started this 25 basis point step-up each meeting.
<START>I’m glad we’re now taking the position that we’re trying to push the risk back to the market.<END>
The market has to make its own forecast of what’s likely to happen.
We need to be clear as to what the key drivers are and pick the few vital elements that we really all can agree on.
We need to communicate that well but make the market judge where those variables are likely to go in the outlook.
I don’t think we do a service to ourselves or to the market if they feel they can sit back and let us make the call.
The moral hazard and other issues there are simply too great.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a few brief comments.
First, with respect to the concision of our statement and the minutes, I guess in a perfect world the minutes would come out much sooner after our statement, but I recognize all the work that needs to get done to get consensus and understanding on those.
I have a modest suggestion, which we can take back up in October.
The minutes could end up being released somewhat sooner but also be more corporate in nature.
<START>It strikes me that a lot of the communication that we do through the minutes is useful for history and for an understanding of August 8, 2006137 of 158 many of the nuances that we’ve talked about but is probably not that useful for some of the other communication purposes discussed here.<END>
It would certainly be useful if the crucial arguments in the discussion we had today were available in the minutes before three weeks have elapsed.
That would take some of the burden off figuring out what goes into the statement.
Without burdening the staff by getting the same product done sooner, we could think rather about what should be part of a corporate-style set of minutes.
<START>We’ve taught the market that a full set of the minutes would come out, but my own suggestion is that the full set could be somewhat delayed.<END>
That’s just a sort of provocative suggestion without as much discussion and thought as we’d want, but I think it partly addresses the statement issue.
Second, on striking the right balance between individuals and the Committee, I’m more convinced than ever, now that I have gone through four FOMC meetings, that the diverse views that people express on monetary policy outside this meeting are important and are critically independent.
What I’m going to say is not an attempt to break that divergence of views or dissuade people from sharing them.
I think it’s actually more problematic when FOMC participants say similar things between meetings.
For example, Mr. Chairman, let’s say that you said X and that 18 of us went out and repeated X more or less identically after the meeting.
The market understanding of that is no longer X or 2X but perhaps 10X or 12X, and I think that does prove problematic.
A burden should be on each of us, when we take our messages to different places between meetings, to be thinking about the consequences, in particular, when we’re saying similar things.
None of that means to say that if you believe Y instead of X you should not be able to go scream that from the hills;
but if you believe a nuance of X, you really have to consider how the markets are going to understand the repetition that they’ve heard.
August 8, 2006138 of 158 Third, just a brief point about market discipline
—I think President Yellen and President Minehan made reference to this.
We’ve been fairly cognizant over the past several meetings about getting the markets to do their own work and not to rely on us.
That market discipline is very important.
Governor Kohn said at the outset that the purpose of this discussion is not to have transparency for transparency’s sake but to try to get to the right monetary policy objectives.
<START>It strikes me as though we could well test the limits of transparency by sharing too much information and getting the markets in a position where they stop doing much of the homework we’ve only started getting them to do at this point.<END>
The right place to come to that judgment is somewhere around where that transparency ends up making them more lemmings than we’d ideally like.
I must admit that I’m not exactly sure how to pull that off, but it strikes me that’s the way to structure or to think about that discussion.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The goals are pretty clearly stated, and I have no real problems with them.
I agree that communication and transparency are really a key part of maintaining and enhancing our own credibility.
I also understand, as I listen to people around the table and other conversations, that some of these issues have no easy or clear answers to them, and I should note in advance that my own views are evolving as I think about and understand the nuances of the issues.
I agree with President Yellen.
I’d like to applaud the Committee because in the past ten years there have really been great strides in both transparency and communication.
Part of the challenge, it seems to me, is how we meet these goals.
I think it’s true that putting some limits on what information is released is probably necessary over certain periods of time.
For example, I wouldn’t advocate opening the FOMC meetings to the public;
<START>I think that would not be terribly useful.<END>
On the other hand, Governor Warsh was just talking about perhaps August 8, 2006139 of 158 releasing minutes earlier or faster or some version of them, maybe with incomplete detail, but including the tone and nature of the discussion.
<START>I think it could be fairly useful and informative, particularly if it noted disagreements or discussions in terms of where the tension happened to be within the meeting.<END>
<START>I spent several months at the Bank of England a couple of years ago and watched the give and take among committee members at the MPC and also watched them go out in public and discuss their different views and why they disagreed with each other.<END>
That was very instructive to me because they it without apparently adding to volatility in the marketplace.
did The market had come to accept the notion that these people disagreed on some things.
The information released might differ depending on the type of monetary regime we think we’re in
—whether in a regime of inflation targeting or one of full discretion.
However, regardless of the regime, the need for policymakers to clearly communicate what their goals are, their understanding of the economy’s current economic conditions and expected future conditions, and then the reasons for their decisions is an important part of communication.
As to the quantity of information, quantity and quality to me are intertwined, so I’m going to talk about both of them together.
Again, I applaud the expedited release of the minutes.
Instituting that was a tremendous step forward, and I think it’s a very good idea.
However, I would favor the Committee’s releasing some additional pieces of information.
I obviously favor stating an explicit definition of price stability because doing so would help clarify our goals.
The current practice of citing the range and central tendency of members’ forecasts is fine, but I would favor our releasing more information, perhaps in a quarterly forecast or in something like an inflation report, to help convey to the marketplace and the public what our range of views is and where the Committee stands on the state of the economy.
<START>August 8, 2006140 of 158 It might help the public’s assessment of our views if we based our forecasts on some underlying policy assumptions rather than on what one might call appropriate policy, which might differ from member to member obviously and would likely not be well understood by the public anyway.<END>
One suggestion that has already been mentioned is conditioning the forecasts on the market’s expected funds rate path, for example.
But in some way stating our assumptions or projections about potential GDP would be important as well because that information, again, will help the markets and market participants understand where the Committee is coming from.
In regard to forward-looking information, I think there are a number of things that the FOMC could and should communicate, but its current expectation about the future path of the fed funds rate is not one of them.
I don’t think that’s a very good practice in general.
However, I do think that what we need to do is talk more about what our goals are, what our forecasts of those goals are, and even more in a qualitative sense the process by which we think we’re going to get there.
That is to say, talking about how monetary policy will respond to various events
—I hesitate to use the phrase “decision rule”
—wouldn’t necessarily say anything about the future path of the fed funds rate, but it would be very informative.
It’s critical, as has already been mentioned, that the FOMC members agree on what the goals are.
The members don’t need to agree on the model of the economy or the channel by which they think monetary policy actually operates.
Indeed, given the state of economic science, the differences in models and channels can aid in policy formation.
<START>Similarly, since dissents at this meeting are public, dissenters should feel free to explain the reasons for their dissent.<END>
We shouldn’t discourage presidents and other members from expressing their views about the state of the economy and the process.
Committee members should be free to indicate how their views on the August 8, 2006141 of 158 economy are evolving.
In fact, I think that doing so supports our goal of helping the public form sound expectations of what policy is actually going to be.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Thank you.
I want to start by saying that I think we’re confronted with a set of issues that really aren’t principally about communication and transparency.
I think they’re fundamentally about how we conduct monetary policy and the monetary policy regime we’re going to operate under.
I want to say a little about what I see as the hierarchy of challenges or decisions we have to make in that context.
We have to have a discussion about what objectives, particularly in terms of inflation, will guide this Committee’s decisions going forward, and I think it’s hard to do that without a discussion in quantitative terms.
<START>We also need to get in the position of thinking and talking through more directly and candidly at these meetings how we make decisions about the most appropriate path for inflation and output, especially at times when we’re way off our basic objectives.<END>
We don’t really do that now.
<START>We’ve been living with a lot of ambiguity about whether we’re operating with, in effect, an objective of getting core PCE down to some particular level at a certain time or not, and I don’t think we can be comfortable living with that degree of ambiguity much longer.<END>
In some ways, that set of issues is the first we have to confront.
We may not get consensus or resolution, but we have to talk through those issues.
<START>We also have to decide what we want to disclose in terms of our objectives, our forecast, the policy consistent with that forecast, and uncertainty.<END>
We face a lot of choices in terms of what we do and how we do it regarding quantitative versus qualitative and explicit versus implicit approaches to communications.
Several of you said that in our statements we should simply say what we decided and why, but I don’t think it’s quite that simple.
The “why” has a lot to do with August 8, 2006142 of 158 the forecast, and to say nothing about the forecast in the statement would be communicating little about the reasons for our policy decisions.
But the “what” is also not simple:
It is certainly not principally about whether or not we move the fed funds rate.
The “what” we’re deciding has to do a lot with whether we take a view about or try to change or validate the market expectations going forward over some period.
So I don’t think we can get through the choices about communication and transparency by just agreeing that we want to limit ourselves to the more-minimalist objectives of communicating what we did and why.
It feels to me a little more complicated than that.
The third point is a general point.
If we are going to change the regime, we can’t do it piecemeal.
We can’t decide that we want to announce a quantitative definition of long-term price stability without confronting the kind of disclosure regime that we have to adopt in support of that.
<START>Also, we can’t think sensibly about the evolution of our disclosure regime around the forecast, for example, without coming to some greater understanding about whether we disclose a quantitative objective for inflation.<END>
So I think they need to be viewed as a package.
For a similar reason, I think we can’t approach this set of changes by saying let’s move on the things that are easy or less contentious or have more of a consensus without having a better sense of where we really want to go.
That doesn’t mean that we should change all at once or, if we decide to change things, we do them all together.
<START>We can still decide to have a graduated approach to introducing the changes in the regime, but before we make an incremental move, we need to have a better sense about where we want ultimately to go.<END>
If we don’t have consensus about where we want to go, then it’s harder to decide what the incremental move should be.
It doesn’t mean we should be inert.
<START>It’s very healthy to have a candid discussion about what we think is wrong with our current regime.<END>
<START>I used to work with somebody who said to me, “Don’t bring me problems without solutions.” Therefore, discomfort with a set of attributes of our regime relative to the experience of August 8, 2006143 of 158 other countries is really not enough to justify change.<END>
<START>We have to be able to look at the proposals for change and be very comfortable that they’re going to respond to the problem without leaving us with a set of other collateral risks or disadvantages.<END>
It’s also good to have a direct and open discussion about what we do not want to try to achieve through communications.
<START>I’m very uncomfortable with what I think it would be fair to say is a substantial faction in the academic profession now, which says that the optimal communication policy of central banks should be to seek very close alignment between the market’s expectations about future policy and the central bank’s and to achieve that alignment in real time and not have long periods of wide divergence between what the market thinks and what we think is appropriate.<END>
That position strikes me as highly unrealistic and complicated and maybe difficult to achieve, but we should talk through that issue.
I think it’s also unrealistic to say that we should avoid clarity about our views on the future course of the economy and policy.
<START>That pure fog alternative seems unsatisfying and uncomfortable to me.<END>
I have nothing to add to the discussion about diversity.
There are great benefits to diversity.
I do think we should try to avoid having, because of scheduling, many members of the Committee talking in the same period.
It is difficult to achieve but worth thinking about.
Finally I just want to compliment the subcommittee.
The way you have laid out the issues is very nicely done.
<START>I also want to compliment the Chairman for approaching this subject very openly, having us try to think through all the difficult choices involved together, and allowing some analysis, debate, and a little competition for ideas help inform choices about how we go forward.<END>
I think that approach is admirable, and I commend you for it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kroszner.
August 8, 2006144 of 158 MR. KROSZNER.
I’ll be very brief.
I think a number of the points that Vice Chairman Geithner made are excellent, in particular his emphasizing that we have to think about this as a package but not as necessarily meaning that we must implement everything at once.
We may want to see how the pieces are working before we do that, but we do have to have the ultimate goals in mind.
<START>We need to have the whole thing together before we can start moving forward because it could be quite dangerous to change some aspects of communication policy but then realize that, if we want to do something else different down the line, we’ll have to change them again.<END>
So I think that approach is exactly the right one.
Also because what we’re doing relates to any changes, we have to think about the dynamics.
We see this now in the persistence of certain words in our statements.
We use the word once, but then do we use it again or do we not use it again?
Individual words take on an incredible amount of importance.
Now, one way to solve that problem is perhaps to put out more and more words so that each one is diluted.
[Laughter] An awful lot of private-sector resources were devoted to the three-letter word “yet” that came out of one of the statements, when I believe that not a single member of the FOMC even noticed it.
I think that is problematic.
<START>I’m not quite sure of the best way to solve that problem, but I think we have to be very sensitive to that.<END>
On the issue of the one versus the whole, the markets have a very strong perception of coordination among us.
The notion that the Governors are independent and that the Federal Reserve Bank Presidents are independent is considered laughable.
<START>When people ask me about that, they say, “Well, doesn’t he tell you what to do?” I say, “No, no one tells anyone what to do.” Maybe you’d like to, [laughter] but that’s not how it operates.<END>
Part of that notion is just a perception, and so having people speak at the same time may not be much of a problem.
But the perception is that it’s a coordinated effort rather than a series of individuals who are expressing their views, and I think August 8, 2006145 of 158 communicating the extent of our independence or the extent of our coordination is something that would actually go a long way toward things.
I was one of those academics that Don referred to as putting up those tables and trying to figure out whether we were independent or not, sort of rating us.
But that is not what we’re supposed to be doing, and I hope my comments will not be taken in that context.
One final remark is that we have to be modest about what we’re trying to do.
Part of this discussion is the way of conveying our uncertainty.
<START>I would close my class on money and banking, and I’ll close my remarks here, by presenting a fantastic New Yorker cartoon.<END>
It relates to the former Chairman and shows someone praying, just before going to bed, about the former Chairman, that he knows what he knows, he knows what he doesn’t know, and he knows the difference.
It’s important for us to be able to try to convey to the markets that we know what we know, we know what we don’t know, and we do know the difference.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
What if we don’t know what we don’t know?
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Let me add just a couple of very general comments.
I hope that in our discussions about communication we’ll be aiming to make policy work better.
I think that involves trying to make the markets and the public form expectations that are at least broadly consistent with our goals and our strategy and trying to anchor long-term inflation expectations to the extent possible.
<START>Even if you are skeptical about our ability to do this, you may still agree that we want to avoid miscommunication and unnecessary volatility to the extent possible.<END>
I agree also that in general we don’t want to provide the future funds rate path.
I see a lot of problems with that.
One of the reasons not to do it is that, if the market is forced to infer the funds rate path from economic information, that inference provides information to us.
Otherwise, they’re August 8, 2006146 of 158 simply repeating what we tell them.
In an ideal world, how would we get the market to infer our expected path?
<START>Well, we would provide them with a conditional forecast with error bands and all kinds of conditioning assumptions, and we would tell them about our objective function, which would include not only the long-term objectives but also the relative weights on inflation and output and the shape of the risk aversion coefficients and the like.<END>
Now, of course, we can’t do that.
Besides the technical difficulties, as has already been pointed out, we have nineteen very distinct points of view around the table.
But I do think there are ways to communicate this kind of information to the public.
As an example, in my monetary policy testimony I very consciously
—whether it was successful or not I leave it to you to judge
—talked about our Committee projections, which gave the public not only some insight into what our general views were but also information about our preferences because it showed a relatively gradual decline in inflation.
This removed the fear that at least some market participants had that we were going to try to bring inflation down extremely quickly and extremely far.
In that respect, it was very useful, and I generally agree with President Moskow and others that more-detailed and more-frequent projections might be a very useful way for us to go in the future.
Finally, since we don’t have the budget to hire a semiotician, I do want to express some frustration with the coded language that we rely on so heavily
—I have been exposed to some of the pitfalls that it can create.
I think that we are reaching the limits of what codes can provide, and I’d like to encourage us to think about ways to use quantitative information, like forecasts, to provide more information and thereby reduce the weight that’s placed on any single words in statements and the like.
So those are just a few comments.
I want to thank everybody for an excellent discussion and for a lot of patience.
I appreciate it very much.
Our next meeting is on Wednesday, September 20, and we are adjourned.
August 8, 2006147 of 158END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 104
