
October 24-25, 20062 of 203Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on October 24-25, 2006 October 24, 2006
—Afternoon Session CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Good afternoon.
Let me start by welcoming Pat Barron, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, who will be here in Jack Guynn’s seat for today.
MR.
BARRON.
Thanks.
It’s good to be here.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Welcome.
I have a bit of business to start with before we go to Dino.
Last month the Congress passed, and the President signed, the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act, which had a number of measures in it.
Included among them were provisions that allow the Federal Reserve to pay interest on reserves and to reduce reserve requirements at our discretion.
The act potentially has a lot of very important implications for the conduct of monetary policy, for payment systems, for contractual clearing balances, for data collection, and so on.
Because of budget-scoring rules, the provisions of this act will not take place until October 2011.
So I feel that, if we hurry, we can possibly be prepared in time.
[Laughter] So if the group is amenable, I’d like to ask Vincent Reinhart to form a committee of senior staff around the System to begin talking about these issues.
I assume at various intervals we’ll have reports and some discussions at the FOMC meeting about these issues.
Do I hear any second?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Second.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Dino Kos.
MR.
KOS.1 1 The materials used by Mr. Kos are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will be referring to the charts that were distributed, and I will divide my comments into two parts.
First, a slimmed-down report on market developments in the intermeeting period, and then I’ll touch on the October 24-25, 20063 of 203highlights of the memo I circulated last week regarding management of the System Open Market Account.
The short intermeeting period was relatively calm.
Hence, volatility remains low and credit spreads tight, while some equity indexes rose to multiyear highs.
Occasional rumors that a large hedge fund lost significant amounts of money betting that yields would rise did not dent the underlying sense of confidence or relative tranquility.
On the first page of the handout, the top panel graphs the three-month deposit rate and the same rate three, nine, and fifteen months forward.
The longer-dated forwards
—as reflected by the solid red line
—have declined more than 75 basis points from early summer to early October as market participants priced in an easing of policy for early 2007.
Those expectations were heightened as GDP forecasts for the third quarter were consistently trimmed downward.
<START>But having pushed forward rates too far, market participants were poorly positioned for the reversal in past few weeks after a surprising Philadelphia Fed survey and comments by Governor Kohn and other Committee members were interpreted as suggesting that policy would not likely be eased on the trajectory that markets had built in.<END>
Longer-dated forward rates still anticipate an ease late next year, but the magnitude of that easing has been scaled back.
Longer-term Treasury yields show a similar pattern, as indicated in the middle panel.
The yield curve remains inverted, though less than it was a month ago.
With credit spreads remaining tight and credit quality favorable, there has been less agitation in markets that the inverted curve is sending a recessionary signal.
<START>Meanwhile, breakeven inflation rates from TIPS paint a favorable picture, especially at short maturities given the fall in energy prices.<END>
As shown in the bottom panel, the five-year breakeven continued to narrow, to about 2.10 percent, and has now contracted more than 50 basis points in less than three months.
Longer-term maturities, which are less affected by short-run energy price moves, had less of a decline, as shown by the ten-year maturity.
Meanwhile the five-year rate five years forward
—the red line
—is little changed from the last FOMC meeting.
<START>The prospect that policy rates may have peaked plus falling oil prices supported equity prices and trumped adverse factors such as evidence that economic growth had slowed.<END>
As shown in the top left panel on page 2, the Dow Jones Industrial Average finally pierced the 12,000 level to a new record high.
Other major indexes, such as the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq
—as shown in the top right panel
—also rose, though they remain some distance from their record highs.
One feature of the equity markets since the tightening cycle began has been the outperformance of so-called value stocks, as shown in the middle left panel.
When economic growth is strong, value stocks
—represented by the larger cyclical companies
—tend to do better because their earnings are stimulated by the strong economy.
But since early August, coincident with the pause in policy tightening, the growth stocks have begun to outperform.
One interpretation is that, with economic growth slowing, the effect is biggest on cyclical companies, whose margins compress, whereas growth stocks are better able to maintain margins.
Another interpretation is that the equity markets are also pricing in October 24-25, 20064 of 203a peak in the tightening cycle on the theory that the Committee will not tighten into a slowing economy.
Finally, this generally benign picture is also reflected in the foreign exchange market.
The bottom panel graphs the dollar against a range of currencies since the last FOMC meeting.
None of these currencies moved more than 2 percent in either direction, and most are clustered within a band of 1 percent.
For what it’s worth, the currencies that appreciated tended to be higher-yielding currencies.
This pattern tends to support anecdotal reports that, in the absence of directional opportunities, carry trades continue to attract speculative flows.
Switching gears somewhat, I want to summarize the main points of the memo that I sent to the Committee last week about the domestic portfolio guidelines.
The last time that we systematically looked at the portfolio was in 1996.
We looked at it again in 2000 and 2001 in the context of considering alternative assets given that the Treasury market was shrinking and the Committee was faced with the prospect of acquiring private-sector assets.
The table on the right side of page 3 provides a recent snapshot of the System Open Market Account.
Given the amount of time that has elapsed and the changed environment, we thought it would be timely to refresh our analysis and assess whether the principles we had been using to manage the SOMA portfolio still made sense.
Indeed, we concluded that the four principles identified previously
—safety, liquidity, market neutrality, and return
—remain appropriate given the objectives for SOMA.
Safety is the bedrock of a central bank balance sheet, and its importance is uncontroversial.
The Committee has achieved the goals embedded in this principle by maintaining a portfolio of Treasury securities with no credit risk.
For years SOMA also held smaller amounts of agency and GSE (government-sponsored enterprise) securities, but these were allowed to roll off.
The last GSE security in SOMA matured in 2003.
Somewhat more complicated is liquidity.
The Committee has discussed liquidity at various times in the past two decades.
In practical terms, the issue is how fast the Desk can offset a reserve-adding event, such as a large discount window loan or a large foreign exchange intervention.
<START>Our view is that the critical period for such operations is the short run.<END>
Longer-term sterilizations will likely be slow and can be managed in the normal course of reserve management operations.
As the memo describes
—so I will not go into detail
—our conclusion is that it is prudent to add a second limit or guideline of $80 billion of liquid assets over a three-month period while keeping the current $208 billion limit over a twelve-month period.
In practice, as shown in the bottom chart on page 3, SOMA maintains liquidity from maturing bills, coupons, and repos far beyond these minimums
—a feature we will continue.
Additionally, the Desk has other tools if needed in extremis, as shown on the left side.
These include the ability to conduct reverse repos and, as a last resort, outright sales.
October 24-25, 20065 of 203The third principle is market neutrality, if you would turn to the next page.
This is also somewhat complicated.
This issue is, in many ways, simpler now than it was six years ago, when the stock of Treasuries was declining.
At that time, we adopted a per issue limit structure, which is summarized in the top right panel of page 4.
In short, per issue limits of 35 percent were adopted for bills, which gradually declined to 15 percent for bonds.
The blue bars represent SOMA’s holdings for each specific security.
This response was reasonable given the environment in 2000.
However, the limit structure has, in recent years, created situations in which we have had forced redemptions to stay within these limits, which in turn forces us to make additional outright purchases to offset those maturing assets.
We are therefore proposing to revert to an informal flat limit structure of 35 percent for all maturities.
I should note that this change would, in reality, have a very limited effect on the portfolio given other restrictions that we have, and which I’ll get to later.
At the margin it might allow us to reduce our huge reliance on holdings at the short end of the curve.
We are somewhat underrepresented in the middle of the curve.
An associated issue I wanted to raise is SOMA’s auction participation.
Our participation can be highly variable.
There are two factors that we cannot control.
First, the Treasury’s auction calendar is itself variable and dependent on fiscal needs.
Second, the Desk cannot participate in auctions unless it has securities maturing that very day.
The middle right panel shows this variability.
The yellow box highlights SOMA’s anticipated participation for the three-year note in the next three refundings.
We anticipate taking down $6.1 billion in November, $1.5 billion in February, and then $6.0 billion in May.
Why is this important given that we are an add-on in the auctions?
The Fed’s holdings are part of the floating supply, which can influence the way an issue trades in the repo market.
This can, I hope, be seen in the bottom panel.
Our participation in the five-year note went from quarterly participation to monthly when the Treasury shifted from a mid-month settlement to a month-end settlement.
SOMA’s participation is the green bar.
The change allowed us to smooth out our participation because we had large amounts of two-year notes maturing at month end.
The black line represents the specialness spread in the repo market for each issue.
Note that this spread has been much smaller in recent months, when SOMA’s holdings have been both steady and available to be lent.
Our preference for steady and consistent auction participation is, however, constrained by restrictions on how we invest maturing proceeds and, of course, by changes the Treasury makes to the auction calendar.
In short, we are likely to continue to wrestle with this principle for some time.
The last principle very briefly is return.
In our view, this principle should not drive the way SOMA is managed, given that our profits are derived from interest on our Treasury holdings and in turn flow back to the Treasury.
<START>Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign operations during this period, and I will need a vote to approve domestic operations.<END>
Helen and I would be happy to answer any questions.
October 24-25, 20066 of 203CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Are there questions?
I see none.
Do I have a motion?
GOVERNOR KOHN.
So moved.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Second.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
The motion is passed without objection.
Thank you very much.
We’ll turn now to the economic situation.
Dave Stockton.
MR.
STOCKTON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>About a week ago, as we were closing the forecast, I was marveling at how little it had changed over the intermeeting period<END>
—both the broad strokes and the details.
<START>But the warm glow of accomplishment had barely been kindled when a glance at my desk calendar revealed the source of our success.<END>
The last FOMC meeting had been only five weeks ago, so we simply had not had time to accumulate our usual backlog of forecasting errors.
[Laughter] I recognize that even this assertion is open to some challenge.
Because of the incoming data, we have revised down our estimate of third-quarter growth of real GDP about ¾ percentage point, to an annual pace of just 1 percent.
However, we don’t think this downward revision carries with it much, if any, macroeconomic signal about greater weakness going forward.
Importantly, consumption, housing, and business fixed investment all came in very close to our September forecast.
The downside surprises that we experienced last quarter were concentrated in motor vehicle production, defense spending, and net exports.
In each case, we believe some good reasons exist for anticipating that these sources of restraint will abate or reverse in the fourth quarter.
With regard to motor vehicles, the production cuts needed to deal with the inventory overhang that developed last spring have been larger and have come more quickly than we had expected.
<START>As a consequence, the drop in motor vehicle output took a bigger bite out of growth in the third quarter and is now expected to be a roughly neutral factor for growth in the current quarter, rather than being a small drag on growth in both quarters.<END>
<START>Defense spending also fell far short of our expectations last quarter, but we expect these outlays to rebound in the fourth quarter to a level more in line with defense appropriations.<END>
<START>Finally, imports are estimated to have surged in the third quarter more than seems warranted by the fundamentals and, as best we can tell, without a full offset in other components of spending.<END>
Karen and her team expect some of that import surprise to be unwound in the fourth quarter, providing a small plus to estimated growth.
All told, we are projecting the growth of real GDP to rebound to a pace of 2¼ percent in the fourth quarter.
For the second half, output is anticipated to grow at an annual rate of 1½ percent, a forecast not much different from the one in September.
We also have made only minor adjustments to our longer-term GDP forecast.
<START>By our assessment, lower oil prices and a stronger stock market more than offset the effects of a slightly higher dollar and a bit weaker trajectory for house prices.<END>
All October 24-25, 20067 of 203told, we revised up our forecast for the growth of real GDP 0.1 percent in both 2007 and 2008, to 2.2 and 2.5 percent respectively.
Basically, the general contour of the forecast is the same as in September.
As before, the very subdued pace of the expansion that is projected for the second half of this year results principally from a sharp contraction in residential investment that directly subtracts more than 1¼ percentage points from the growth of real GDP.
Residential investment continues to contract next year, though that contraction gradually diminishes.
In addition, the drag on spending and activity from the run-up in energy prices that has occurred, on net, over the past three years is expected to lessen considerably from this year to the next.
The attenuation of the drags from housing and energy alone would result in a prompter return of growth to potential.
However, we expect the housing slump to restrain the growth of real output this year and next through wealth effects and multiplier-accelerator influences.
Most notably, house prices are projected to about flatten out;
and as the impetus from past house appreciation wanes, consumption growth should slow, and the saving rate should begin to edge up.
With its usual lag, the overall deceleration in output, income, and sales further damps consumption and business investment.
As a consequence, growth remains slightly below potential in 2007, and the output gap edges up to roughly ½ percent of GDP by the end of the year.
With the bulk of the direct and indirect effects of the housing slump expected to have largely played out by then, real GDP growth is expected to expand in line with its potential in 2008.
Meanwhile, core PCE price inflation, which is currently running a bit less than 2½ percent, edges down to about 2 percent in 2008.
The opening up of a small output gap helps to head off an intensification of inflation pressures.
But by far the most potent influences are the diminishing upward pressures from prices for energy, non-energy imports, and other commodities.
Because this basic story is virtually unchanged from the September Greenbook and because we had relatively few surprises to deal with in the forecast, I thought that I would dispense with a further explication of the contours of the forecast.
Instead, I=ll offer you a scorecard of sorts to help you audit the plausibility of the forecast story in light of data that we will be receiving in coming months.
Let me start with housing, because as I noted a moment ago, the recent and projected contraction in residential investment is the principal source of the below-trend growth that we are projecting over the next year.
For that story to be on track, housing starts will need to drop sharply further by the end of the year.
<START>Single-family starts averaged about 1.4 million units in the third quarter, and in our forecast, we are anticipating a further 12 percent decline, to a pace of 1¼ million units this quarter.<END>
We read the incoming data as being consistent with that outlook.
Although starts bounced up in September, permits
—a less noisy indicator of housing activity
—continued to plunge.
Moreover, inventories of unsold homes remain at a very high level, and sales cancellations have continued to increase.
But after a long period of what seemed to be unrelentingly bad news, the housing data received over the intermeeting period could be fairly characterized as more mixed.
Sales of new and existing homes firmed a bit in late summer, the index of pending home sales moved up in August, and homebuying attitudes as measured in the Michigan survey October 24-25, 20068 of 203jumped up in September and October.
Although it is far too early to conclude that these indicators are pointing to stabilization in housing markets, they provide at least some encouragement to the view that the bottom may now be closer than the top.
We will also be scrutinizing the information on house prices.
Another reading on the OFHEO (Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight) price index will become available in early December before the next meeting.
Here we will be looking for another noticeable step-down in the rate of house-price appreciation, from the 5 percent pace posted in the second quarter to a projected 1¾ percent pace in the third.
That forecast is roughly consistent with our near-term forecasting models that make use of the information in the Case-Shiller price indexes and other high-frequency measures of home prices.
As you know, we are not forecasting the national average of house prices to drop, but our very low projected rate of house-price appreciation implies that a substantial fraction of households will be experiencing outright declines.
Consumption will be the second major area that should be monitored, in part because we are expecting the slowing in house prices to show through here.
In brief, we will be looking for a continuation in coming months of the moderate increases in consumer spending that we have observed since the spring.
Over the past half year, consumer spending excluding motor vehicles has been increasing at a pace of roughly 2¾ to 3 percent, and we are expecting more of the same in coming months.
That relatively steady expected growth reflects some crosscurrents that seem likely to be at work.
<START>Real income gains should be bolstered by the recent fall in energy prices and continuing, albeit modest, gains in employment.<END>
But the lagged effects of higher borrowing costs and an ebbing of positive wealth effects from housing are expected to hold spending below the gains in income and result in a slight upward tilt to the saving rate.
<START>Obviously, given the importance of consumption in overall aggregate demand, developments here will have a critical bearing on the probability of achieving our projected soft landing.<END>
A snap-back in consumer spending in coming months
—an outcome that seems to underlie some of the outside forecasts that are stronger than ours
—might lead to no landing rather than a soft landing.
<START>In contrast, any serious faltering of consumer spending is “buckle the seat belts and assume the crash position.” The third major development that we will be looking for is another sustained step-down in the pace of employment growth.<END>
Slower employment growth is a key link in the multiplier mechanism through which the housing-induced slowdown in aggregate output and spending propagates forward into below-trend growth next year.
We correctly anticipated the first leg of that slowing earlier this year, when average gains in nonfarm payrolls dropped from the 200,000 per month pace of the preceding several years to the roughly 120,000 per month pace observed since the spring.
But our projection anticipates a further slowing in the fourth quarter to an average pace of about 75,000 per month.
To be sure, the increase in September was just 51,000, but that came on the heels of a gain in August of 188,000, so we wouldn’t want to lean too heavily on the September observation for support.
Moreover, if asked to present just one piece of evidence that casts the greatest doubt on the staff projection at October 24-25, 20069 of 203present, I would point to initial claims for unemployment insurance.
<START>Claims have basically been moving sideways in recent months and provide no indication that a further softening in labor markets is under way.<END>
<START>Given the looseness of the relationship, our forecast of payroll employment is not inconsistent with the current level of initial claims, but right now this important piece of our forecast seems to have more upside risk than downside risk.<END>
The fourth element of our forecast that we will be looking for in coming months is some signs of slowing in business fixed investment.
Of course, the accelerator consequences for equipment spending of the slowing we now think is under way in aggregate demand is really a story for 2007, and given the volatility in the data, it will take some time to detect that slowing when, or if, it occurs.
But more immediately, we are expecting to see some slowing in nonresidential construction from the 20 percent pace that we’ve experienced over the past half year to something closer to a 10 percent pace in coming quarters, thus providing less offset to the weakness in residential construction than has been the case thus far this year.
With energy prices leveling out, the upward impetus from drilling and mining activity seems likely to gradually abate.
Outside drilling and mining, smaller employment gains, slower growth of manufacturing output, and still-high vacancy rates suggest to us that this sector will cool somewhat going forward.
The final item on the scorecard is inflation.
We are going to be looking for core PCE prices to continue to increase an average of about 0.2 percent per month for the remainder of the year, with core CPI running between 0.2 and 0.3 percent per month.
Those increases would be higher than in most recent years but lower than the pace observed last spring.
Moreover, some of the key factors that underlie our projection of a gradual slowing of core inflation over the projection period now seem to be falling into place.
After nearly three years of persistent upside surprise, oil and other energy prices have dropped noticeably from the levels of late summer.
If these recent developments hold, the cost pressures from rising energy prices should ease over time.
Moreover, the sharp increases in residential rent that occurred in the spring appear to have simmered down of late, and we are expecting that pattern to continue in coming months.
<START>Meanwhile, most of the major measures of inflation expectations that we monitor have continued to fluctuate in a reasonably narrow range, and we expect that to remain the case going forward.<END>
I am tempted to say that, armed with this scorecard, you will arrive at the December meeting with a clear idea of how the staff forecast has stood up to the incoming data.
But of course, we all know how the story goes.
Much like the cliffhanger serial movies of the 1930s, the promise appears to be that, if you come back next time, all the current problems will be resolved.
<START>However, given rational expectations, you know that, to the extent any problems are resolved over the intermeeting period, they will simply be replaced by a new set of puzzles and perils.<END>
Karen will continue our presentation.
October 24-25, 200610 of 203MS. JOHNSON.
Once again I find myself reporting to you that movements in global oil prices are among the developments during the intermeeting period that were factors in our deliberations about the external sector.
Global crude oil spot and futures prices fell further following our September projection but by differing amounts over the maturity spectrum.
When we finalized the current baseline forecast, spot prices and very near term futures prices had moved down more than $4 per barrel;
futures contracts that mature at the end of 2007 had recorded price declines of about $2;
those maturing at the end of 2008 had price declines of about 50 cents.
Indeed, for contracts maturing beyond 2009, prices actually rose such that the far-dated contract for December 2012 had moved up about $1 per barrel in price.
We adjusted our projection for U.S.
oil import prices by amounts similar to these changes in futures prices.
The differential movement in prices implies that, even though prices have moved down all along the path through the forecast period, this path now slopes up more steeply than it previously did.
<START>So our outlook is for oil prices to rise rather sharply over the forecast period, although from a lower starting point than in the September Greenbook.<END>
The reasons for the additional decline in prices during September and October include the return of production to near previous rates at Prudhoe Bay, the absence of any sign of late-season hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico, and awareness of current high inventory levels.
These inventories are by their very nature transitory;
hence, market participants seem to believe that some of the current abundant supply will diminish over time, leaving limited spare production capacity and chronic risks to production in Nigeria, Iran, Iraq, and elsewhere.
Late last week, OPEC announced production cuts of 1.2 million barrels per day as of November 1.
Although the size of actual cuts by individual OPEC suppliers remains to be seen, we judge that significant cuts, albeit not as large as those announced, are needed for prospective demand to be consistent with prices in the futures curve.
Those prices remain elevated
—around the levels expected at the start of this year.
<START>We again asked ourselves how the substantial drop in oil prices since their August peak matters for the U.S.<END>
economy.
As Dave mentioned, some of the near-term variance in U.S.
real GDP growth reflects the path of real imports, including oil imports.
The nominal trade deficit is clearly narrowed as a consequence of lower oil prices.
We expect that the average oil bill in the fourth quarter will show an improvement from the third quarter of $60 billion at an annual rate.
The net trade balance on nominal goods and services will improve by just about the same amount as other trade components experience small, offsetting changes.
As oil prices rise going forward, the nominal value of oil imports should move back up;
but for 2007 as a whole, we expect that the total figure will be about the same as the total for this year, followed by a moderate increase in 2008.
With respect to our forecast for exports, we again expect that real exports of goods and services will expand at an annual rate of about 4½ percent through early 2008 and then will accelerate slightly, to about 5 percent, over the second half of 2008.
We see this pace of export growth as reflecting moderately strong growth of trade in both services and merchandise.
These components in turn reflect solid average growth of around 3¼ percent in foreign real GDP.
The projected October 24-25, 200611 of 203acceleration in real exports in 2008 reflects a boost from relative prices as U.S.
export price inflation moderates.
This projected pace of export growth is somewhat below that observed in recent years, particularly in the first half of this year.
To some extent, the double-digit growth of U.S.
real exports early this year reflected rapid real GDP growth abroad at that time.
<START>But our models cannot explain all the strong growth, and a sizable positive residual has emerged in our model.<END>
During the first quarter, exceptionally rapid growth of real GDP was widespread abroad as most industrial countries and many emerging-market economies in both Asia and Latin America recorded particularly robust real expansion.
<START>The rapid growth moved many foreign economies closer to potential and was not sustainable over the long run.<END>
We read recent indicators of activity abroad as generally confirming our expectation that slowing from those very rapid rates would occur through the year.
According to the data, among the industrial countries, Canada and Japan have GDP already decelerating in the second quarter.
In contrast, the pace of expansion strengthened in the euro area;
<START>but with further tightening of monetary policy and an increase in the value-added tax in Germany to take effect at the start of next year, our outlook calls for a slowdown in growth there as well.<END>
For the emerging-market economies, the most important news is Chinese third-quarter real GDP growth, announced just after the Greenbook was distributed.
Based on the data and our best estimate of a seasonally adjusted series for the level of Chinese GDP, real growth in China was at an annual rate of about 5½ percent in the third quarter from the second quarter, following two quarters of growth above 12 percent.
These data are only approximate as they are inferred from the annual growth rates published by the Chinese authorities.
However, it does seem clear that the measures implemented by Chinese officials to cool the economy have had some effect.
We are projecting that growth going forward will return to rates between 8 and 8½ percent.
Of course, the band of uncertainty around this forecast is significant.
We judge growth at that pace to be consistent with Chinese potential and acceptable to Chinese officials.
This picture of real output growth abroad is a benign soft landing.
We are projecting slowing that does not overshoot in many foreign economies, including importantly the euro area, Japan, and China.
We believe that domestic demand growth in Canada, Japan, the euro area, and Mexico will continue to sustain their domestic expansions and growth in the global economy and will underlie ongoing moderate strength in U.S.
exports.
With respect to the current quarter, trade data for August surprised us with the strength of exports and led us to revise up by more than 2½ percentage points our estimate of the annual rate of growth of real exports in the third quarter.
The surprise was widespread across categories of merchandise trade other than computers and semiconductors and included strong exports to most of our trading partners, with the important exceptions of Canada and Mexico.
<START>With no special stories or specific components of interest, we have projected that real export growth will revert to its historical relationship with foreign output and relative prices.<END>
However, the positive surprise in August reminds us that there is upside risk to our forecast for real exports as well as downside risk should foreign growth slow more than expected.
Real October 24-25, 200612 of 203merchandise imports in August came in above our expectation as well.
We have accommodated that surprise in part by reducing real imports projected for the fourth quarter, particularly real oil imports.
All in all, our baseline forecast for the combined contribution of imports and exports to U.S.
<START>GDP growth over the forecast period is for a small negative effect during the second half of this year that becomes slightly more negative through the second half of 2008, reaching about 0.4 percentage point as strengthening U.S.<END>
real GDP growth boosts import growth above that for exports.
David and I will be happy to answer any questions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you very much.
Are there questions?
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I have a question for David, and it concerns the Greenbook alternative scenarios and the morals we should draw from them concerning the Committee’s ability to affect inflation.<END>
The Greenbook this time had two scenarios showing how the forecast would be affected by shocks to aggregate demand.
One was a stronger demand scenario;
the other a housing correction with spillovers.
Demand, of course, is much weaker in that second scenario.
<START>In both of them, unemployment by the end of 2008 deviates markedly from baseline, but even so there is virtually no effect on core inflation.<END>
It falls just 0.1 percent by the end of 2008 in the negative housing shock scenario, even though unemployment rises to 6 percent.
When I actually took a magnifying glass to the panel on page I-21 to look at the core inflation paths, the shocks appeared actually to have a perverse effect on core inflation.
The housing correction shock has a perverse effect on core inflation in mid-2007, with inflation actually up in the weak demand scenario and down a bit in the case where demand strengthens.
Now, I scratched my head and asked myself if I could I invent a reason that this might occur.
My thoughts went to possible repercussions on the exchange rate that might have an inflationary effect.
But my trusty staff told me that it might be something else entirely
—namely, the way inflation expectations are modeled in FRB/US.
<START>They told me that inflation expectations October 24-25, 200613 of 203in these simulations aren’t much affected by any movement in unemployment with shocks like this because implicitly those forming inflation expectations take the shock to be transitory.<END>
But expectations are perturbed, and perversely so, by the reaction of the Fed to the shocks.
In other words, the Taylor rule type response that’s embodied in the scenarios has the Fed lowering the fed funds rate to address economic weakness following a downside housing shock.
<START>My staff tells me that the Fed’s cut to address the weakness then raises expected inflation, which passes through into inflation in these scenarios, and that’s why we get a stronger housing correction perversely raising inflation.<END>
Would you comment generally on this?
Do I have the correct understanding of how it works?
<START>If I do, do these simulations give an unduly pessimistic assessment of the effect of aggregate demand shocks both on inflation and on our Committee’s ability to affect inflation through policy?<END>
<START>Is it plausible to assume in your view that easier monetary policy has this direct effect on inflation expectations, even when all it’s doing is offsetting a demand shock?<END>
MR.
STOCKTON.
I think, actually, your first story was the more potent one in offsetting these effects
—that we’d have an exchange rate response to the monetary policy effect.
Now, there is a small change in inflation expectations in response to your doing something the markets don’t expect you to do given the macroeconomic outcomes.
The markets lean in a direction in terms of inflation expectations, and if they see you easing significantly, they’re confused as to whether that might say something about your inflation objective being higher.
MS.
YELLEN.
Even when there are negative demand shocks and even though unemployment is rising?
MR.
STOCKTON.
That is part of it
—yes.
Obviously, the question is whether they see those shocks as well.
October 24-25, 200614 of 203MS. YELLEN.
They would see unemployment rising.
MR.
STOCKTON.
Well, they don’t see that.
The unemployment effects do take a while to begin to develop.
All these things happen very slowly.
If something is perverse here, it is that we’re showing too short a time frame for the effects to actually play out.
<START>With an output gap opening up, we would obviously expect in this model that eventually there would be downward pressure on inflation in the housing scenario and upward pressure in the stronger demand scenario.<END>
<START>So there’s nothing unstable about the model or something that works in the wrong direction over the longer haul.<END>
<START>But as you know, inflation is so inertial in the basic structure of the model that those effects don’t really show through and, because these shocks typically are relatively slow, they tend to get offset in the near term by exchange rate movements in particular but by some movement in inflation expectations as well.<END>
<START>So I don’t think that’s necessarily a flaw of the model, but I do think it’s probably a flaw in the short time frame that we show for these alternative scenarios, where most of the interesting effects on inflation, if you think it takes as long as the model does, are typically happening beyond the horizon that we’re showing here.<END>
That gets back to an issue that Governor Mishkin raised last time about wanting to look a little further down the road to actually see the response of inflation.
Now, that doesn’t mean that the model has got it right in terms of how persistent or inertial inflation is.
I think reasonable men and women could come to different views about that.
But I don’t think there’s something perverse in the underlying structure of the model.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dave, I want to ask you a question about residential housing markets and the effect of this slowdown that we’ve seen on the prices of October 24-25, 200615 of 203housing.
As you mentioned in your comments, we’ve seen the rate of increase slow.
In one of the alternative simulations, you actually plugged in a major reduction in housing prices.
Are you aware of any empirical work that has been done, or have you done any work to show us what the time lags would be here that we could expect to see from the drop in housing to some effect on housing prices going forward?
MR.
STOCKTON.
A little work has been done in this area, but it’s a bit like modeling the stock market.
You wouldn’t take it very seriously in the sense that these are asset markets and they’re sometimes moving in ways that are very difficult to model on the basis of, for example, fundamentals
<START>—especially in a period when, by our assessment, prices have moved up significantly above what we think can be justified in terms of interest rates and rents.<END>
So now we have a situation in which that asset price misalignment is projected in our forecast to just barely begin to unwind but we’re really uncertain about what the timing of that process is going to be.
One of the reasons we wanted to show the alternative simulation is that we’ve taken a fairly conservative approach here.
Our slowdown in the growth rate of house prices, to roughly 1½ to 1¾ percentage points over the next two years, doesn’t make a big dent
—if you remember from the briefing that we did one and a half years ago
—in the price-to-rent ratio, which we plotted there and showed that that had increased very significantly.
So our best guess is that, as in the past, those nominal prices will flatten out rather than actually decline.
But the run-up was so large that we couldn’t rule out this time around that the adjustment of house prices could be more significant and more rapid than in the past.
But I don’t know of any reliable empirical model or evidence.
We’ve certainly done our share of work in modeling those house prices, and I know our colleagues at the New York Fed have as well.
<START>There’s a lot of controversy about whether there even is an asset price misalignment, much less, October 24-25, 200616 of 203if there is, how it will unwind.<END>
So I don’t have a lot to offer you there, except that we’re going to try to present you with the range of possible outcomes in the sensitivity of our forecast to the baseline assumption that we’ve made.
In that regard, I still see more downside risk there than upside risk to our house-price forecast.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
I have just an informational question, David and Karen.
<START>If my memory is correct, the September CPI numbers excluding food and energy were not substantially different from those in August.<END>
What I’m curious about, if you could just quickly comment, are the dynamics of owners’ equivalent rent (OER).
That was you, Dave.
MR.
STOCKTON.
As you know, those increases were very substantial in the spring.
We had projected them to slow some.
They have slowed some.
Whether that is noise in the data or an actual response to developments on the ground in housing such as
—as I think Governor Bies has mentioned
—the possibility that some of this flow of excess housing may turn back into the rental market, and that could help put a lid on rents.
We’re expecting a little further slowing going forward.
<START>As I noted in my remarks, I see some upside risk, so we’re taking comfort from the fact that those 0.4 and 0.5 percent increases that we saw in the spring have now been running more like 0.3 and 0.4 percent increases.<END>
But it’s too soon to conclude that that whole process is over
—that it’s all worked out and that things are going to slow down.
There’s enough volatility in those rents that we could experience a return to the increases that we saw in the spring.
We’re not forecasting that, but I don’t think that outcome should be out of your probability distribution.
Obviously, our reason for expecting some slowdown is that, in fact, there will be some adjustments in the housing market and especially that people’s expectations for price appreciation on owner-occupied dwellings have shifted down significantly.
<START>That downshift is October 24-25, 200617 of 203going to make homeownership look less attractive and the rental market look stronger.<END>
That’s why we get some slowing but not so much as to go back to the rates that we had a year or two ago, when they were increasing more like 2 and 2½ percent.
MR.
FISHER.
So, in summary, we are looking at high threes, upward.
MR.
STOCKTON.
High threes in the near term on rents, going down, we think, to more like threes by next year.
MR.
FISHER.
<START>Karen, the most arresting figure, as you pointed out, is reported Chinese growth in the third quarter.<END>
What does that stem from?
<START>Is it their faux monetary policy or moral suasion or what we call, negotiating with the Chinese, “immoral suasion?” Or do you sense that some capacity constraints are at work here?<END>
MS.
JOHNSON.
<START>Well, I don’t know that we have enough detailed information to speak definitively to the question of whether some capacity constraints were reached.<END>
We do see the slowdown occurring, importantly, in the sector of fixed investment.
<START>That is, the GDP numbers themselves do not give us real component information, but other measures of investment did turn down in the third quarter in a way that’s consistent with seeing GDP slow.<END>
The timing of the latest round of administrative measures suggests to us that we are seeing some effect from those.
I don’t know that I would call it monetary policy exactly, but I think the bundle of moral suasion and, to some degree, real actions that, in and of themselves, have some bite contributed to this.
After two quarters of what we infer from manipulating the numbers as very strong growth, is it possible that in some particular places capacity constraints are reached?
It certainly could have been the case.
From our attempt to turn the series into quarter-to-quarter changes rather than the data that are announced, we certainly had higher numbers for the first half of this year than were October 24-25, 200618 of 203generally talked about.
The released numbers were tens and so forth, and we had twelves.
Similarly, as a consequence we had a much greater slowdown than the released numbers, and we could be exaggerating both.
Possibly it wasn’t really quite as strong as we thought in the first half, and it may not have slowed quite as much as we saw in the third quarter.
But it would be a real gamble on our part to conclude that it wasn’t, at least in some important sense, due to the administrative measures that they took.
I don’t think the officials are so unable to have a consequence with their policy tools, such as they are, if they are really determined
—and they certainly seemed to be determined.
<START>Thus I would attribute much of the figure to the administrative measures, but we can’t rule out some capacity constraints here and there.<END>
MR.
FISHER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
Thank you.
As you suggested, labor force participation plays an important role going forward in how you think about your forecast of the longer-term growth rate and how it evolves.
So I have two questions about labor force participation in trying to understand where it comes from and what’s going on.
One is the distinction between what’s going on cyclically versus what’s going on in your trend demographics of the labor force participation rate.
That distinction is part of it, as is whether the way you estimate the cyclical component of employment and so forth affects the forecast and whether it adjusts very quickly or very slowly in shaping the picture going forward, particularly into 2007 and 2008.
The second question has to do with the secular decline in general that you’re predicting from demographics.
Is there any mechanism in the way you come up with those forecasts that has feedback from the economy?
For example, through a certain period, labor participation rates for the 60-year-old cohort were falling rapidly.
From more-recent data, that cohort appears to be back in October 24-25, 200619 of 203the labor force more aggressively than it was.
I’m not exactly sure why that is.
Maybe it’s uncertainties about pensions, Social Security, and what have you and whether real wages and adjustments in the labor market affect the secular decline.
So I’d like a little discussion about what’s going on in the model that might help me understand where those pieces fit.
MR.
STOCKTON.
I’ll turn your question around and address the trend aspect first and then discuss a bit how the cycle gets overlaid on this.
Our forecast is based on some research that we’ve been doing in the past several years that was recently presented at the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity.
It’s based on a very detailed decomposition of the labor force by cohort, gender, and age.
The downward tilt in our projected trend in labor force participation is driven principally by two factors.
One is the end of the large uptilt in the participation of women in the labor force.
For a long time, women’s participation had been driving the upward trend;
that continued rise offset the downward trend in the men’s participation in the labor force, which actually has been a long, ongoing trend that we expect to continue.
Now the labor force participation of the entering cohort of women looks a lot like women exiting.
We’re not getting any further upward press there, but we are seeing some continued downward press from men.
Second, the labor force is aging, and it’s aging within this forecast frame.
In 2008, we’re at the front edge of the baby boomers who are eligible at age 62 to collect Social Security payments.
Bill Wascher is here if you want him to add anything about the details of his research
—but when we run that model, it projects a pretty steep trend in labor force participation.
Now I will get to your question about all the dynamic feedbacks.
I think we would admit that this work does not have all the general equilibrium effects, the potential ways in which employers and employees might respond going forward over the longer haul to the big demographic changes that are at hand.
So, any substantial changes in the incentives that employers are providing October 24-25, 200620 of 203for older workers to stay in the labor force longer, if they occur, are really not built in here in any significant way.
I feel pretty darn comfortable with this forecast over the time frame for which we’re doing it, which is through 2008.
I think that these demographic factors will, in fact, be felt and that the labor market institutions will probably not adjust quickly enough to overwhelm the downward demographic tilt.
But if we go out a lot further, we have more thinking to do about how those adjustments might occur and whether the steep downward trend that we are currently projecting would continue.
As you are probably aware, in trying to model labor force participation, real wages and various other things that make a lot of sense to economists don’t always show up strongly in those models.
So in this forecast we’re letting the demographics drive the trend in labor force participation.
On top of the demographics is the cyclical behavior of labor force participation.
We now think the labor force participation rate is probably a bit above its trend.
Given the cyclical behavior of participation, we think that is not unreasonable to think that labor force participation has probably already overshot its trend
—admittedly, just a bit
—when the unemployment rate is below the NAIRU.
So the employment dynamics and the labor force dynamics that we have going forward are driven both by the labor force participation rate returning to its trend and that trend continuing to decline.
As we discussed at the last meeting, those things together produce a very small increase in overall employment growth.
Also, as I think we mentioned last time, we recognize that we’re out of the consensus on this piece of the forecast.
Again, I haven’t seen anything over the past year or two to make me more uncomfortable.
<START>If anything, I’ve become more comfortable with that view, given the behavior of the labor force participation rate and the unemployment rate in this period as labor markets have tightened up.<END>
<START>October 24-25, 200621 of 203As I said last time, however, if we changed this aspect of our forecast going forward and went back to a forecast of just a flat labor force participation rate, we’d obviously raise employment growth and the growth of potential output.<END>
<START>But we’d also raise the growth of projected actual output, and thus this change wouldn’t affect our forecast of the output gap much at all going forward.<END>
So this has a big effect on the top-line GDP but not on the GDP gap.
Thus if we make a mistake here, it will not have significant policy consequences because with demand and supply revised up by similar amounts, you don’t have to have a higher interest rate to choke off that demand.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you.
Dave, I have a question on the less-persistent inflation scenario.
The description indicates that the scenario allows for inflation to be less persistent in the baseline perhaps for structural reasons.
Could you give me a couple of examples of how the structure might change and what the data might tell us or what data would be telling us that such a change is occurring?
MR.
STOCKTON.
<START>Clearly, if you have managed to achieve a significant degree of credibility and that credibility has anchored inflation expectations at a rate of 1½ percent going forward and if, therefore, agents expect whatever inflation shock you’ve had to be temporary and for inflation to revert to its average over the past ten years relatively quickly, then inflation could quickly fall back to 1½ percent as suggested by the scenario.<END>
We would be looking for evidence that the level of inflation expectations had remained exactly where it was previously and had remained unchanged, at a range of roughly 1½ to 1¾ percent.
Now, we don’t think that’s the case, so that scenario does not underlie our baseline forecast.
In fact, we think inflation expectations are probably higher than that, more like the 2 percent level that I think implicitly underlies this forecast.
October 24-25, 200622 of 203But work by our colleague John Williams at the San Francisco Fed, estimating over a very short time span, does produce an estimate that suggests that it might be reasonable to expect
—as a good forecast
—that inflation reverts reasonably quickly to its recent average.
We’re not persuaded by that, but we don’t think it’s entirely unreasonable.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Any other questions?
Dave and Karen, thank you, as always, for a very good report.
We’re ready now for the economic go-round.
We haven’t made much use of the two-handed intervention lately, but it’s an option.
If you want to make a comment or ask a question, please raise two hands instead of one.
We’ll start with President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Conditions in the Seventh District appear to be quite similar to what I reported last time.
Except for housing and autos, activity remains on a solid footing, and most of our contacts are relatively optimistic about the outlook.
For instance, the two large temp firms we talk to regularly both reported that, although billable hours were roughly flat, their clients were upbeat about the outlook.
Furthermore, demand for workers in light industry
—the segment most closely tied to the national business cycle
—continued to grow.
In terms of wages, both temp firms noted that compensation increases have been running much higher than last year at this time.
The difficulties of the Big Three automakers continue to be a problem for our region and are showing through in the national numbers for the third quarter.
These difficulties don’t stem from an overall lack of demand.
Light vehicle sales continue to run at a pretty healthy pace, as the Greenbook notes.
To some extent, the Big Three’s difficulties are a consequence of the energy price shock.
Demand has shifted away from pickups and big SUVs, which have been their bread and butter.
Despite the recent gas price October 24-25, 200623 of 203declines, Ford and GM told us that they do not expect a reversal of this shift anytime soon.
Otherwise, the District is doing reasonably well.
I heard a lot of optimism.
Indeed, a few contacts explicitly described the current slowdown as similar to the brief pause in the mid-1990s, which was followed by sustained expansion.
Turning to the national outlook, clearly economic activity was soft during the third quarter, but the fairly solid growth in consumption and business fixed investment indicates that at least to date we have not seen a spillover of the weakness in housing to other sectors of the economy.
This is consistent with the anecdotes that I’m hearing.
<START>Looking ahead, we expect several quarters of weak residential investment, but activity in other sectors should increase roughly in line with longer-run sustainable rates.<END>
Assuming market expectations for interest rates, we see GDP growth averaging modestly below potential over the next year and a half.
We think growth will be a bit above potential in ’08.
In our view, the underlying fundamentals
—wealth, income, interest rates, and the current level of liquidity in the economy
—should support a higher level of spending than what’s in the Greenbook baseline.
Of course, a major risk for our outlook is that there could be more-substantial spillovers from the housing sector.
As has been noted around this table, it could take some time for the weakness in housing demand to show through to house prices.
I was hoping we could get more information, but it sounds as though the research isn’t there yet.
If prices do fall substantially, a reduction in wealth could have serious ramifications for consumption and spending overall.
It’s hard to say when we’ll have a clearer picture as to how events are unfolding.
<START>At some point, probably before the decline in the broad measures of housing prices, we’ll likely see early evidence in either anecdotes or risk spreads.<END>
<START>Or if the risk is overstated, we may hear of improvements from our contacts.<END>
October 24-25, 200624 of 203Turning to inflation, the projections from our models have not changed much with the incoming data.
They still show core PCE inflation in ’08 coming in between 2.3 and 2.6 percent, depending on the period used to estimate the models.
<START>So I continue to have the same questions I had last time regarding the interplay between such inflation rates, inflation expectations, and Fed credibility:<END>
<START>Will continued high levels of core inflation eventually make the public doubt our resolve to maintain low and stable inflation?<END>
<START>Even if inflation is less persistent, as some have suggested, will it settle out at rates like those in the past few years<END>
—namely, 2 percent
—rather than the 1.6 percent in the Greenbook’s less-persistent inflation scenario?
Are the current long-run core PCE inflation expectations, which are likely above 2 percent, just simply too high?
I’m quite concerned that the answers to these questions might be “yes.” If so, and the housing spillover risks fade, then we may have to act more forcefully than the Greenbook baseline policy assumption in order to ensure that inflation is more clearly headed into the range consistent with price stability.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Okay, Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
I wondered, President Moskow, if you had a sense of whether Ford was in a kind of death spiral
—I might be influenced by the headlines of today and yesterday
<START>—at risk of losing the confidence of customers, so it won’t be able to sell cars, and of creditors.<END>
I’m wondering whether that would have any effect on the macroeconomy, or whether we just take down the Ford signs, put up Toyota signs, and continue to produce.
MR.
MOSKOW.
My general assessment has been that this is a market share story.
It’s not a story of aggregate demand for automobiles or light vehicles in that it is a shift from the domestic, what we used to call the Big Three, to foreign manufacturers, whether they’re producing here in the United States or exporting more to the United States.
Obviously, we know October 24-25, 200625 of 203there has been a big ramp-up in transplants here, but the import share of light vehicles is going up, too.
So I generally think it’s a market share story and, as you said, there will be a lot of dislocations if, God forbid, Ford goes out of business.
But I think it would just be a shift.
Now, in terms of whether what’s happening at Ford is, as you said, a death spiral, I really wouldn’t know.
A new CEO is coming in, and there is the old adage, “When a new CEO comes in, he’s going to write off as much as he possibly can and get it behind him.” So some of that may be occurring as well.
But the problem with the U.S.
firms is both the product they have and the perception of that product.
I think their product has gotten better.
<START>I don’t, personally, think it’s as good as the foreign firms’ product, but I think the perception of it is much worse than the perception of the foreign firms’ product.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Moskow, didn’t you say that you saw output growing below potential in ’07?
Did I hear correctly?
MR.
MOSKOW.
Slightly.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
So with energy prices down and so forth, why do you see core inflation rising from near-term levels?
MR.
MOSKOW.
No, I saw it coming down
—oh, you mean in the outer years.
Well, I think several things are going on.
<START>There is still the spillover of energy price increases flowing through the economy, but also there are more resource constraints than are built into the baseline forecast.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The New England District economy continues to grow at a moderate pace, pretty much as it was growing the last time we met, with job counts slowly increasing and business and consumer confidence relatively good about both October 24-25, 200626 of 203current and future conditions.
As I’ve noted before, income growth has been robust in the District, with regional income growing better than 7 percent from second quarter ’05 to second quarter ’06.
Indeed, incomes in Massachusetts and Connecticut both rose about 9 percent.
Reflecting this rise, the fiscal condition of the states in the region, while varied, remains positive.
Regional corporate health is solid, and readings of regional stock indexes follow the positive pace of the nation’s financial markets.
Contacts from a wide range of manufacturing industries reported positive trends;
fewer cost pressures from commodity, energy, and interest rates;
and a continuation of competitive pressures to restrain costs and keep prices stable.
We regard this pressure as a return to business as usual.
On the negative side, the slowdown in the housing sector becomes more apparent with each passing month.
According to the overall OFHEO house-price indexes, year-over-year appreciation in the second quarter of ’06 for New England was about half of that for the nation.
The change from the first to the second quarter in ’06 was virtually zero.
The region now has the lowest rate of annual housing appreciation of any area of the country except the Midwest.
<START>This situation is not entirely unwelcome, as housing price levels in the region remain quite high relative to the nation, and there has been much hand-wringing locally about the effect high housing costs have on attracting skilled labor to the region.<END>
Of course, the cyclical effect of a sharp residential investment slowdown is of concern.
Existing home sales volumes are down 12 percent from their 2005 peaks.
New home construction is weakening significantly, and construction employment has declined in both Connecticut and Massachusetts since year-end 2005.
Indeed, negative commentary from area business contacts revolved mostly around markets for products aimed at the residential housing industry.
While there may be some light at the end of this tunnel, with recent lower mortgage interest rates and some sense of bottoming out, October 24-25, 200627 of 203the usual seasonal slowdown in the real estate industry as winter approaches may make this improvement difficult to appreciate for some time.
<START>The effect of slowing residential investment remains one of the key uncertainties on the national scene as well.<END>
<START>Combined with the negative effect of trade, housing trends have caused us to mark down our estimate of third-quarter GDP growth to about the level of the Greenbook.<END>
<START>However, positive incoming data on employment, consumer spending, and corporate profits, spurred as they have been by favorable trends in energy prices, financial markets, and worldwide growth, support a modest rebound in overall activity in the fourth quarter and a forecast for 2007 and 2008 of just slightly less than potential.<END>
Indeed, I was pleased to see the upward revision to the Greenbook forecast for the fourth quarter of this year, as I had worried whether the earlier trajectory had increased the risk of a spiral downward into a recession.
I don’t think that’s likely, and I realize that overall the second-half GDP projection remains about the same.
But the upward revision to the fourth quarter in the Greenbook, which brings it closer to our Boston forecast, makes me somewhat more comfortable about the underlying trajectory of economic activity.
We, like the Greenbook authors, have revised down slightly our estimate of potential, so our sense of any gap in resource usage remains about the same as it was at the last meeting.
Thus, unemployment rises very slowly, to just about 5 percent in 2008, and inflation falls slowly as well, along the lines of the forecast at the last meeting.
All in all, that is not a lot of change.
<START>I must admit, however, to some small amount of hope that we may be seeing the bottoming out of the housing market decline because of the mixture of the data that Dave referred to earlier.<END>
Moreover, other aspects of the current situation seem quite positive as well
—in particular, the very accommodative nature of financial markets and the continuing profitability of the nation’s October 24-25, 200628 of 203corporations.
<START>Thus, the risks to what continues to be in many ways a rather benign forecast seem to me to be a bit less on the downside than they seemed at our last meeting.<END>
Energy-driven inflation may be lower as well, but I remain concerned about the underlying pressures on resource utilization if the economy does not slow as much as we now expect.
Corporate-driven productivity growth, though we haven’t seen it escalate recently, could come to the rescue here, but I think it’s hard to bet on that.
Thus, I do see some continuing uncertainty as to whether inflation will be as well behaved as in either the Boston or the Greenbook forecast.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our regional economic story is similar to that of the national economy.
Regional activity has slowed in the third quarter, mainly because of the housing sector.
In general, our business contacts expect the regional economy to continue to expand, albeit at a modest pace.
Price pressures remain elevated in the Third District but have not strengthened over the intermeeting period.
Turning to the individual sectors, manufacturing activity in our region has softened over the past two months.
The index of general economic activity in our business outlook survey, which turned slightly negative last month, remains slightly negative this month, indicating basically not much change since September.
However, there were some positives in the October survey that were not in the September report.
In particular, there was a rebound in the indexes of new orders and shipments, suggesting slightly positive growth in our respondents’ firms.
Also, manufacturing executives were much more optimistic this month about future activity, with most indicators rebounding from their September low readings.
This optimism is consistent with President Moskow’s comment about the optimism of some executives that he has observed.
Now, consistent with the slowdown in activity, payroll employment growth in our three states October 24-25, 200629 of 203slowed in the third quarter to an annual rate of about 0.7 percent, compared with 1.1 percent in the nation.
The unemployment rate, which had been running under the national rate for the past three years, has now moved up to that rate.
<START>Still, our business contacts as well as respondents to our manufacturing survey continue to cite difficulty in finding qualified workers as one of their major business concerns.<END>
As in the nation, the housing sector in our region continues to decline.
We’ve seen some slowing in the value of nonresidential contracts as well over the past three months.
But these data are quite noisy, and I think it’s too early to read much of a turning point into the nonresidential construction sector for our region at this point.
<START>Office vacancy rates continue to edge down, and the net absorption of office space continues to be positive.<END>
Consumer spending continues to hold up well in our region.
We saw a pickup in retail sales in September, except for autos.
Area retailers told us that their sales had increased in recent weeks, and their back-to-school sales exceeded their expectations.
Their view is that continued growth at that pace depended on consumer confidence, which for the mid-Atlantic region increased in September, no doubt because of the decline in oil prices.
The Fed’s current economic activity indexes indicate a slowing in activity in our region over the past three months, especially in New Jersey, which has shown the sharpest deceleration.
As of August, year-to-date average growth in these indexes (weighted by gross state product) for our three states has been about 1.8 percent, compared with 3 percent for the United States.
Over the past three months, regional growth has slowed to about 0.6 percent.
The leading indicators for our three states also have moved down this year, suggesting only modest growth over the coming six to nine months.
October 24-25, 200630 of 203On the inflation front, consumer prices in the Philadelphia region continue to rise at a pace faster than that of the nation.
The faster pace is due mainly to the larger increases in shelter prices in the Philadelphia metro area compared with those in the United States.
On a more positive note, while area manufacturers continue to report higher production costs, these cost increases have been less widespread in recent surveys than earlier in the year.
<START>The index of prices paid in our manufacturing survey has declined for the past three months, and the index of prices received was down significantly in October.<END>
So while the levels of these indexes remain high, indicating continued inflationary pressures, some solace may be found in the less elevated levels of these indicators, at least in recent months.
For the national economy, my outlook is not much different from what it was at the last meeting.
<START>Real GDP growth in the second quarter was revised down to 2.6 percent, as has been noted, and the data received to date suggest that growth in the third quarter was even weaker, perhaps 1 to 1½ percent.<END>
I expect some rebound in the fourth quarter and, like President Minehan, was pleased to see the upward revision in the fourth-quarter forecast in the Greenbook.
The main source of the slowdown, of course, is the fall in the demand for housing.
Manufacturing also softened in the third quarter compared with its robust pace earlier in the year.
About half of that slowdown was due to autos, and I expect some rebound there, too, in the fourth quarter.
Trade subtracted from growth in the third quarter relative to the second quarter, but again, as has been pointed out, I expect that to be less of a drag in the fourth quarter than it was in the third.
So aside from housing, most other sectors of the economy, including consumer spending and business investment, are holding up, even in the Philadelphia region in the Third District.
They aren’t growing as rapidly as they were in the first part of this year, but they are growing October 24-25, 200631 of 203somewhat below trend, and they continue to expand.
If the slowdown in housing continues to be an orderly one, without large spillovers as has been frequently mentioned, I would not characterize that correction as unwelcome.
Housing activity has been at an unsustainably high pace in recent years.
Of course, at this point we cannot rule out the possibility that the correction in housing from the unsustainably high pace of activity that we’ve seen over the past few years will derail the expansion.
But so far, we have not seen spillovers of housing into other sectors.
In particular, we have not seen any retrenchment by the consumer for the most part.
The moderation we’ve seen in consumer spending after the strong first quarter is largely in line with expectations.
Real disposable income growth remains healthy, and we have been lucky with two positives
—the decline in gasoline prices and the rise in the stock market.
<START>We’ve had some hopeful news on the inflation front over the intermeeting period, but the level of inflation continues to concern me.<END>
As we anticipated at the time of our last meeting, the drop in energy prices led to a significant deceleration in headline inflation for September.
<START>Although the twelve-month change in core CPI actually edged up to 2.9 percent, a rate that I consider well above price stability, it may be beginning to stabilize.<END>
But, frankly, a lot of uncertainty remains, and it is dangerous, to my mind, to rely too heavily on one month’s numbers.
Some of the acceleration of core inflation over the past year was likely due to the pass-through from energy prices, as we discussed before.
So if oil prices fall or continue to stabilize, then acceleration of core inflation from this source will likely dissipate.
However, we’ve seen energy prices retreat only to move back up again, so I don’t think we should become too sanguine.
Indeed, the inflation picture remains uncertain.
I’ll be more comfortable when we begin to see twelve-month core inflation begin to decelerate.
<START>To the extent that some of the acceleration in inflation was fueled by very accommodative monetary policy over the past five October 24-25, 200632 of 203years, we still need to consider whether monetary policy has firmed enough to remove the cumulative effects of the past policy accommodation to get inflation back down to a level consistent with price stability in a reasonable time so that our credibility is not at risk.<END>
<START>The longer we allow that deviation from price stability to persist, the higher the risk to our credibility and the higher the risk that recent high inflation readings will raise longer-term inflationary expectations.<END>
<START>So far, long-run expectations have been stable, and shorter-run expectations have fallen with oil prices.<END>
Nevertheless, I think the Fed’s commitment to price stability deserves our protection.
One thing to note going forward, though, is that if economic growth remains below trend for a while, then there’s an implicit firming of monetary policy, even without changing the nominal interest rate.
<START>Given our economic outlook and the risks to that outlook, at this point that may be actually the most desirable path.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
For a while now, I’ve been somewhat more pessimistic than most of the Committee about the downside risk to the real economy.
I was beginning to get worried that this might be the perpetual disposition of someone from Ohio.
[Laughter] As a prominent member of our business community said to me not too long ago, it’s not the weather, it’s the climate.
[Laughter] Since our last meeting, I’ve become more comfortable with the idea that substantially weaker-than-forecast growth is less probable
<START>—partly because we’re now a little further down the road without any signs that the worst-case scenarios are materializing and partly because my directors and my business contacts seem more positive about the economic outlook.<END>
Specifically, as I listened to some of my business contacts in construction, retail, and even real October 24-25, 200633 of 203estate, the expectations that things will get substantially worse just aren’t there.
Also, the demand for labor seems to be growing at a moderate pace.
<START>On the price side, my contacts are not indicating much of an impetus for higher final goods prices.<END>
Although projected compensation growth seems to be firming just a bit, my contacts are telling me that they think productivity gains will keep costs in check.
With the declining energy and material costs, I don’t hear much about the potential for accelerating pressures on prices.
When I combine what I’m hearing from my District contacts with the aggregate data that have come in since our last meeting, I sense that we have weathered the worst in softness on the real side for now.
In September I noted that my biggest concern was the possibility that the inflation trend would worsen.
It does not appear that this is happening at this point.
<START>However, we have yet to see lower rates of core inflation, and I’m sensitive to the fact that core measures of inflation are being held up by the contribution to owners’ equivalent rent from the rising rents and falling utility bills.<END>
<START>Although more-stable energy prices will make the latter effect go away, it’s not clear that the rent part of the picture will quickly fade, as rents continue to converge toward still high housing prices.<END>
When we look at the distribution of prices in the CPI, excluding energy, food, and owners’ equivalent rent, prices seem to be either rising rapidly or falling.
There isn’t much in the middle, and that makes the underlying movements in the inflation trend hard to interpret.
<START>It seems to me that the key risk on the real side of the economy has been that the housing market would decline much faster and more deeply than we had forecast and that the effect on consumption spending would be greater than we anticipated.<END>
So far, as others have commented, the collateral effect on consumption appears to have been contained.
Furthermore, we expected October 24-25, 200634 of 203that other forms of spending would hold up as the housing sector slumped, and those expectations appear to be on track for now.
I recognize that we’re not out of the woods yet, but the downside risks to the real economy appear somewhat more benign than they did at both the August and the September meetings.
<START>In regard to the inflation risks, the probability of accelerating inflation has decreased, in my opinion, but the risk that inflation will remain higher than I personally desire hasn’t really changed.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I’ll start with the District this time, and I will tell you that conditions in the District remain generally good.
Energy activity remains strong, both in the traditional sectors, such as gas, oil, and coal, and in our new sector called ethanol.
[Laughter] They are booming, I’m afraid.
Despite the recent decline in energy prices, we are not yet hearing, in talking to different producers in the region, about any significant pullback in energy production.
In part, this situation reflects a prevailing view right now among those producers that the weakness in energy prices is likely to be temporary.
However, if energy prices remain at current levels or move lower at a sustained rate, I think we will then see some pullback in retail activity and so forth
—more than we’ve seen so far.
In other areas of the District economy, we saw some softening in manufacturing activity in the third quarter, but our manufacturing survey shows that businesses remain mostly optimistic about future hiring and capital expenditure plans.
Housing activity has certainly slowed across the District.
However, we have received few reports of unusual weakness in our recent meetings with directors and economic advisory council members.
So it is slowing but shows no sign of collapse, at this point anyway.
<START>We have also seen, with the decline in energy prices, strengthening in District retail sales activity and a sharp rebound in expectations for retail October 24-25, 200635 of 203activity in the fourth quarter<END>
—except for domestic auto sales.
Labor markets remain firm across the District.
Unemployment rates are low, and our directors and other contacts continue to report shortages of skilled labor across the District.
District agricultural conditions remain rather mixed.
Drought continues to affect much of the western part of our region.
However, livestock and crop prices have been supported by strong world demand and lower supply, so those farmers who are able to bring in a crop are doing quite well.
Turning to the national economy, I think that the recent decline in energy prices will provide important support to the near-term outlook.
Currently, I see second-half growth of around 2 percent, rebounding to between 2½ and 3 percent as we get into next year.
Generally speaking, I am more optimistic than the Greenbook, both in the near term and for the next year.
Indeed, with the current financial conditions that others have talked about, I don’t envision the pullback in consumer spending and business investment spending that the Greenbook has projected at this point.
One area that is worth discussion
—and Dave talked about it a bit in responding to a question
—is the employment outlook, an area for which the Greenbook continues to have, as Dave said, a different perspective.
<START>Although demographic forces will clearly work in the direction of slower labor force growth in the coming years, I’m not as convinced that the slowdown will be as sharp or as sudden as the Greenbook suggests right now.<END>
I say that because I want to be cautious about viewing the recent slowing in monthly employment growth as being driven by these demographic factors.
I believe the recent slowing in employment largely reflects some employer caution about the economic outlook, combined with the effects of weakness in housing and retail sales.
Support for this view can be found in the recent slowing of growth in temporary help that has been reported to us.
<START>Should the economic growth pick up, as I October 24-25, 200636 of 203anticipate, we should begin to see some stronger employment numbers as we get into next year.<END>
As to the effects of demographics
—again, I think they are going to play a very important part, but another significant factor to keep in mind is the educational composition of the labor force and the skills composition as we move forward in terms of labor demand, because that’s the shortage we’re always hearing about.
Now, returning to the near-term outlook, the recent decline in energy prices has helped to counter the effects of housing weaknesses.
Consequently, the downside risk to the outlook has diminished somewhat.
However, because we have not necessarily seen the bottom of the housing market, I do believe that that is an important downside risk to the economy.
Finally, let me share some of my perspective on the inflation outlook.
My overall views on inflation have not changed materially since the last meeting.
<START>I continue to expect core CPI inflation to moderate from about 2.8 percent to about 2.5 percent next year and, similarly, core PCE inflation to moderate from about 2.3 percent to 2.1 percent.<END>
<START>A significant fall in prices for oil and gasoline and natural gas in recent weeks has already begun to show through to overall inflation.<END>
I believe this is a positive development in helping to ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored and perhaps in helping to moderate core inflation next year.
<START>Although the decline in energy prices has reduced the upside risk to inflation somewhat, I agree with others that core inflation does remain too high, and I think we have to keep that in mind as we consider our policy options.<END>
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
First Vice President Barron.
MR.
BARRON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Data releases and reports we have gathered over the intermeeting period do not indicate much change since the Committee last met, so far as the Sixth District is concerned.
Overall growth has been moderate, with the index of District October 24-25, 200637 of 203economic activity showing a year-over-year increase of about 2.7 percent, and reports of activity varied considerably among sectors of the District economy.
Retail sales have been mixed, and the outlook for tourism is reasonably optimistic.
Auto sales remain sluggish, and the housing market
<START>—even beyond Florida, where both prices and sales have declined significantly<END>
—continues to show additional signs of some slowing.
On the positive side, construction is shifting somewhat from residential to commercial.
However, the lack of availability and the high cost of home and business insurance in Florida and along the Gulf Coast is a serious concern for our region.
Manufacturing activity appears stable.
Prices of some commodities are reported lower.
Although gasoline prices are lower, fuel surcharges remain in place.
As in the national economy, the slowdown in housing and moderation in overall activity have shown little signs of spilling over into the labor market.
Employment gains through September softened somewhat.
However, all states in the District, except Georgia, added jobs, and together accounted for 20,000 of the nation’s 51,000 jobs added during the month.
The overall unemployment rate in the District, accordingly, moved down to 3.9 percent.
Shortages of skilled labor continue to be reported in some areas, and overall labor quality, as Tom Hoenig noted, continues to be a problem, both of which I interpret as indicating a relatively firm labor market.
We had a meeting this past week of our Advisory Council on Small Business, Agriculture, and Labor.
Nearly to a person, participants reported things were good
—not great but good
—and the common problem was finding qualified workers willing to work.
Most council members were willing to hire if they found the right people, but at the same time, they would forgo expanding their businesses if it meant hiring individuals who were less than qualified.
One member from the construction sector noted that an individual walking around a job site with a piece of pipe, without doing anything else, would fully meet the October 24-25, 200638 of 203requirements for continued employment
—that is, they were carrying something, and they were moving.
[Laughter] Concerning the national economy, opinions differ as to how much of a slowdown we will see this quarter and how long it will last.
Most professional forecasters, as well as our own in-house models, suggest that growth will slow in the third quarter and then gradually accelerate thereafter.
On the positive side, the labor market is very healthy.
Corporate earnings continue to be healthy, business investment is supportive, and equity markets not only are at record highs but show no signs of letting up.
At the same time, our headline inflation has come down, in the most part because of the decline in energy prices.
Core inflation, especially in the service price component, continues to drift upward.
<START>Further, it’s not clear that the energy price increases have played a major role in explaining the increase in core inflation, so it may be problematic to assume that the recent decline will provide a significant downward impetus to core inflation, at least in the near term.<END>
Federal funds futures prices, the TIPS spread, and inflation expectations seem to be saying that the Fed’s credibility remains intact and are consistent with the belief that the Committee will get policy right, rather than signaling that slower growth is ahead in the foreseeable future.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
That reminds me of the Navy saying:
“If it stands still, paint it.
If it moves, salute it.” [Laughter] President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Mr. Chairman, at our last meeting I engaged in a little Texas brag.
I mentioned that the employment growth rate in our District was twice that of the national average.
Then I read in the pre-briefing for the Board last night the penultimate sentence, which had a wonderful three-word phrase
—“Humility is required.” So let me report that economic growth in our District has slowed somewhat, and I want to put the “somewhat” in perspective.
We redid the October 24-25, 200639 of 203numbers of our first-quarter real GDP growth.
Growth of the state real gross product for the first quarter was 9 percent for the Eleventh District.
So it’s not a great wonder that it is slowing
—it is slowing down from too torrid a pace.
But our housing sector is still sweet
—perhaps the only spot left in the country
—particularly in the Houston area.
We actually are building a new auto plant, President Moskow, a Toyota plant in San Antonio, which is getting an inordinate amount of attention.
The exports from our state are growing at a monthly rate annualized at 45 percent, and Texas is now the largest exporting state in the nation.
So from the standpoint of economic growth, even as I am trying to be humble, the District is doing exceedingly well.
The only consistently sour note that we hear is what you have heard around this table
—and just now from First Vice President Barron
—that we have continued reports of shortages of skilled and unskilled labor, from chemical engineers to school teachers to bank tellers and even to hotel housekeeping staff.
So we have a significant problem in terms of labor shortages
—skilled, semi-skilled, and now, increasingly, unskilled.
To put some numbers on this, we have a contact who has surveyed fifty plants on the Gulf Coast for the price of welders.
In eight months, the price for a welder has gone from $19 an hour to $25 an hour.
You have to pay them a bonus of $100 when they show up, and you have to pay them a completion bonus as well.
The bottom line is that in the Eleventh District we’re behaving as though we were a full-employment economy.
In the rest of my comments, I’d like to emphasize not my District but our views on the U.S.
and the global economies, particularly the U.S.
economy.
<START>I want to go back to your concluding remarks, Mr. Chairman, at the last meeting, when you reminded us that, if we believe we need to have output below potential to help address inflation pressures, it’s a delicate operation, and we may have a very narrow channel to navigate as we go forward<END>
—just to keep with your naval analogy of a few seconds ago.
<START>This summer I sailed the Corinth Canal, which is so narrow that at times you feel October 24-25, 200640 of 203you can reach out and touch both sides.<END>
Even though I was on vacation, I was actually thinking of one side as the shoals of slow economic growth
<START>—almost recessionary growth, which seems to be what the Greenbook is forecasting at least for the third quarter, and the risk that seems to be out there<END>
—and of the other side as the shoals of inflation.
From the 27 or 28 CEOs and CFOs to whom I spoke in preparing for this meeting, as I always do, I do hear reports of a slowdown.
I talked to two of the Big Five housebuilders this time.
They are cutting back significantly.
Let me give you some numbers.
For example, Centex owns 109,000 lots outright and has 54,000 lots under hard option and 80,000 lots under soft option, as they call it.
They’ve canceled 25 percent of their hard options.
That is $85 million worth of properties.
Hovnanian is walking away from $100 million worth of hard option properties.
The effort there is to cut back so that what was a two-month leading supply has now become a three-month leading supply.
You can see how the dynamics are beginning to work.
They’re moving on price, but they are also trying to shut down their inventory and are taking very quick action.
That is a depressing factor.
One of the truck dealers I talked with, Rush Enterprises, has about $2.7 billion a year in sales.
I believe they are the largest in the country;
they are nationwide.
They are reporting that Christmas retail activity seems to be backing up;
in other words, it is slower than it was in previous years.
This is an operator with 41 years of experience.
<START>They are also building their inventory, particularly in the coastal areas, with the heavy trucks that are going to be used for home construction.<END>
The book-to-bill ratio for Texas Instruments has fallen below 1;
it is the lowest since 2000.
And if you read the newspapers, you will see that the airlines are offering very deep discounts and for longer periods than before.
So there seems to be a slowdown in activity.
With that said, when you talk to the rails, there is a diminution of growth, perhaps 1 percent third quarter over second quarter, and if you talk to UPS, as I reported last time, you’re still seeing October 24-25, 200641 of 203some rather robust reports of economic growth of 2 to 3 percent.
<START>I think the best way to summarize the economy is, as President Moskow said earlier, that although there are weak signs, the economy is still robust.<END>
The chairman and CEO of Cadbury-Schweppes said, “I keep looking and listening, but I’m just not seeing what everybody tells me is going to happen.” Again, as I reported last time, the CEO of EDS, who is an experienced businessman, said, “It’s a funny period.
Everybody is prepared to be bearish, but it’s simply not materializing.” So, David, from an economic standpoint, both from the anecdotal evidence and our own economic modeling, we don’t quite accept the Greenbook’s forecast of the kind of slowdown that you’re expecting for the third quarter or for the second half.
There are positive benefits, and the benefits are, of course, with price pressure abatement.
My favorite anecdotal example, by the way, comes from globalization at work, Karen.
Interestingly, the CEO of Fluor, who is one of my contacts, reports that when they bid for the Bay Bridge construction, their bid on U.S.
steel prices was rejected as being too expensive.
They went back and bid based on what they could buy steel from China for, and the bid was accepted.
Canadian steel now sells for 25 percent less than U.S.
steel, and Chinese steel is being dumped into this market at a price 40 percent lower than Canadian steel.
From the standpoint of raw materials and energy, you have seen price pressure abatement.
But from businessperson after businessperson, we still hear the same reports, Mr. Chairman, that we hear in our District and that you’ve heard around this table, which is of significant price pressures stemming from labor.
As I mentioned earlier, it is not just skilled labor;
it is now semi-skilled labor such as truck drivers and welders.
Increasingly shortages are being reported, throughout our District and the rest of the country.
<START>So I would summarize by agreeing with President Moskow in that we in the Eleventh District find the Greenbook’s projection of economic growth to be too pessimistic.<END>
Although price October 24-25, 200642 of 203pressures have abated somewhat, we know by our measure
—the trimmed-mean PCE, off of which we key our view of the economy
—that the three-month rate is still running at 2.9 percent and the twelve-month rate is running at 2.7 percent.
I would argue as we navigate this narrow channel, Mr. Chairman, whether it’s the channel you describe or the Corinth Canal, that I would be more careful of the inflationary shoals than of the risk of excessive slowdown of growth.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Richard, clarify for me.
You said that some of your national contacts were seeing a slowdown in the book of business.
Is that the minority of the contacts?
I’m not quite sure I know what you were conveying.
MR.
FISHER.
The question that I put to each contact was to compare the third quarter with the second quarter.
<START>I was trying to get a feel because I’m quite concerned about our staff analysis and the Greenbook’s analysis of the dramatic slowdown to 1 percent in third-quarter growth.<END>
So the answer is, yes, there is a slowdown, but it is not now of the severity that our staff projection seems to indicate.
But I do want to note that there is some slowdown taking place.
MR.
HOENIG.
As to your reference to the trucking company
—one of our trucking company contacts indicated that business is still good.
Their bookings out have been reduced from three weeks to about four or five days.
So they’ve seen a slowdown, but they’re still busy.
They still have business coming in.
MR.
FISHER.
Part of that, by the way, is in the average fleet of, say, Class A trucks, which are the big ones.
The average fleet age is now fourteen months;
the normal fleet age is twenty-two months.
Part of that has to do with all of these Environmental Protection Agency changes that keep being mandated.
So you have to sort out that distortion from economic activity.
But the point I was October 24-25, 200643 of 203reporting is that the utilization of those trucks in terms of carrying Christmas inventory appears to have slowed and is not running at the pace that it was in previous years.
MR.
HOENIG.
I agree.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan, did you have something?
MS.
MINEHAN.
Yes.
I just wanted to add something that I forgot to mention earlier.
President Fisher’s comments reminded me of it.
Whether you look at the KMV data on expected-default frequencies for the five major homebuilders or at the Dow Jones home construction index and the stock prices for the top five homebuilders, none of them seems to be indicating a major problem.
Now, the expected-default frequency, which again is driven from stock prices, may certainly be above the rest of U.S.
industry, but by no means is it even at any kind of historically medium position, let alone high position, and there has been a recent uptrend in the Dow Jones home construction index overall.
So that’s another bit of the data that I was using, and others may be using as well, to suggest that maybe things won’t get as bad as the worst of our projections in terms of homebuilding.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Mr. Chairman, very quickly
—I asked two of the big homebuilders to whom I spoke about that very phenomenon.
Their answer was very interesting.
They have strong balance sheets.
One of them said, “I can feel the private equity shark swimming around my feet.” In fact, there is rumor of one sizable deal that has been proposed
—I haven’t been able to figure out what it is
—to take one of them entirely private.
So some of the buttressing, President Minehan, is coming from significant amounts of liquidity in the system.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Private equity interest, yes.
But not all five of them, and they all point in the same direction.
October 24-25, 200644 of 203CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We had a meeting at the Bank last week with representatives from the housing industry in the Twin Cities, including builders, brokers, and lenders, and most of these participants operate nationally.
In fact, one of the first you mentioned, Richard, was there.
Some of these firms are in nonresidential development and construction as well.
The bottom line of the meeting, I would say, was that the comments overall track pretty well with the Greenbook forecast of housing activity
—that is, both a further and a prolonged slump in housing.
Let me just give you a few of the specifics.
They reported, as we know, that sales of new homes have declined dramatically and prices of new homes are going down with sales, also dramatically.
Retail brokerages are starting to contract in terms of both number of offices and number of brokers.
It was reported that so-called investors have disappeared entirely from many markets and that inventories of unsold homes are rising and the extent of the increase may be understated by the published data.
There was little expectation among this group of improvement in housing in the next several months at least, and I would say not a whole heck of a lot of confidence that there was improvement in store even out beyond that, maybe as you get later into ’07.
In contrast, and on a somewhat more positive note, the people who are also in nonresidential construction
—in particular, office and retail development
—thought that the outlook was promising, indeed positive, and are seeing a lot of activity in that business.
The housing situation notwithstanding, I remain somewhat more optimistic about our prospects for real growth both in ’07 and in ’08 than the Greenbook.
Apparently my assessment of the implications of the sustained increase in income, of the run-up in equity values, and of the decline in energy prices is just more positive than the Greenbook’s, and that’s how I arrive at a somewhat more optimistic assessment.
I continue to think that core inflation will diminish modestly October 24-25, 200645 of 203over this period.
So my overall view of the outlook really has changed very little since the last meeting.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me start by saying that I think the Greenbook outlook is a very good central tendency outlook.
I am going to make some comments that are more on the downside of that, which come from hunches and gut instinct.
I want to emphasize that I don’t want to make policy on the basis of gut instinct, but I think it helps to keep an open mind about some of the things that might be going on.
<START>First, on the positive side, my UPS contact says that he is expecting a peak season with a glut of volume and not enough lift.<END>
They’re going to have to move express business over to trucks.
So if you’re counting on getting a last minute present at Christmastime, I urge you to order a little earlier than you might otherwise.
That’s his expectation.
On the labor side, UPS has some fairly big increases coming next year as a consequence of recent contracts they signed.
They had a long negotiation with pilots, but on the ground side, obviously the less skilled workers, they’re expecting about 3½ percent compensation, very much in line with a normal situation.
<START>My Wal-Mart contact said that they have not experienced the pickup in sales that they would have anticipated from the decline in energy prices.<END>
They had expected an increase of about 65 basis points.
They always measure their sales as same-store, year over year.
They haven’t seen that.
They’re going to be lucky to get 2 percent year-over-year in October.
My contact says that weekly information suggests that October is slowing down week by week as we go through the month.
Wal-Mart received a lot of attention recently in the press about their slowdown in building new stores next year.
They probably had a lot more press than the actual size of the slowdown warrants.
They are expecting to increase their square footage 7.6 percent in ’07 compared with October 24-25, 200646 of 2038.4 percent in ’06
—so the slowdown is hardly gigantic.
Construction costs this year are rising 17 percent;
next year they’re anticipating 11 to 12 percent.
So there is a slowdown in the increase, but 11 to 12 percent is still a pretty big increase in construction costs.
My contact in the trucking industry says
—and this may make a little more explicit what Richard Fisher was saying
—that things in the industry are continuing to slow down.
He says it’s the first time in his experience
—and he’s been with the company twenty years or more
—that the seasonal peak has not yet started.
Ordinarily the seasonal peak in shipping for the holiday shopping season would have started.
It just hasn’t started, and I think he said they’re running
—I forget exactly what the number was
—8 percent below a year ago.
(Incidentally, one thing that I was thinking when Richard was talking was that sometimes the business people have a hard time doing the seasonal adjustment, so when you compare the third quarter with the second quarter, they may not be seeing a seasonally adjusted slowdown because the volume is bigger in the third than in the second.) My trucking industry contact says that the slower business seems pretty evenly distributed geographically
—perhaps a greater softness in the Southeast than in other parts of the country.
It is more concentrated in home improvement
—I think Home Depot is one of the big customers
—and probably autos, but the softness is spread fairly generally across commodity categories.
We’ve also spent a lot of time talking recently with contacts in the housing industry.
The word that we’re getting is that some of the smaller and even regional builders have perhaps six months, and if they don’t see a pickup, they’re going to be filing for bankruptcy.
They are very, very hard pressed.
A lot of them overbuilt.
They are stuck with a big inventory.
They have the carrying costs of that inventory, and laying off workers doesn’t solve that problem.
They may bring the new construction down very low, but it doesn’t solve the problem of what to do with October 24-25, 200647 of 203the unsold inventory.
So without a pickup in housing, I think we can anticipate some bankruptcy filings in that area.
People around the table here and, I think, generally have been treating oil price declines as an unambiguous positive, and I would like to raise a caution flag on that.
I remember from my first year in graduate school Milton Friedman pounding into me that a price never declines without a shift in either the supply curve or the demand curve.
Over and over again, that’s what Friedman would say.
<START>Now, on the supply side in oil, as far as I know, there have been no gigantic new supplies that have come on the market, and the optimistic view on oil is that last winter and spring or starting in the fall perhaps a year ago, there was maybe a $10 to $20 premium built into crude on the basis of geopolitical and weather uncertainties.<END>
So a possibility is that prices in the mid to upper seventies were above what was clearing current supply and demand.
Inventories accumulated
—we know that there has been a big inventory accumulation in the United States for sure
—and eventually, with nothing really bad happening on the geopolitical front and with no hurricanes hitting, the prices dropped back down.
It seems to me that is the optimistic way of looking at what’s happened to oil prices.
<START>But I think we should not rule out the possibility that some fundamental weakness in world demand is showing up in the demand for energy and that might have something to do with the softness.<END>
I take that as a hunch, not by any means as a certainty;
but I think we ought to be open to that possibility.
Clearly, the yield curve has been inverted for quite a few months.
The market seems to be quite persistent in believing that some time next year there are going to be some declines in short-term interest rates, presumably because of some combination of slower real growth and more-benign inflation.
Possibly it’s not all expectations related.
It may simply be that the underlying demand for funds is softening
—that’s surely true in the mortgage and housing October 24-25, 200648 of 203industry
—and that is what’s driving yields down.
So I think that it’s important to keep an open mind to the possibility that a more fundamental slowing than we see in the current numbers is taking place and to make sure that we don’t dismiss incoming data and say it can’t really be happening.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Five weeks have passed since our last FOMC meeting, and not surprisingly the outlook does not appear to have changed in any fundamental way.
Recent data bearing on the near-term situation point to noticeably slower growth in the third quarter than we anticipated at our last meeting.
However, the Greenbook has revised up its projection for growth during the current and next few quarters so that the overall effect on slack next year is roughly neutral.
This forecast strikes me as plausible, but there are few data thus far to bear it out.
Meanwhile, measures of consumer price inflation remain uncomfortably high, although the latest readings have been very slightly better.
With regard to the pace of economic activity, there’s uncertainty in all directions.
In fact, we seem to have a bimodal economy with a couple of weak sectors, and the rest of the economy doing just fine.
Those two weak sectors are, of course, housing and domestic auto production.
Autos seem likely to have only a short-lived effect.
In the case of housing, we agree with the Greenbook assessment of housing activity and find it quite consistent with the reports of our contacts in this sector.
Besides the falloff in activity, house-price increases have also slowed markedly.
The Case-Shiller house-price index has been flat in recent months, and futures on this index show outright declines next year.
However, equity valuations for homebuilders, as Cathy mentioned, have risen moderately in the past couple of months, following large declines over the previous year, and we interpret that as providing some indication that the expected future path of October 24-25, 200649 of 203home prices has at least stopped deteriorating.
Of course, housing is a relatively small sector of the economy, and its decline should be self-correcting.
So the bigger danger is that weakness in house prices could spread to overall consumption through wealth effects.
<START>This development would deepen and extend economic weakness, potentially touching off a nonlinear type of downward dynamic that could trigger a recession.<END>
But so far at least, there are no signs of such spillovers.
Consumption spending seems on track for healthy growth.
Nonetheless, the growth estimate for the third quarter begins with a 1 and just barely.
<START>Any time a forecast is that low, it’s reasonable to consider the possibility that the economy could enter recession.<END>
<START>So for this reason, we, like the Board’s staff, took a careful look at various approaches to assess this issue, including yield-curve-based models, past forecast errors, leading indicator models, and surveys.<END>
Our bottom line is that we agree with the basic results reported in Monday’s nonfinancial briefing.
The highest probability of recession that we found, around 40 percent, was obtained from a model developed by a Board staff member.
The model includes the slope of the yield curve and the level of the funds rate.
An issue with this result is that long-term rates may currently be low, hence the yield curve inverted, for unusual and not very well understood reasons having to do with the risk premium.
Estimates from the other approaches came in with lower probabilities.
Finally, other financial developments that could presage future economic performance, like stock market movements and risk spreads, suggest some optimism on the part of financial market participants.
So our sense is that, except for housing and autos, the economy appears to be doing quite well.
Indeed, the recent rather sharp drop in energy prices could boost consumption spending even more than assumed in the Greenbook.
While this is a possibility, it seems more likely to October 24-25, 200650 of 203me that households ran down their savings to fill their gas tanks when gas prices rose and are, therefore, likely to use their recent savings at the pump to bolster their finances, at least partly.
Overall, under the assumption of an unchanged funds rate, our forecast shows a beautiful soft landing, with real GDP growing at a moderately below-trend pace for a few more quarters and homing in near trend thereafter.
But I must admit that we got this forecast essentially by averaging the strong and weak sides of the economy.
I think that way of proceeding is reasonable, and I hope the landing happens that way.
But I acknowledge there is plenty of risk.
<START>We may end up instead with either the strong or the weak side dominating the outcome.<END>
<START>For example, if the housing market decline does not spread significantly to consumption, we could end up with a strong economy in fairly short order.<END>
However, if it does spread, the slowdown could last quite a while.
Scenarios like this are nicely spelled out in the alternative simulations in the Greenbook.
Which way things go is a key issue, given that we’re in the vicinity of full employment.
The desired soft landing depends on growth remaining below trend long enough to offset the moderate amount of excess demand that appears to be in the economy so that inflation can trend gradually lower.
<START>The slight drop in unemployment, to 4.6 percent, in September did not help in that regard, and I should note that recent comments by our head office directors almost uniformly supported the idea that labor markets, especially for skilled workers, are tight.<END>
<START>However, we do expect the unemployment rate to edge higher over the next year in response to sluggish growth.<END>
Our forecast for core consumer inflation comes down a bit faster than foreseen by the Greenbook.
<START>We have core PCE price inflation edging down from just under 2½ percent this year to just over 2 percent in 2007 and see a good chance that it may fall a bit below 2 percent in the following year.<END>
<START>We see the relief on energy prices as helpful, although we keep trying to resist October 24-25, 200651 of 203any temptation to overestimate the extent to which past energy price pass-through has been boosting core inflation.<END>
Inflation also may benefit from an unwinding of the earlier strong pressures on rents.
<START>Finally, as in the discussion we had earlier about the alternative Greenbook scenario, we think inflation may have become less persistent over the past decade, and this is one reason that we’re a bit more optimistic than the Greenbook about the possible degree of disinflation over the next couple of years.<END>
<START>But on balance, I have to admit we don’t have a perfect understanding of why inflation has been so high over the past few years, and so I try to remain humble, as always, in my predictions.<END>
My bottom line is this.
<START>I see a non-negligible chance that the downside risks to the economy, emanating especially from housing, could produce a recession in coming quarters, but there’s a very good chance that the spillovers will be sufficiently modest that the economy will avoid a recession.<END>
I also see a significant chance that growth could modestly exceed potential.
In that sense, the overall risks to the outlook for real GDP growth could be characterized as balanced.
In addition, I see quite a bit of uncertainty about inflation going forward with the risks to my forecast probably being a bit to the high side.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
It’s just a little after 4:00.
Why don’t we take a coffee break and come back at 4:20?
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Mr. Stockton.
MR.
STOCKTON.
It’s amazing how great my answers are to your questions at 3 o’clock in the morning after an FOMC meeting.
[Laughter] I want to address just a couple of things that came up during the question-and-answer session.
October 24-25, 200652 of 203First, on the issue that President Yellen raised about the expectational channel.
That’s a pretty small piece of the story in the way that these model simulations work, so I don’t think you should worry too much that it is being a significant factor.
It is a small factor slowing the pace of disinflation.
The model guys tell me that the dollar channel is probably the more important factor there.
<START>Second, in response to President Moskow’s question about house-price modeling, I should have said we do have several models of house-price determination, none of which we think are very good.<END>
<START>[Laughter] One is an error-correction model that takes seriously the notion that, when house prices are very high relative to rents, there’s a correction that will bring the price-rent ratio back to the historical average, and we estimate the speed of that correction.<END>
That model taken seriously would suggest outright house-price declines in 2007 and 2008.
We also have a simpler model based on momentum.
That model suggests a bit of deceleration but nowhere near the amount of deceleration suggested by the error-correction model.
Our forecast cuts between those two simply as an indication of our ignorance about which of those models might be best at capturing the current situation.
Third, in response to President Pianalto’s question, besides the notion that the less-persistence scenario could reflect greater credibility anchoring monetary policy, some structural changes could be taking place in the economy in terms of greater flexibility of labor markets and maybe greater price flexibility as well.
I don’t think that’s an unreasonable hypothesis.
<START>One could think about and be surprised at the extent to which workers have taken a significant hit to their real wage this time without trying to recoup any of it through higher nominal wages.<END>
That may indicate that labor markets and maybe product markets are changing in a way that will make the overall inflation adjustment more rapid than the inertia models that October 24-25, 200653 of 203underlie our staff projections.
I hope those responses are a little clearer.
I’ll sleep better tonight.
[Laughter] Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Fifth District survey for October just released today shows manufacturing flattening out after a run-up last month, though expectations remain upbeat.
Services firms note solid increases in revenues, and overall District job growth remains strong.
Among retailers, big-ticket sales were softer, and housing-related sales slowed further;
but with other retailers, the picture brightened, with sales and traffic notably stronger.
<START>The housing sector continues to slow, with sales weakening further in the D.C. area and modest price reductions occurring in other large markets.<END>
<START>Some cities in the Carolinas, however, continue to report modest increases in home sales prices and even permits, and in many locations, activity varies significantly across different price ranges.<END>
District labor markets remain tight, and our surveys indicate that expectations are for some additional wage pressures in the next six months.
This commentary includes the now-usual reports of shortages of particular skills.
Our price measures moderated some, but they remain elevated.
The national outlook has changed only marginally in the past five weeks.
At our last few meetings, we have seen the staff mark down their forecast for second-half growth as the pace of the contraction in housing activity has become clear.
The information that has come in over the past several weeks does not suggest any steepening in the rate of decline, and if anything, there are scattered signs suggesting that we might be getting close to the bottom.
Except for housing, the economy still appears to be in good shape.
Consumer spending is holding up well.
Employment is tracking labor force growth.
Commercial construction is fairly robust, and business investment spending continues to grow.
So we’re still not seeing any major spillovers October 24-25, 200654 of 203from the housing market to other economic sectors.
Housing is certainly going to subtract from headline growth over the next couple of quarters, but I expect GDP growth to return to close to potential at some point next year, and I remain more optimistic than the staff about when that will occur.
<START>There is a risk that output growth will come in lower than I anticipate because of a more severe deterioration of the housing markets or more substantial spillover effects on other spending categories.<END>
Although it’s certainly too early to rule this out, I think the probability of such an outcome has receded in recent weeks.
<START>So my outlook for real growth is about the same as it was in September with, if anything, a tad less downside risk.<END>
The inflation outlook has not improved since our last meeting.
The September core CPI reading was 2.9 at an annual rate, identical to the August reading, and core PCE inflation for September is estimated at an annual rate of about 2.1 percent, I think.
I grant that three-month core PCE inflation has come down off its May peak of close to 3 percent.
I do take some comfort in the fact that core inflation did not remain so high, but that measure of inflation has been right about 2¼ percent for three straight months.
The Greenbook forecast has it stepping up to 2.4 percent for the next six months and falling below 2.2 percent only in the second quarter of 2008.
So three-month core PCE inflation is now as low as it gets for the next year and a half in the Greenbook forecast, and at the end of 2008, core inflation will have been above 2 percent for five straight years.
I have my doubts about the prospects for even the modest decline described in the Greenbook.
The notion that slowing real growth will bring inflation down much has already been heavily discounted around this table
—and rightly so, in my view, given the tenuous status of the relationship between real gaps and inflation.
<START>The recent fall in energy prices may help, but relying on tame energy prices is problematic, I think.<END>
It would encourage the public to believe October 24-25, 200655 of 203that we will allow core inflation to rise whenever energy prices surge.
That belief is, for me, the leading hypothesis explaining the run-ups in core inflation that we saw last fall and earlier this year.
We are likely to see some significant swings in energy prices in the years ahead.
So help from this direction is by no means certain.
More broadly, I believe we should be leery of letting a relative price move core inflation around.
<START>There was a lot of discussion at our last meeting about the state of inflation expectations, and a number of people pointed to evidence that market participants did not seem to believe we intend to bring inflation down to the center of the 1 to 2 percent range.<END>
This is confirmed by the Bluebook, which provides a very useful compilation this time from various sources of market expectations for core PCE inflation, and they are all clustered around 2¼ percent.
<START>If the Greenbook forecast is realized and core inflation gradually comes down to 2.1 percent over the next two years, it’s hard to believe these expectations would fall much.<END>
So with core inflation running around 2¼ percent and not likely to come down much soon and with expectations apparently settled at about the same rate, I’m deeply concerned about inflation.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our view of the national outlook hasn’t changed much since September.
If monetary policy follows the path that’s laid out in the Greenbook, and it’s flat for the next few quarters, then we expect growth to return to a level close to 3 percent in ’07 and for inflation to moderate gradually from current levels.
However, we still face the basic tension in the forecast
—the combination of relatively high core inflation today and an economy that has slowed significantly below trend
—and we still face the same basic questions:
Will inflation moderate enough and soon enough to keep inflation expectations reasonably stable at reasonably low levels?
Will weakness spread beyond housing October 24-25, 200656 of 203and cumulate?
Relative to September, we see somewhat less downside risk to growth and somewhat less upside risk to inflation, but as in September, I think inflation risks should remain our predominant concern.
Relative to the Greenbook, we expect somewhat faster growth in ’07, but we have a higher estimate of potential.
The difference is really mostly about hours and trend labor force growth.
We expect more moderation in core PCE and expect it to fall just below 2 percent in ’07, but this difference is mostly the result of different assumptions about persistence.
With these exceptions, our basic story about the contour of the expansion is fairly close to the Greenbook, and the implications for monetary policy are similar.
The markets do seem relatively positive, a little more optimistic about the near-term outlook.
<START>Equity prices, credit spreads, and market interest rates all reflect somewhat less concern about both recession and inflation risks.<END>
Some of this, however, is probably the result of the exceptional factors supporting what the markets call liquidity.
What is liquidity, and what’s behind it?
I don’t know that we have a good answer to that.
Most people would cite a combination of the facts that real interest rates are fairly low in much of the world still, that reserve accumulation by the countries that shadow the dollar is still quite large, that a big energy-price windfall is producing demand for financial assets, particularly in dollars, and that there is confidence in the willingness and ability of the central bank, particularly this central bank, to save the world from any significant risk of a recession.
<START>I don’t think all of this, therefore, is the result simply of confidence about fundamentals, so we shouldn’t take too much reassurance.<END>
But it still is a somewhat more positive constellation of asset prices, of market views about the outlook.
October 24-25, 200657 of 203Someone wrote this week that the fog over the outlook has lifted.
I don’t think that’s quite right.
<START>It’s true that the economy still looks pretty good except for housing, and I do think it’s fair to say that core inflation is moderating and that expectations are behaving in ways that should be pretty reassuring to us.<END>
<START>But it is too soon to be confident that inflation is going to moderate sufficiently soon enough with the path of monetary policy priced into markets today, and it is too soon to be confident also that the weakness we see in housing, in particular, spread and won’t cumulate.<END>
<START>won’t So I think that overall the balance of risks hasn’t changed dramatically, and as in September, I still view the inflation risk as the predominant concern of the Committee.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kohn MR. KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>The Committee’s focus has been on encouraging a gradual abatement of core inflation, and I think the limited evidence we’ve gotten since the last meeting is consistent with this outcome.<END>
The price data themselves show some signs of deceleration of core inflation on a three-month basis from the very high levels of last spring and summer, though the rates are still elevated.
A further decline in energy prices should help to keep inflation expectations down and will take a little pressure off business costs and core inflation even if pass-throughs are fairly small.
As expected, the rent-of-shelter component has been increasing less rapidly, supporting the projection that, in a soft housing market with overhangs of unsold housing units, this component will not be boosting measured inflation rates very much.
Inflation expectations as derived from financial market quotes remain at the lower levels reached earlier this fall.
As the Bluebook notes, the exact level of these expectations is really impossible to tease out of the data;
and although they may be a bit higher than we would October 24-25, 200658 of 203like, they do look lower than the recent twelve-month inflation rates and, at these levels, should exert some downward gravitational pull on realized inflation.
The economy appears to be running modestly below the rate of growth of its potential, and this should relieve pressure on labor and product markets.
<START>How far the economy is running below potential in an underlying sense is uncertain.<END>
I suspect it is not as weak as the estimated third-quarter GDP number but is somewhat softer than the labor market indicators, which show no slackening in the pace of demand or decline in resource utilization.
I base this conclusion in part on the data and projections of final domestic and total demand, which the Greenbook has averaging in the neighborhood of 2 percent in the second half of the year.
<START>Industrial production was weak in August and September, pulled down by the ongoing inventory corrections in housing and autos, and this reinforced my sense that, at least for a time, the economy is growing a bit below the rate of growth of its potential.<END>
<START>Going forward, I think a projection of economic growth gradually recovering next year as the drag from housing abates is reasonable, with growth supported by favorable financial conditions and lower energy prices.<END>
How quickly it returns to potential is an open question.
Though other forms of spending have proven resilient to date, I agree with the staff analysis that some spillovers on consumption and investment from the weakness in housing and in housing wealth are likely to restrain growth at least a little next year.
I also see that the spending risk is still pointed somewhat to the downside, although less so than at the last meeting.
To be sure, the recent signs are somewhat reassuring that the housing market isn’t weakening faster than expected.
Still, in the staff forecast the housing market is left with a relatively high level of inventory at the end of 2008, and prices are still elevated relative to rents, suggesting the possibility of greater declines in activity and prices.
In addition, equity prices are vulnerable to disappointing earnings as labor costs rise even gradually.
October 24-25, 200659 of 203The economy is most likely to grow a little below its potential for a while and inflation to trend gradually lower.
All in all, this is a pretty good outcome following the earlier oil price shock and rise in core inflation and housing market correction.
With demand outside of housing as resilient as it has been and inflation as high as it has persisted, the extent and trajectory of the expected inflation trend is uncertain and should remain our focus.
<START>A failure of inflation to reverse the uptick of earlier this year before it becomes embedded in higher inflation expectations continues to be the main risk to good, sustained economic performance over time.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>Well, again, as some of you have said, in five weeks we don’t have a whole lot of new information.<END>
But I’m coming back and starting with housing again.
As you know, that continues to be something I watch.
Let me just make a few comments and give you recent feedback from some exams and dialogues with brokers that I’d like to share with you.
Looking at both starts and permits, we all know that housing is continuing to soften in terms of construction, and we have also identified the increasing number of contract cancellations for new housing.
Someone mentioned earlier the noise that we may be having around housing data, and I get this through some of the anecdotal conversations that I’ve had with folks.
One topic was the inventory of existing housing for sale.
I’m hearing from a couple of real estate brokers that people who may have wanted to sell their homes or may have put them up for sale are withdrawing them from the market.
They don’t need to move, and it isn’t worthwhile for them to move if they don’t get the price they want.
I think the supply was possibly bigger than what we’re really measuring, and so we’re seeing some understating of October 24-25, 200660 of 203what desired house sales would be in terms of inventory.
That’s continuing;
it is just beginning at this stage, at least in a couple of regions, according to folks with whom I’ve talked.
One of the challenges that we’re faced with here is that
—again, I try to look for the good news
—in the housing purchase process, people file applications for mortgages very often before they qualify to buy the house.
When you look at the Mortgage Bankers Association data on purchase mortgage applications, as I mentioned before, they dropped 20 percent from their peak of last summer, but in the past few months they have been leveling off.
So if applications are a leading indicator, we may begin to see some moderation in housing purchases.
However, the 20 percent drop in purchase mortgage applications means that mortgage brokers are earning a lot less income.
If they don’t close a transaction, most of them get no paycheck because three out of four mortgages are originated not in financial institutions but by independent brokers.
We’re beginning to see increasing evidence of this in terms of the quality of mortgages that are out there.
We continue to track the mortgages that have vintages
—in other words, that were originated
<START>—in 2005, and we are continuing to see that, as these mortgages age, the early delinquencies for these are greater than early delinquencies for similar-aged mortgages of earlier vintages, which implies a loosening of underwriting standards and more stress on the borrowers.<END>
We are also seeing in a small way increased predatory activity with loans.
Certain practices have been described to me lately with new products, such as the 2-28 mortgage, which is fixed for two years and then escalates and becomes an ARM tied to LIBOR in the third year.
But don’t worry
—you can refinance it with the broker and bring your payment down and do it all over again.
We’re seeing those kinds of things
—mortgages for which people are being qualified by brokers with no escrow account;
all of a sudden taxes are due, and borrowers don’t have the money for them.
So predatory lending is rearing its head at the lower end of the scale, October 24-25, 200661 of 203and it’s something we have to continue to watch for.
However, before I leave housing, let me just say that the bottom line is that overall mortgage credit quality is still very, very strong.
We’re seeing predatory lending only in pockets of the market.
I continue to believe that the rest of the economy
—except for autos, I should add
—is still very strong.
Consumer spending is good, and business fixed investment is very sound.
The moderation in energy prices and the growth in consumer income will continue to add support to the economy going forward.
Jobless claims have been low and moving in a very narrow range the past few months.
<START>As several of you have mentioned, I’m hearing more concern by corporate executives about the inability to hire the talent they need to meet their business plans, and so I’m seeing more indication of tightness in labor markets.<END>
<START>Turning to inflation, as many of you have said, core inflation has moderated from the pace in the third quarter.<END>
But going forward in the Greenbook forecast, it is still showing significant persistence even though we think we will be growing, at least for a period, below potential.
That concerns me because that level is higher than I’m comfortable with in the long run.
We might have had some spillover effects from rising commodity and energy prices earlier on, but I was hoping at this point that, with the reversing, we would see more-positive spillover effects that would mitigate inflation.
So I am very worried about inflation.
<START>At the same time, I know that negative spillover effects on growth due to the rapid decline in housing construction and the moderating house-price appreciation are risks, which we cannot dismiss, to growth;<END>
but on net I am still much more concerned about the persistence of inflation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
October 24-25, 200662 of 203MR. WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My own views are quite consistent with what I expressed five weeks ago and with the central tendency of many of the speakers today
—that is, a greater concern about inflation prospects than growth prospects.
So I thought what I’d do is just give you maybe three or four perspectives on market activity in the intermeeting period and suggest to you what conclusions we can draw from them and what conclusions I’d hesitate to draw.
First, as we noted at the last meeting, the growth in the equity markets is all about earnings and not about multiples.
As the markets record the eighteenth double-digit quarterly growth rate, with quarterly growth in the third quarter likely to exceed, on an annualized basis, the second quarter, on one level you would see reasons for earnings momentum and for more robustness than the Greenbook shows in the prospect for business fixed investment.
Despite those headlines, I think the Greenbook probably has the general slowdown in business fixed investment and the general slowdown in manufacturing about right.
Again, at some superficial level you would think that these stock prices would be juicing business activity
—that animal spirits would be as high as they’ve ever been.
<START>But in fact, what we can say with some confidence is that historical models of cash and profits have done a poor job of indicating what the strength of business demand would be here.<END>
Although business demand has certainly picked up over this cycle, it appears not to have picked up as dramatically as a lot of the data might suggest.
So what does that mean?
I think it means that there is generally still conservatism in board rooms, conservatism by CFOs.
Although they have plenty of ammunition in terms of their access to capital markets and their cash balances, we’ll likely see them use that only when it’s clear that the economy has turned.
If this soft landing followed by a gradual acceleration does October 24-25, 200663 of 203appear to be the most likely path, I would expect to see these companies put their feet on the accelerator a bit more and make sure that growth gets back to trend relatively quickly.
But the idea that businesses are going to turbo-charge their way through this without hesitation appears to be less likely than the data would suggest.
Second, let me turn to the debt markets.
There is a discussion among pundits about a tug of war going on between growth risks and inflation risks.
<START>As I look at the data in the debt markets, I must say that I don’t see that tug of war.<END>
The only tug of war is really between a soft landing and a harder landing, under the view that inflation is almost assuredly going to be solved by the central bank or by exogenous factors.
<START>Again, a superficial conclusion would be, boy, the markets are not worried about inflation, and we should take great comfort in it.<END>
<START>Rather, the thing that gives me the greatest pause is that, just as inflation is nowhere on the table in the capital markets now, it could quickly emerge;<END>
<START>and it would not take much data, which all of us would consider to be relatively noisy and perhaps not overly valid, for inflation to become part of the discussion in the debt markets.<END>
That’s something I think we have to prepare for.
I suspect, as I think about the balance of this year, that another round of discussions in the capital markets about an inflation scare is quite possible.
The third issue is really one of short-term volatility, which I tend not to overreact to, but I do think this particular case is telling.
Typically, several weeks after a quarter, the markets’ assessment of that quarter’s GDP ends up trending toward truth and ends up without a huge disparity as they get closer to and smarter about the underlying information.
I have no reason to doubt our own staff’s view that third-quarter GDP is likely to come in around 1 percent.
Nonetheless, the markets’ estimates are quite far away from that.
Market estimates have, in fact, trended down, but I’d say the median estimate in the market is still in the high ones, maybe even October 24-25, 200664 of 2032 percent.
So the question really is, come Friday, if the headline number posts the way that the staff suggests it will, what the market will say about that.
My own view is that there will then be an immediate rush to judgment probably amplified to the downside in a political season like this.
<START>They will say, “Boy, the economy is really on the wrong track, and the economic landing is a very hard one.” Whether that judgment dissipates as markets look forward and start to understand the reasons for the shortfall is a bit of a concern.<END>
<START>Also, some in the marketplace may have the view that, if that landing is relatively hard and fast, the pace of economic growth will do our work for us on the inflation front.<END>
Obviously I don’t think that view is shared by many of us around the table;
in fact, there might be more work for us to do.
It wouldn’t surprise me if the markets didn’t, at the end of this period, expect there to be a couple of rate cuts built into the first half of 2007, and I suspect we’ll need to send Don back out there to give them another speech.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I second the motion.
[Laughter] MR. WARSH.
What does all of this mean for the real economy?
Again, I’d break it up into two pieces.
<START>First, in terms of a consumer reaction function, I think consumers are going to be very stubborn and very strong and are not going to be overly scared by a third-quarter GDP number that they don’t really pay that much attention to.<END>
<START>On a very fundamental level they are feeling much better about their prospects now than they have felt in some time, this is a function of some of the wage growth that we’ve seen and a function of oil prices and the unemployment rate.<END>
So I don’t really worry that there will be any short or intermediate effect on the consumer.
I think the Greenbook has consumer spending continuing in the fourth quarter at something like 3 percent.
That’s probably a very conservative estimate given the strength of some of those underlying fundamentals.
Second, what’s the effect of this on the real economy for businesses?
October 24-25, 200665 of 203I’m more concerned about their reaction function.
Despite the rather robust discussion in the business sector that I mentioned at the outset, I would expect them to be concerned.
As they’re thinking about their capital expenditures plans for 2007 and as they’re doing their fiscal year-end meetings, on balance the concern and the discussion of a hard landing may well affect their ability to bet big and make big projects.
So, again, I share the rather conservative view that the staff expressed in the Greenbook in terms of where business investment is going to be.
Finally, let me just talk for a moment about inflation
—again in the context of these market perspectives.
<START>I tried to be as witty as David is in this discussion, and during the break it occurred to me that I should call this section “Inflation:<END>
Are Objects in Mirror Larger than They Appear?” [Laughter] That’s my half-hearted effort at humor.
I’ve probably talked about the TIPS markets at least as much as other folks around this table in the past six or seven months, and I do find some comfort in them.
But I find myself increasingly viewing them as being a bit divorced from some of the data.
My view is that expectations of inflation relevant for price setting may have deteriorated much more substantially than the TIPS markets and the survey measures suggest.
I think the Greenbook has an alternative simulation that hits this case well, and its conclusion has to be that expectations may account for more of this year’s rise in core inflation than either we or the markets estimate
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 147

INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 147

I have expressed my views on explicit inflation objectives previously.
<START>Just to summarize, economic theory does not sharply pin down the optimum inflation rate, but my preference is a range of 1 to 2 percent for core PCE inflation.<END>
My preference is for core inflation to be 1½ percent, in the center of that zone.
<START>When inflation is outside the zone, policy should be broadly designed to move inflation back to the center of the zone.<END>
However, the time frame for core inflation to return to the center of the zone depends on a number of factors, like the dual mandate that I mentioned earlier.
Finally, an important issue that we should discuss is whether to use core inflation or headline inflation.
<START>Other central banks use headline inflation, and they seem to manage that well.<END>
I’m open to a discussion on this, but I think the communication issues are more complicated for headline inflation when it deviates so much for transitory reasons than for core inflation.
To conclude, I favor taking the intermediate step of extending the forecast horizon to five years, and I’d like to leave open the question of whether to establish quantitative guidelines until we get more experience with that approach.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Thank you.
I want to associate myself with comments that President Lacker offered.
If we are going to do this, we ought to make it very clean and explicit.
I would not favor the approach that President Moskow offered because calling the target a forecast leaves too much October 24-25, 2006132 of 203room for it to change over time.
I think that the central idea of a target is that it is a long-term commitment and not something that ought to change with each new FOMC that comes in.
<START>I believe that a coherent policy for the FOMC requires that the Committee at least act as though it has an inflation target.<END>
We can’t have a coherent discussion if Charlie Plosser and I are both favoring zero percent and other people are favoring 2 percent.
I have often said that I would like zero properly measured, but I think it is far more important to have any reasonable, low range and to say exactly what that number is.
I think we ought to be able to do that.
I have said that the target range should be understood to be permanent unless developments in the literature and the theory suggest that it needs to be recalibrated.
As a matter of governance, each incoming FOMC is going to have to reaffirm that range, but I think it would be understood that there would not be a change without substantial analysis and communication with the general public.
In fact, the constraint that there would be communication with the general public would produce a very, very high hurdle for even discussing a change.
<START>I think that would be appropriate because discussing a change on the inside and springing it on the general public would not reflect good monetary policy.<END>
<START>I also believe that there’s good reason to adopt an inflation range sooner rather than later.<END>
<START>I realize that we need a deliberate process here, but I would argue for doing it sooner, first of all, because our new Chairman has views as an academic that are well known on this subject and because we have been discussing it for some time.<END>
Also, we have an opportunity
—whether it would be successful I don’t know but we shouldn’t pass it by
—to help deal with the current inflation environment.
<START>It is true that, if you take the staff model and arbitrarily dial down the inflation expectations that are embedded in the Phillips curve, you get a very nice result.<END>
Generally, the way that the simulations go, the inflation expectations term grinds away over time, and only the October 24-25, 2006133 of 203creation of a period of slack and lower inflation gradually changes expectations.
<START>If we can wind down inflation expectations discretely through this method, it produces a gain in welfare for the country that I believe we should not lightly pass by, and so I would like to do it sooner rather than later.<END>
I’m not going to go into the details about exactly how we might do it.
I’ve given a lot of thought to those details and the way we talk about them.
As part of the process of talking about a range, I agree that a range of 1 to 2 percent in core PCE inflation would be a very good place to go.
But what do we mean if we say it applies to the medium term?
I could imagine events that would make the medium term longer rather than shorter.
Just to give one example to get the flavor
<START>—if the country went to a value-added tax system, it would dial in price increases for quite some time as a part of moving to essentially a national sales tax.<END>
That would be taken into account, and therefore, a rigid definition would not serve us well.
We would need to be able to explain why the horizon would have to be elastic under certain circumstances, and I think we could do that when we had situations for which we could provide solid analysis.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Mishkin.
MR.
MISHKIN.
Some people who know me quite well have been surprised at how brief some of my statements have been.
So in this case I hope you’ll indulge me a little.
[Laughter] MR. STERN.
The good times are over?
[Laughter] MR. MISHKIN.
As many of you know, I have thought quite a lot about this issue and have written quite a lot about it.
I’ve also been thinking a lot about it recently, particularly in the context of different political environments and structures of committees in which to operate.
I just finished a report on Sweden.
Sweden is not the same as the United States, and the Riksbank is not the same October 24-25, 2006134 of 203as the Federal Reserve, so that will reflect some of my thinking that may be a little bit different from what you have seen before.
Let me go down the decision tree, which I thought was excellent.
The Committee and the staff did a superb job in framing it in a way I find very useful, so I am going to proceed exactly along the lines that they suggest.
The first question is, Is an explicit numerical specification of price stability helpful?
You are not going to be surprised at my answer:
It’s a very strong “yes.” I could go on and on about this because I have written so much about it, but I’ll try to be very brief on these issues.
The key to successful monetary policy is having a strong nominal anchor.
<START>The kind of success that we’ve seen in central banks throughout the world, which would not have been predicted ten or fifteen years ago, is really remarkable, and it is because having a strong nominal anchor allows the markets to do a lot of the work for you.<END>
<START>But also what’s very important to emphasize is that you don’t have to do it with a long-run numerical inflation goal<END>
—the Federal Reserve has been very successful in doing it with an individual.
So I don’t see that this has been a problem in recent years.
I have to tell you that, maybe because I am here, I feel we are very lucky to have had the Chairmen we have had.
It could have come out quite differently.
<START>Having an explicit numerical definition of price stability, a long-run goal for inflation, means that the nominal anchor is less dependent upon who the Chairman is, and I think that’s actually something that is very good.<END>
It’s true in the past that we have not had a problem with that, with Volcker, Greenspan, and now Chairman Bernanke.
MR.
POOLE.
You did before that though.
MR.
MISHKIN.
But we did have a problem before that, and that is exactly my point.
In fact, not only might you not get the right person in the future
—and that could have happened this time around, but we were lucky in that regard
<START>—but even when you have the right person, the October 24-25, 2006135 of 203transition to a new Chairman has been very complicated.<END>
In particular, people might not remember this, but when Greenspan came in, there was an inflation scare in the bond markets.
Long bond rates went up about 200 basis points, and the bond market tanked.
I think that there was also some confusion in the markets when our current Chairman took this office about whether he was a hawk or a dove on controlling inflation.
Luckily, I think that confusion has dissipated, but I think it actually made your life, Ben, a little more complicated than you would have chosen it to be.
<START>So the way I think about this is that I would like the transition to a new Chairman to be very boring, and having an explicit numerical inflation goal for the long run would help in that regard.<END>
<START>Clearly, there are also the standard advantages that having an explicit long-run numerical inflation goal would clarify communication with the public, the markets, and the politicians.<END>
It increases transparency and accountability.
What is not discussed as much
—but I think Bill Poole hit on it
—is that it could clarify and make more coherent discussions inside the FOMC.
I would really like to know, when somebody is advocating a certain setting of the federal funds rate, what his or her inflation goal is.
Jeff Lacker has dissented in this particular meeting.
I have an idea why you did because I think you have been clear on what your goal is.
But if I were confused about that, I would have a harder time understanding why you’re taking the position that you’re taking.
We have seen evidence in looking at how central banks operate that having an explicit goal has actually improved the nature of the deliberations in these committees.
Another thing that is very important is that having an explicit numerical goal would allow us to think about the way of doing monetary policy, which is becoming better understood in the academic literature on optimal policy.
<START>The way we think about doing optimal policy is looking at what is an appropriate inflation path.<END>
In particular, having a long-run goal that you know you’re heading to and then talking about the path to that goal is exactly the right way to think about policy.
October 24-25, 2006136 of 203Let me tell you where I would like to head ultimately and then where I think the Committee should head in the short run.
There’s a slight difference because of some considerations I’m going to bring up.
I’d like to see in the long run exactly what Bill Poole and Jeff Lacker mentioned, which is the FOMC’s agreeing on an explicit long-run numerical inflation goal and doing it in terms of saying that we are defining what we mean by price stability.
So I am in full agreement with you that we should ultimately head there.
Then the discussion of monetary policy, both inside and outside, should focus on what the appropriate path is to get there and how long it should take.
This approach is consistent with what we have learned in terms of modern monetary policy analysis.
It is the way we have learned to think about this and, by the way, is consistent with the kind of policies for the most part that have been pursued by the Federal Reserve over the past ten years.
A key part of the success of the Federal Reserve’s operations is that, in practice, we have actually been operating in that way.
When you have such an approach, there are four basic principles regarding the way you think about changing the path that you think is appropriate in terms of achieving the long-run goal.
First of all, we ask how far away we are currently from the long-run goal
—so where we are really matters.
Second, the nature of the shocks, whether they’re transitory or permanent, is clearly important.
Third, it is very important to be aware of how big the projected output gaps are because we should care about output fluctuations, something I will turn to in a second.
Finally, we also want to be very concerned about financial stability issues because, if something is occurring on the financial stability front, we have to be able to deal with it.
This kind of approach would allow us to have a concern about business-cycle fluctuations, which I think is key for a central bank.
It would also allow us to change policy in response to financial instability concerns.
It should allow us to deal with the LTCM type of situation, in which there was a potential small probability of very October 24-25, 2006137 of 203disastrous things happening.
<START>In fact, it should be consistent with what Greenspan called the risk-management approach.<END>
<START>So I think it is very important to understand that we’re not talking about going to a rigid form of inflation targeting if we pursue this goal.<END>
Now let me turn to the second issue on the decision tree, which is how we express an explicit nominal definition of price stability.
I want to discuss some subtleties that really do concern me right now, which means that I’m going to shift slightly from where I want to get in the long run to where I think we should head in the intermediate term.
Four critical considerations worry me.
The first is the political process.
It is very important that we do not get too far ahead of the Congress on this.
It is extremely important that we express a further definition of what we mean by price stability in a way that is absolutely consistent with the Federal Reserve Act and with the law and with the dual mandate.
This consideration became very clear to me in looking at what happened during the testimony that the Chairman gave when he took his position.
It was clearly a central issue in the testimony that I gave.
<START>It’s very clear that this process is part of the American system and that it differs from many other countries.<END>
So that’s consideration one.
<START>Consideration two is that it’s extremely important that we not be considered to be what Mervyn King artfully has called “inflation nutters.” The British have better training in English than we have<END>
—they always have better phrases for things.
But we need to make very clear that, in fact, we are not inflation fanatics.
A key part of the success of the Federal Reserve has been based on the fact that the Federal Reserve is clearly perceived by the public, the politicians, and the markets as having a weight on output fluctuations in our decisions.
<START>What is also an important part of our success is that, in contrast to many other central banks, we have been willing to express our concerns about output fluctuations and the business cycle.<END>
So in my past writings, I have talked about the dirty little secret of central banking, which is that most central banks are not willing to October 24-25, 2006138 of 203admit that they care about output fluctuations.
I think this is actually a serious problem for them.
<START>Luckily, we don’t have that problem, but if we move toward an explicit nominal long-run inflation goal, we need to be clear that we differ in that regard from other central banks.<END>
The issue here is that this is a primary reason that we’ve had the support of the public and the politicians.
We certainly don’t want to lose that.
That’s the second consideration.
The third consideration is that we differ from other countries in a major way, and when I look at the Riksbank versus the Federal Reserve, I see how different we are.
We have nineteen participants making decisions about monetary policy, and that’s extremely unusual.
The only other comparable situation is the European system of central banks.
Our situation is different not only because there are nineteen people but also because the participants reside in different locations.
Now there are six but there will be seven of us existing in house, and there are twelve of you who factor in different locations and have a very different role.
You are CEOs of an organization, and you have to communicate differently with the public than the Governors do.
I really understand this because I’ve been on both sides, having been at a Reserve Bank and also here.
That situation actually makes things very, very different.
The fourth consideration is that the Federal Reserve has been extremely successful.
That gives people confidence in us and tells us that the more evolutionary we can be the better off we are.
This consideration is important in two senses.
One is that we want to say that we have done a good job in the past, and we are going to continue to do a good job in the future.
Thus we build on the credibility that we’ve established over the past fifteen years or so.
The second sense is political:
<START>We really want to promote political support, and looking as though we’re doing something that is departing from where we were is not a good way to move forward.<END>
October 24-25, 2006139 of 203Now that I have given you basic principles, let me put forth a proposal
—not one to be voted on today but where I would like to see us head.
<START>Although in the long run I would like the FOMC to be able to sit down and agree on what our long-run inflation goals should be in terms of a specific number, I would argue that the four considerations I brought up suggest that we need to go a bit more slowly to that path.<END>
So here is what I would suggest.
As part of our reporting procedures that we do for our Monetary Policy Report twice a year, we produce forecasts.
In a similar vein, I think it would be very effective for all nineteen participants, when they are giving forecasts, to say what their definitions of price stability are and, in fact, provide that number.
But I would recommend that this be done only once a year, not twice a year.
What are the advantages of doing this?
One advantage is that I think we are fairly close or will become fairly close to having agreement on it.
I would argue that the numbers will not be that different among us, and providing our numbers will make it easier for us to come to consensus in the future.
So it is an intermediate step to get us there in the long run.
Another advantage has to do with the fact that we have nineteen participants.
I think it’s very important that all participants are heard from and that we don’t encroach on their particular views until we can actually build a consensus.
So it really fits in with the issue that there are nineteen people in different locations with different jobs to do.
Also, it’s evolutionary;
it really is not a radical departure.
It’s very much in the spirit of saying that we have a dual mandate.
We’ve actually had individuals talking about comfort zones and so forth.
We’re just formalizing the process, and we’re doing it in a way that is a step forward in transparency, so it really moves us very much in the direction we have been going.
The bottom line here is that it gets us close to having an agreement.
I think that is not too far away.
I do want to mention the once-a-year issue, which would come up if the FOMC actually votes on this.
I think people worry about that very much because
—and I agree strongly with October 24-25, 2006140 of 203President Poole and President Lacker
—we do not want to have the number change very much over time.
<START>(We could also talk about some tricky issues that are created by bad inflation expectations dynamics, but not now because they are more complicated.) In practice, we have actually seen something that gives us a lot of information about this issue because one of the concerns that people had when inflation targeting started was that it would be decided by governments.<END>
The problem with governments is that we know what politicians are like
—they have to get elected, and they think short term;
this is one reason that we like to insulate the central bank from the political process.
There was then a concern that, if the government provides a number, it will do so opportunistically.
We have not found that to happen, and the reason it has not happened is that providing a number is so transparent.
When you actually have to give a number, you have to have a darned good reason for changing it.
In fact, I think it would be very unlikely that we would find this Committee, even if we did this on an annual basis, wanting to change it.
Transparency really has huge benefits.
It’s remarkable that, when there have been such changes, they have clearly been for technical reasons and have been in the right direction.
In one case, the Bank of England changed the number because of a change in the calculation of their price index.
It was done in the case of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, with some resistance from the Reserve Bank, but they agreed that the range they went to
—eventually to 1 to 3 from zero to 2
—was a better number for them.
Thus, I think that concern is really not going to be a problem even if we do this once a year.
I have an aside that I wasn’t going to mention, but I think it’s important to mention.
<START>It has to do with the issue of potential GDP and potential employment or a discussion of the NAIRU, and it relates a bit to President Moskow’s suggestion, which I do not think is the right way to go.<END>
<START>If we provide information about our explicit numerical inflation goal, it’s very important to explain why doing so should not drive us to provide a similar definition of potential employment, potential October 24-25, 2006141 of 203output, or the NAIRU for several reasons.<END>
The first is that it’s extremely hard to know what the correct values are for those numbers, and they’re extremely hard to estimate in real time, as we know.
I don’t even know what they are conceptually.
This is a big issue in the academic literature.
We have a good example of this issue right now, which is that the Greenbook has a very different view on this from what we find in the private markets
—you see much slower growth of potential GDP than the markets do.
Any suggestion that we have something like an employment goal would be very, very damaging to us.
We also know that, when the Federal Reserve has acted this way, which they did in the ’70s, it led to disastrous outcomes;
Burns focused too much on output gaps, and it got the Fed into a lot of trouble.
This finding comes from work done by your staff
—in particular, Athanasios Orphanides.
In contrast, it is important to clarify that the reason for the big difference between defining price stability and defining employment goals is that we know from a welfare viewpoint it doesn’t matter much whether we are off by 50 or even 100 basis points.
I think this is the point that Bill made.
<START>He likes zero, taking into account measurement error, but if we said it was 100 basis points more than that, I don’t think it would be that big a deal.<END>
We know that what is really important is to have a number to pin down inflation expectations, and not the specific number.
That is absolutely not true of an employment goal.
So it is very important to get that across, and it is the reason I reacted to President Plosser’s comments about this issue of talking about potential, although I think that he agrees with me.
It is also one reason that I have a concern with the proposal that President Moskow has made.
First of all, I don’t think it is explicit enough.
But I also have the problem that, if you talk about a five-year inflation forecast as a goal, people start to interpret that as a goal, and if you talk about a five-year GDP forecast, they’ll also interpret that as a goal.
<START>I think it leads exactly to a lack October 24-25, 2006142 of 203of clarity that will get us into trouble.<END>
So we need to be much clearer on this.
<START>If you ask me my five-year inflation forecast, that might not be the same thing as my view of the appropriate level of price stability because I have to think about what everybody else’s decisions are going to be, who may be the next Chairman, or whatever.<END>
Another issue, which is not the main subject today, is important to discuss because it may affect what the staff has to do.
<START>I have another proposal, which is completely independent of our decision to go toward an explicit inflation goal;<END>
it is that markets would tremendously benefit from more information about our forecasts, which are now twice a year, and to have that information four times a year.
By the way, this proposal came out very strongly in the Meyer survey, which I’m sure you’re all familiar with.
They were quite in favor of it.
Again, this could be done in an evolutionary fashion.
We have a reporting procedure on monetary policy, which we are mandated to carry out twice a year.
By saying that we’re willing to do it four times a year, we are actually saying that, in the spirit of cooperating with the Congress, we are trying to be even more helpful.
So I think it would fit in very naturally.
What it would require, of course, is a little more work on the part of all of us because we’d have to do it four times a year rather than twice a year.
But I’m willing to do that, and I think other people would be willing to do it as well.
Another key issue is that we need to greatly improve the quality of the written documents that go with this process.
The current Monetary Policy Report is really terrible.
It’s dull;
it’s sex made boring.
I don’t want to criticize too much, but it is.
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Tell us what you really think.
[Laughter] MR. MISHKIN.
If it were a textbook, and I can tell you I know a lot about this, you wouldn’t sell one copy.
[Laughter] So it’s a problem.
We see this in practice in that the markets pay very little attention to the Monetary Policy Report.
A feature of inflation-targeting regimes is October 24-25, 2006143 of 203that they produce something called inflation reports.
(By the way, I would never want to call it that in the United States;
I would want to stick with Monetary Policy Report
—it is a good name, and it fits into this evolutionary view.) They have improved the quality of these documents so that they receive a lot of attention.
Those reports have become extremely important vehicles for getting the central bank’s views across to the public and for helping the public understand what the central banks are doing;
they actually also provide support for the central bank to pursue optimal policy.
So improving these documents would have tremendous benefits, and I think it could be done, and I actually think the staff would probably enjoy doing them
—well, maybe not.
[Laughter] You’d be working harder, but that’s why you get paid the big bucks.
<START>I think you’d actually enjoy doing this.<END>
<START>In the inflation reports, they’ve moved to using the best textbook writing techniques<END>
—nice colors, boxes.
Ben and I have been involved in this process.
It’s the reason that I can afford my spouse.
It’s a change in the nature of the way this is done, but I think it’s very doable and will have a lot of benefits.
The last box in the decision tree is technical issues.
That’s not what we’re here to discuss today.
There are a lot of them.
How should we report the participants’ forecasts, if we go that route?
What price index should we use?
We would have to agree at least on what price index and whether it is a core or a headline measure before providing our views about what price stability means.
Would it be a point or a range?
What should be the form of the Monetary Policy Report document?
<START>Also, what does economic analysis tell us about the optimal level of long-run inflation rates so that we can actually think about the sense of it?<END>
Even though I’ve written a lot about this, I would like to think about all of it from scratch, and I would encourage the Committee to do that as well.
In that regard, I would like to have the staff do even more work.
The staff would need to provide us with a set of documents to get us to rethink these issues.
There are a lot of technical October 24-25, 2006144 of 203issues.
The documents that you provided for the January 2005 meeting were excellent.
But I would basically have a complete relook because I think there are some changes that we should be aware of, and then we can decide on what index.
<START>Some of us may change our views on exactly what number we think is the right number for the long-run inflation goal.<END>
If we go this route, we might try a dry run on some of these things because of what Governor Kohn mentioned
—once you go this route, it’s not easy to go back;
so you had better get it right.
We might want to try dry runs of what procedure we would use to provide information.
If we have a Monetary Policy Report document, we might try dry runs that we would actually discuss in this Committee.
I think by doing that we would be more likely to get it right.
Anyway, I am sorry to have gone on so long.
I have now made up for the fact that I have been quieter other times, and I’ll try to be quiet in the future if I can.
Thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
It probably comes as no surprise to most of you that I share a lot of the views expressed by Jeff, Bill, and Rick, and so I’ll try to reinforce some and maybe fine-tune a couple about which I might have some additional thoughts.
I do applaud the changes that the FOMC has made
—over the past decade, in particular.
It has enhanced its credibility.
It has improved its communication and its transparency about the policymaking process, and I think that has been a great step forward.
<START>In principle, I view the announcement of a long-term numerical definition of price stability or long-term inflation target, however you want to think about it, as another important step in that direction, and in that sense, the announcement is going to be evolutionary rather than revolutionary.<END>
I also believe that it will fundamentally improve the policymaking process without unduly restricting our flexibility to respond to crises.
October 24-25, 2006145 of 203I think it is often important to remind the public and others that we
—the Federal Reserve, the central bank
—have the unique responsibility to maintain price stability.
<START>No other agency of the government is charged with maintaining price stability, and nobody else can do it for us.<END>
So in some sense, when you think about mandates and what our responsibilities are, we are the only vehicle for achieving that.
Specifying our long-term price stability objective numerically would help coordinate expectations by reducing the public’s uncertainty about our goal.
Long-run expectations would become less responsive to short-term inflation, therefore probably less persistent.
This should enhance monetary policy flexibility in many ways.
Thus, rather than being unduly constraining, it could add to our flexibility.
But that’s not to say that a numerical definition would not influence our policymaking;
indeed, there would be little point in specifying a target if we thought that it wouldn’t.
The numerical goal would be a long-run anchor
—the nominal anchor to our monetary policy.
It would help coordinate our own discussions of appropriate policy and serve as the guidepost for our policy deliberations.
At times a policymaker would like to deviate from the commitment to long-term price stability, the so-called time consistency problem.
A precise definition of what we mean by price stability, however, would make it harder to succumb to the temptation to deviate and thereby would improve policy outcomes.
What we know in the context of most policies is that welfare under forms of full commitment generally exceeds welfare under forms of discretion.
Now, that does not mean that there will not be exceptional unforeseen events or events with such low probabilities of occurring that reactions to them would not have been pre-specified but would require deviations from policy as usual.
But these special circumstances are easily recognized.
In such instances, such as 9/11 and other crises, the FOMC will be able to react appropriately.
<START>October 24-25, 2006146 of 203We are fortunate, as Rick pointed out, that a number of other central banks in the developed world have set numerical inflation objectives and inflation targets.<END>
Numerical specification has been viewed quite favorably by those banks, and it seems to produce a moderate improvement in monetary policy.
<START>There is evidence that inflation expectations have become better anchored in these countries and that inflation outcomes have improved without any negative consequences for output growth.<END>
<START>It can be reasonably argued that the FOMC has implicitly targeted inflation over the past ten years.<END>
Twelve-month averages of core CPI inflation have remained inside a band of 1 to 3 percent.
I believe, given the shocks that have hit the economy over this period, that has not been just good luck.
Rather, it has been good policy.
Thus, an explicit setting of a numerical objective would be evolutionary and not revolutionary for the Fed.
Now, I have not come to firm conclusions about the precise formulation of the price stability objective.
We’ll need to consider
—as has been alluded to
—which index, what period over which to define the goal, and whether we should choose a range or a point for the definition.
The choices, to me, are interrelated.
For example, a long horizon would mean a tighter range and perhaps even a point.
A long horizon makes the choice between headline and core inflation less important.
Any proposal will have its pros and cons.
<START>For example, specifying a range may be preferred if it communicates explicit upper and lower bounds, presumably above or below which we would say we are definitely away from price stability.<END>
Of course, because of inflation dynamics, to maintain inflation in that range, policymakers would have to take action before inflation moved above or below those bounds.
<START>On the other hand, a range might induce some complacency on the part of policymakers so that they would not feel any urgency to take action until inflation moved outside the range, at which point it might be too late or at least more costly to restore price stability and October 24-25, 2006147 of 203reestablish our credibility.<END>
If so, a point estimate actually may be best because it would force the policy to be more explicit about why or why not any deviation should be tolerated and for how long.
As I said, I’ve not really come to a firm conclusion about a particular formulation in that regard.
<START>Presumably, deciding on a definition of price stability would entail estimating measurement bias in particular indexes.<END>
Robert Gordon in recent work estimated that the bias in the headline CPI is about 0.8 percent per year.
There are likely different estimates of the bias.
Presumably having ranges will help us determine what those definitions might be.
If we decided and agreed upon a bias, let’s say it was 0.8, should that be our target?
Yes, if price stability is our goal.
<START>However, in this regard, I agree with Bill, Jeff, and Rick that having a unique number may, in fact, be more important than what that number is, so long as it is within a fairly narrow range.<END>
<START>I think that this problem is a little more complex because we also have to consider the view of models in which there is actual optimal inflation.<END>
<START>Many models of optimal monetary policy suggest, depending on the exact formulation of the model, that the optimal rate of inflation falls in a range of slightly negative to slightly positive.<END>
Thus, price stability may be desirable, but it may not be optimal in some circumstances.
Finally, monetary policy is a Committee decision.
<START>We may differ on our forecasts, our models, and our understanding of the channels through which monetary policy affects the economy, but it seems to me that the Committee must agree on its inflation objective.<END>
I don’t see, as has been discussed, how we can formulate coherent policy if we disagree on the numerical long-run goal we are trying to achieve.
In helping communication and the public’s understanding of policy, individual definitions would create much too much confusion.
This problem is evident today.
<START>For example, there seems to be a disconnect between the market’s view of long-run inflation, which according to surveys and financial markets seems to remain around 2½ percent, and the statements October 24-25, 2006148 of 203made by many of us on this Committee who seem to be comfortable with 1 to 2 percent.<END>
Do the markets not believe that we are seriously committed to that goal?
Are we really committed to the goal of 2 percent or below?
By publicly committing to a specific target, we might, I hope, obtain greater congruence of our goals and the market’s expectations.
Of course, we have to remember that we will not succeed at all unless our actions are consistent with our stated objective.
Let me make two really quick points about communications.
First, as I said earlier, sometimes when I’ve read past FOMC statements I’ve said, “Well, why don’t you just say what you mean?” I agree with Rick:
<START>I don’t really like “potential output” either.<END>
I think it’s important that we strive toward achieving a communication strategy in which we are not trying either to confuse the market or to send signals but are basically stating what our forecasts are, what our policy objectives are, and how we propose to get to them.
Second, I’d like to reinforce the idea
—and Rick spent a good deal of time talking about this so I won’t elaborate on it
—of a document like an inflation report
—call it a monetary policy report.
Part of our communication strategy would be greatly enhanced by our ability to communicate on a more regular basis what our views about the economy are and where we think it is going.
As a way of communicating, such a report would be very valuable.
It would be tricky because it needs to be a report of this Committee and not necessarily of the staff.
How we mesh what the staff does with what the Committee thinks can be a very tricky process.
So I recognize that getting to that report entails some discussion about how to proceed, what constitutes the report, and how we communicate the Committee’s views independently or how we aggregate them.
Thus, I appreciate Rick’s argument that maybe we could have some dry runs in thinking about how we aggregate our views.
What variables we need to put in the report, which are the critical ones, and what policy assumptions underlie some of those forecasts are all very subtle and complex issues.
October 24-25, 2006149 of 203I taught in a business school for most of my career
—thirty years of teaching business students.
One thing I said to students was that the tough part of management often wasn’t figuring out where you wanted to go;
the tough part often was figuring out how you get there from where you are.
Indeed, in running an organization, in many cases that is where you run into most of your problems and where you step into the biggest potholes.
Therefore, I’m very sensitive that, if we agree that we want to get to some goal, the trick is figuring out how we get there from where we are.
That is critical.
The last thing I’d like to comment on relates to the so-called dual objective and Rick’s comment about the importance of the central bank’s concern for output and employment, the “dirty little secret” as you referred to it
—that we don’t have to worry about it because the public knows that we are concerned about it.
<START>But I think we have to be very careful in our communications because I worry sometimes that the public’s view of monetary policy is often that we can do anything, and at the slightest deviation or problem, we sometimes step into the hole of leading them to believe that we can either fine-tune or achieve objectives that we really can’t achieve.<END>
So in the context of this discussion, we need to try to communicate to the public that, although we may have a dual mandate in some respects, our ability to achieve certain objectives is very, very limited.
We’ve come dangerously close in this period to going from a position in which monetary policy was never considered to matter for anything to one in which it’s all that matters.
Our communications can play a role in which we are a bit more humble and admit what we can do and what we cannot do.
We should be very careful not to lead the public along a path that suggests we can actually accomplish things that most of us around the table don’t believe we really can.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Minehan.
October 24-25, 2006150 of 203MS. MINEHAN.
<START>Well, it will probably come as no surprise to anybody around this table that I don’t agree with some of the things that have been said, though I have a great deal of respect for the opinions that have been expressed.<END>
I want to go through the questions in a somewhat different order:
<START>first of all, whether or not explicit numerical specification of price stability is helpful;<END>
second, whether I think it would affect policy setting;
and then third, if we’re going to do it, some beginning thoughts
—and they are only beginning thoughts
—on how we would do it.
Is an explicit numerical specification of price stability helpful?
My answer to the question hasn’t changed much since we last talked about this in February 2005.
I don’t think it is.
Based on the evidence then and the updates since, I don’t believe an explicit numerical specification of price stability would have sufficient benefits to U.S.
policymaking to outweigh the potential costs involved in either actually taking our eyes off the other goal of policy or being seen as likely to do so.
<START>There is no doubt that such a specification has been useful in countries with a track record of very high inflation or no central bank credibility.<END>
I think it also was useful in the formation of the ECB, since there was a new central bank with no track record.
In the cases of both the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan, it was part and parcel of their gaining independence, which was important in a number of other ways.
<START>So I don’t think the situation in other countries necessarily applies to the United States, and I don’t think we have a good body of evidence that they’ve done with inflation targets, however they’ve been set, any better than we’ve done over the past whatever relevant time period it is.<END>
It is asserted that an inflation target of some sort enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy by helping to generate market expectations and actions that are consistent with the goals of the central bank.
But it’s not clear to me that our current process doesn’t do that about as well as it can be done while leaving some room for the flexibility that I believe is vital to the policy process.
October 24-25, 2006151 of 203Now if we adopted, and we probably are likely to adopt, some form of price stability specification, what does that do to policy setting?
<START>If such a target or goal is to be credible, then markets ought to have some confidence that the Federal Reserve will react in predictable ways each time the goal is either met or missed.<END>
But we don’t have just one goal.
<START>We have two goals, and how we react to inflation readings or forecasts will depend importantly on the trajectory we see for economic growth, output gaps, unemployment, however we want to phrase it.<END>
Thus, the setting of an objective for just one of our goals could result in somewhat less transparency about what our policy actions right now might actually be;
<START>even worse, having such an objective could result in actually making policy in a way that is insufficiently sensitive to growth.<END>
Every paper we have received on this topic has stressed that aspects of setting a so-called flexible inflation goal can reduce the possible cost of confusion about our commitment to dual goals.
Specifically, we could set a wide range.
We could choose a long period over which to attain the target.
We could choose an inflation measure less subject to volatility, particularly over the long run.
We could communicate extensively about all aspects of our forecast, et cetera, et cetera.
But in the end, if everything about the goal is so flexible or needs continual communication, how does it, in fact, deliver its benefits?
I really wonder what problem we’re trying to solve.
The communications subcommittee asked for our perspectives on the goals of communication.
I believe we can improve how and what we communicate, but I don’t see that the effort to communicate better by definition has to include an explicit numerical target for inflation.
For the best part of twenty-five years, no matter how we have measured inflation, it has moved down.
<START>GDP has faltered only occasionally, and unemployment has really been the envy of the developed world.<END>
This was done without an explicit inflation target, and I wonder whether one would have helped much.
I also wonder whether we October 24-25, 2006152 of 203know enough about what the underlying inflation mechanism is within our economy to lead us to certainty about what the correct range is.
<START>Is it zero properly measured, or is some level of inflation, low and stable, actually good for the way the economy functions?<END>
I am not sure I know the answer to that question, which makes me hesitant to put a numerical range around my goal.
Finally, we do need to consider the likely interaction with the Congress as we set a target for one of our goals but not another.
<START>In my view, the Congress should be very interested in the short-run tradeoffs between that target and growth in unemployment.<END>
<START>It might be hard, for example, to explain the virtues of a goal that’s focused on a 1½ percent midpoint rather than the current inflation of 2½ percent.<END>
Over the long run, I think either one of these numbers could be consistent with solid growth.
But in the short run, moving from one level to another would require some sacrifice, and I think the long-run charts in the Bluebook show that.
<START>There’s no research I know of that proves a lower rate is clearly preferable, though inflation stability at any low level might be.<END>
So how is the sacrifice justified?
What else might that interaction with the Congress provoke?
The possibility for unintended consequences is clear.
Now, I think I’m as committed to being accountable, credible, and transparent as anybody else around this table.
<START>However, I believe that we’ve achieved those goals in spades and that an explicit numerical target has the potential to do some harm.<END>
<START>The possible benefits of setting a numerical target seem to me to lie solely in the advantage to some of being able to point to a number rather than thinking of price stability as the absence of concern about prices in everyday business and consumer activity.<END>
<START>A number conveys precision, but that precision itself could backfire by seeming to require a policy response that may not be optimal.<END>
That probably covers the question about whether a numerical price specification is helpful and the related question 3 about whether the quantification of the long-run objective would serve as October 24-25, 2006153 of 203a new influence on policy setting.
I think it would serve as a new influence on policy setting.
Frankly, I don’t find it hard to understand where people around this table come from at present or where they have come from over the past thirteen years.
<START>I think that if you set out a numerical target, it will change the dynamic around the table, and I’m not sure in a positive direction.<END>
Okay.
I know I am in a small minority.
I know most people see only good or at least nothing bad coming from an explicit specification of price stability.
I know the decision over time is likely to be to pursue such a specification.
If that happens, here’s a general idea of how I think it should be done.
First, I agree with Don and, I think, Rick as well:
One ought to approach this process very carefully.
<START>Once in the public domain, an inflation goal, target, specification, whatever you want to call it, will be there and will be very difficult to take away.<END>
<START>I believe the markets at present think we’re after the lowest feasible level of inflation that we can get consistent with a reasonable level of growth.<END>
Once a number or a range is attached, market perceptions might change in unforeseeable ways.
<START>When or if we take this step, it will be very hard, if not impossible, to reverse it, so we had better be both thoughtful and careful about doing it.<END>
So I like ideas such as Rick’s that there are ways we can evolve to this and we can take some dry runs or intermediate steps that give us a sense of what the longer run might be.
<START>Second, I haven’t given a lot of thought to the possibility of each member of the Committee setting his or her own goal, but it is consistent with my understanding of the way the Committee is intended to function, with each of us bringing our own thoughts and frameworks to the table.<END>
Over time, the resulting diversity of perspective is vital to the way the Committee works.
Thus there is some appeal to the direction in which Rick was going, which is, as a first step, disseminating perhaps twice a year or more frequently the range of FOMC participants’ personal definitions of price stability in conjunction with their near-term forecasts.
I wouldn’t extend the forecast.
<START>The October 24-25, 2006154 of 203difference between the two could well indicate policy concerns even without fully specifying the underlying policy path in the forecast.<END>
I don’t know if that’s where you were headed, Rick, but I see some value in that step as a matter of evolution.
Perhaps a key reason I seem to think more about each participant’s own price stability definition is that it allows for some uncertainty about how the policy discussion will come out.
<START>Maybe unlike others, I see some policy uncertainty as a good thing.<END>
Most of the time we cannot forecast exactly what the Committee will find necessary to do, and I think we should avoid giving the appearance that policy moves are always known months in advance when they aren’t.
Making it clear that nineteen different perspectives and definitions are involved could, I think, contribute to that.
<START>Finally, regardless of whether a numerical specification of price stability is set for the Committee as a whole or reflects a range of our individual preferences, the target specification needs to be a range rather than a single number.<END>
I think of it as an umbrella rather than a target.
We should use a measure based on either the headline or the core CPI on the grounds that most people know what that is.
It is part of the life that they live day by day, and so it resonates in our communication.
We should set a medium-run to long-run target of five years or so over which the specification would be met if the relevant range were exceeded.
I think that gives us enough flexibility to deal with crises of one sort or another.
We should do whatever we can to make sure that we, the central bank, and not the Congress, set the target if we’re going to have a target.
That’s as far as I can go.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In August, this Committee discussed the goals for our policy communications and generally agreed that one goal is to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy and the performance of the economy by helping agents generate October 24-25, 2006155 of 203well-informed expectations consistent with the goals and strategy of the central bank.
The other goal is to enhance the accountability, credibility, and democratic legitimacy of an independent central bank.
I think that an explicit numerical specification of price stability can help us achieve these goals.
I’m in favor of establishing an explicit numerical objective by a vote of the Committee, but I recognize that we have many issues to resolve before we would feel ready to implement such a practice.
The economic research in support of explicit numerical objectives is encouraging but nowhere near conclusive.
The same can be said about the experience of other central banks.
So, unfortunately, there is no single off-the-shelf solution for us.
Our challenge is to craft our own framework
—one that’s achievable, understandable, and believable.
Fortunately, there are steps that we can take to move us in that direction.
A significant internal benefit to adopting an explicit numerical objective is that it would help communication within the Committee.
<START>At a minimum, knowing each other’s inflation objectives would help us understand when we disagree, whether the disagreement concerns our objectives or the means of achieving those objectives.<END>
Externally, greater specificity could help us anchor the public’s inflation expectations.
<START>In our current environment, with inflation low and credibility high, I don’t see the external benefits as being especially large.<END>
However, history does have a way of repeating itself.
<START>If we had to face conditions like those of the 1930s or the 1970s again, having an established practice of achieving explicit inflation objectives could prove helpful, and it could be a potent insurance policy.<END>
So the benefits of having an explicit numerical objective will be significantly greater during those periods of extreme inflationary or deflationary pressures than they are today.
Of course, as others have indicated, an explicit numerical objective has potential costs.
We might want to deviate from our objective for good reason but feel constrained from doing so.
October 24-25, 2006156 of 203Here I’m encouraged by the experiences of other foreign central banks, which suggest that flexibility is available.
<START>There is also the potential loss of credibility from not achieving the objective when we should be achieving it, but that is a cost that I think we should dedicate ourselves not to incur.<END>
Our challenge is to construct a framework in which we have the flexibility to make small deviations from a numerical objective
—but not large and persistent ones.
Two other potential costs matter to me.
First, I want to pursue this option within the mandate that we have from the Congress today.
I’m not sure that inviting new legislation would prove, on balance, to be constructive.
Second, as we explore our options for jointly establishing an explicit numerical objective, I would like to see the independent contributions of individual Committee members preserved.
<START>Turning to Vincent’s question about how we should choose the inflation objective, I prefer, as I said earlier, ultimately to arrive at the objective by a Committee vote rather than by establishing individual objectives.<END>
<START>I think the public would be least confused by a simple statement from the Committee that says its operating definition of “price stability” is X percent, with a range, and that specifies the particular index we’re using and the time horizon by which we’re trying to achieve the objective.<END>
In other words, this approach would be the most understandable.
In choosing the X percent with the range and the time horizon, we’ll have to be sure that we achieve the tests of achievability and believability.
We might benefit from having a period during which the public can get more comfortable with this option.
An expression that I like is “make haste slowly.” One step for getting us started would be to survey the Committee members about their working definitions of “price stability” and to publish the distribution along with our semiannual economic projections.
Obviously, a potential pitfall of this practice, as others have mentioned, is that eventually people are going to know that we’re doing this and October 24-25, 2006157 of 203they’re going to want to know our specific individual objectives.
So as we move forward with that practice, we’re going to have to be aware of that.
Turning to Vincent’s third question
—“Will quantification serve as a new influence in setting policy?”
—I think that we can expect that having an explicit numerical objective could change policy setting in ways that we can’t foresee.
But I can also see some intentional changes to the policy-setting process.
<START>First and foremost, being more explicit about our inflation objective will shift the time horizon of our analysis and our discussions at our meetings into the future a couple of years, which I think is a good thing.<END>
<START>A shift in the focus on the medium term would lead us to spend less time talking about where we are relative to the short-term Greenbook baseline and to spend more time talking about whether we agree or disagree about issues like productivity trends, the transmission mechanism, the cost of inflation, inflation measurement, and so on.<END>
These are now regarded as special topics, but I think they would become more normal fare under a new regime.
I like Governor Mishkin’s and President Plosser’s suggestion to improve the Monetary Policy Report to the Congress and to the public.
Once we start to discuss these longer-term trends, they could be included in the report, and their inclusion would make the report more beneficial.
The positions I’ve taken on these specific questions are positions that I had before I walked into this room, but I recognize that my views are evolving as I’m listening to some of my colleagues’ comments on these issues.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll start at the top of the sheet but then jump around.
So the answer to the first question is “yes”
—I do think that an explicit numerical specification of price stability would be helpful and that the FOMC should move toward such a October 24-25, 2006158 of 203specification.
I always thought this step was a close call in terms of its costs and benefits.
There have been a couple of developments since January ’05, when we last discussed the topic, that have led me to change my position to favor this step.
First, we’ve been through two more episodes
—in the spring of ’05 and the spring of ’06
—when a surge in actual inflation raised questions in financial markets about our intentions and expectations.
In both cases, higher inflation expectations did not persist.
<START>But making our long-term intentions clearer should reduce the risk that temporarily heightened inflation pressures result in increases in expectations that become more permanent and more costly to reverse.<END>
A couple of studies in the past two years have tended to support the hypothesis that a numerical specification might help tie down expectations at least a little within the financial markets.
Second, I think a lack of clarity on this question has increasingly muddied discussions in this Committee and communication with the public.
<START>Within the Committee, it has sometimes been difficult to discern whether differing viewpoints reflect diverse perceptions of the course of inflation and economic growth or of the desirable end point or path for inflation.<END>
The public does not know whether the comfort zones enunciated by various Committee members reflect the views of the Committee or only those of the individuals.
Coming to an agreement on an end point and on the role that end point should play in policy and announcing that agreement should help our discussions and enhance the public’s understanding of our intentions.
Having said that, I think we need to recognize that any explicit inflation specification is likely to exert some pull on policy.
It will not simply institutionalize the Volcker or Greenspan policy regimes, as is sometimes said.
It cannot help but to increase the Committee’s focus on particular numerical outcomes and projections for inflation.
<START>That’s good to the extent that it reduces the odds on a repeat of the cumulative errors of the 1970s, but it also may make it more October 24-25, 2006159 of 203difficult for the Committee to take actions that might be perceived at the time as inconsistent with achieving price stability in the next few years but that were still in the public interest<END>
—say, by countering financial distress, as in 1998, or by moving very, very aggressively against economic weakness, as in 2001, when core inflation was actually rising.
A risk-management approach to policy may well call for aiming away from the price stability objective from time to time.
I continue to believe that monetary policy over the past twenty-five years has been exemplary.
We should be very cautious in tinkering with its design.
Whatever we do must be clearly consistent with the dual mandate and be perceived as such.
This is important for democratic legitimacy.
The Federal Reserve Act includes maximum employment equally with price stability.
I recognize and have often used the principle that price stability enhances maximum employment.
But I also note that proposals introduced in the Congress over the past two decades to make price stability our primary objective have not had support, and they’ve gotten nowhere.
<START>I’m encouraged by the fact that Chairman Bernanke in his hearings didn’t meet too much opposition [laughter] but I think we need to recognize that there have been attempts to change our mandate and there has been no congressional support for those attempts.<END>
I think the last attempt was about ten years ago.
The dual mandate is also good economics.
<START>Fluctuations around potential impede planning and long-term saving and investment decisions, just as do fluctuations around price stability.<END>
<START>We need to take explicit account of these costs as we pursue our price stability objective, and this implies that we should tolerate deviations from price stability on occasion and that the time path to price stability should depend on the circumstances, including the likely costs in lost output along with the deviations from price stability.<END>
Support for the Federal Reserve in the population and among its elected representatives has never been October 24-25, 2006160 of 203higher, certainly never higher in my thirty-seven years at this institution.
That support flows from the results of the past twenty-five years and from confidence that we know what we’re doing and will behave sensibly.
This was the second type of credibility that Chairman Bernanke talked about at the last meeting.
<START>We should not depend on any announcement to have a substantial immediate effect on inflation expectations, where they count most for economic performance.<END>
Professional economic forecasters would have a number to coordinate on, and they probably will.
It may help tie down expectations in financial markets, but even in financial markets, the effects are likely to be small.
Long-run inflation expectations are already well anchored in the United States.
Spreads over indexed debt move around quite a bit, even in inflation-targeting countries.
For example, as we saw in the briefing on Monday, inflation compensation has fallen since July the same amount in Canada that it has in the United States.
As the staff memo on price dynamics noted, the data do not support an inference that such an announcement per se would affect wage-setting and price-setting behavior.
Such influences would come because our behavior and the economic results would change.
These caveats and concerns lead me to favor a numerical definition of price stability without an explicit time dimension rather than an inflation target that we would expect to achieve in a defined time frame.
I have in mind something along the lines of Chairman Bernanke’s suggestion in St. Louis three years ago
<START>—the long-run average inflation rate we will be seeking in order to meet the price stability mandate in our act.<END>
We would not expect to achieve this objective year by year or even necessarily on a two-year-ahead projection.
That would depend on the circumstances.
My expectation, or maybe it’s a hope, be that the benefits of such a formulation would exceed its costs
<START>would—that without greatly impeding the type of flexible October 24-25, 2006161 of 203policymaking that has so benefited the economic performance since 1980, it would help a little to tie down expectations, aid the public in making its plans, clarify internal and external communication, and make it more difficult for future FOMCs, when all of us have retired, to allow inflation to drift higher.<END>
I don’t have well-defined views on the exact specification of this definition
—the index, its level, point or range, whether it should be expressed in terms of total or core
<START>—but these specifications will be critical in judging the eventual likely balance of costs and benefits.<END>
If we go down this route, we’ll have a lot of work to do.
Besides the details of the specification, it’s vitally important that the Committee think through very carefully the role that any definition of price stability would play in policy formulation and that we convey our expectations to the public.
It would have implications for all our modes of communication as well as for the inputs to policymaking and would call for considerable communication to the Congress and the public to prepare the way.
Understanding what we’re doing and explaining it to the public in turn requires that the Committee come to a decision on the definition and the way it will be treated in policymaking.
So I favor the “jointly” arm of Vincent’s chart.
I can see some of the suggestions of aggregating the views of individual policymakers as a possible way station, but I’m concerned that such aggregation will raise as many questions as it answers.
If we go to a numerical definition of price stability, we should be prepared to explain and justify it fully, and that requires the Committee to consider those implications explicitly.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
First Vice President Barron.
MR.
BARRON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In light of the hour and the fact that many of my more learned colleagues have yet to speak, I’ll try to be brief.
<START>My comments come from one October 24-25, 2006162 of 203who has been with the Federal Reserve System for some thirty-nine years, has been seated on the sidelines of this Committee for fifteen years, and has observed the evolution of communications and the critical importance of transparency.<END>
I’d like to make two observations.
<START>First, if the goal of adopting an explicit target is to institutionalize credibility, then this should not be a big concern now.<END>
<START>The Committee has credibility, and the recent market evidence on low market volatility and contained inflation expectations is clearly consistent with the conclusion<END>
—the recent Wall Street Journal article notwithstanding
—that this Committee has credibility.
Over the long run, however, there are some looming fiscal issues
—specifically, the projected growth of nondiscretionary spending
—that make the conduct of monetary policy very difficult.
<START>From this perspective, an explicit target may provide additional reassurance to the market that the Committee can pursue its low-inflation objectives with some independence from the pressure to accommodate fiscal deficits.<END>
Second, as many have noted, to move to an explicit numerical target raises a number of both practical and political issues.
These issues concern not only the specifics of the target, the choice of the time horizon, and the methods employed to ensure transparency and accountability but also the nature of the negotiations to ensure congressional acceptance and support.
The System’s mandate has been modified several times, most recently in December 2000.
<START>If, and I would emphasize “if,” the Congress required or even suggested additional legislation, I believe the risks and potential costs of opening up the Federal Reserve Act might be great.<END>
For example, the Committee might also get numerical targets for employment or even specific targets for housing or other sectors that might be of special interest to individual members of the Congress.
<START>My bottom line is that, given the risks, I take some comfort in the current vagueness of the wording of the Federal October 24-25, 2006163 of 203Reserve Act as it relates to monetary policy objectives and the way it has been interpreted over the past many years.<END>
My sense is that the Committee may well be close to having the right balance with regard to communicating its objectives and ensuring credibility.
Although, clearly, the Congress can change our mandate any time, I would urge caution in providing the impetus for such change until we have thought long and hard about the costs and benefits of that change.
Having said all that, I find a great deal of comfort in Governor Mishkin’s approach at gradualism.
<START>I would certainly be comfortable with that approach if we could avoid nailing, so to speak, a tablet to the halls of the Congress saying, “This is going to be our explicit target.” I think to do so would simply lure them into a fight that I wouldn’t want to take on at this time.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, in preparing for today’s comments, I found it interesting and somewhat instructive to look back to similar discussions that this Committee has had in the past.
This includes not just our more recent ones but an extended debate that took place in July 1996.
I can confirm, therefore, that we have a deliberative process.
<START>[Laughter] Looking back over how my own views have evolved, I am as convinced now as before about the importance of an unqualified commitment to price stability as the underpinning of our monetary policy.<END>
<START>I have long had an interest in how an inflation-targeting approach to policy might help us, and that’s where I think it gets interesting because I think the devil is in the details, if you will.<END>
<START>As the staff and I have tried to work through some of the details we would have to confront in implementing such an approach, I have become somewhat less enamored than I was about the usefulness of establishing an explicit numerical inflation objective.<END>
I am not necessarily opposed to such a October 24-25, 2006164 of 203step, and if we were to go there, I’m more drawn to Governor Mishkin’s approach than to others I’ve heard.
<START>But I do have concerns about the value of doing so, as well as how such a decision would be implemented and how it might alter the decisionmaking process and our discussions within this meeting<END>
—the so-called unintended consequences of moving along this line.
Let me address these points by framing my comments according to the questions in Vince’s memo.
First, is it helpful?
As I understand the literature on central bank transparency and credibility, the value of establishing an explicit numerical definition of price stability comes from anchoring the public’s inflation expectations and reducing the volatility of these expectations.
In this regard, I have been struck by how well anchored inflation expectations have been in the current tightening cycle here in the United States.
This is in contrast, I realize, to some historical contexts, but the fact of the matter is that they have remained quite anchored.
How much further improvement would come from the adoption of an explicit target at this point, I question.
Would it be meaningful?
I’m not so sure.
<START>Another argument is that adopting an explicit numerical objective would make it more difficult for future Committees to backslide on their commitment to price stability.<END>
I find this argument somewhat weak.
Short of a change to the Federal Reserve Act, future Committees would not be bound, nor would they feel bound, to actions taken by this Committee.
I can see someone pushing forward at some time, in terms of the dual mandate, an issue relative to stable output as becoming a new important element.
Moreover, my reading of the literature comparing the performance of inflation-targeting and non-inflation-targeting countries suggests that there is very little measurable difference in performance to this point.
<START>In the absence of a clear benefit of establishing an explicit numerical objective, we also need to look at its costs.<END>
One possible cost is the constraint that might be placed on short-run October 24-25, 2006165 of 203policy decisions.
In this regard, I wonder how an explicit numerical objective might have altered our response to the weakening economy in 2001, which Governor Kohn mentioned.
Since core inflation measures tend to lag output, core inflation was still rising as we began to reduce rates.
Would we have been as able to cut rates as readily if we had established an explicit numerical objective?
Perhaps yes, perhaps no.
How should the objective be chosen?
Turning to the question of choosing an explicit numerical objective, I see a host of procedural and logistical issues.
As to procedure, I feel strongly that any decision should reflect unanimity on the part of the Committee;
otherwise, the credibility of such a decision is immediately called into question.
<START>Establishing unanimity about the details of an objective could prove difficult.<END>
For example, I would not be comfortable with using the core PCE deflator exclusively in defining a measure of price stability.
Theoretically, PCE is generally judged superior to the CPI because chain weighting avoids the substitution bias in the CPI.
In another important dimension, however, the case for the PCE is much weaker.
Perhaps most notably, the core PCE deflator is subject to regular and sometimes significant revisions.
The revisions to PCE over the past six years have not been trivial;
moreover, they have all been in the same direction.
By underestimating inflationary pressures during this period, core PCE sent misleading signals about those pressures.
Moreover, the CPI plays a much larger role in the institutional fabric of this economy.
<START>I find it interesting that so few members of the financial community produce forecasts of PCE inflation, even as they view it as the Fed’s preferred measure.<END>
More important, TIPS-derived measures of inflation expectations are based on the CPI.
Thus, to line up market inflation expectations with the PCE we are forced to go through the sort of exercise that is reported in the current Bluebook.
I wonder how accurate or useful such a translation might be over an extended time.
Consequently, if we were to go the October 24-25, 2006166 of 203route of establishing an explicit numerical objective, I would advocate not tying ourselves exclusively, for example, to the PCE.
As to whether an explicit or implicit approach is preferable, I would lean toward an explicit approach of surveying members on their long-run objectives.
I feel this approach would be more transparent and efficient than expanding the horizon of central tendency forecasts.
How would an objective influence policy setting?
I believe there would be effects, but gauging these effects would be difficult without a more thorough and detailed understanding of how the objective would be implemented.
If we decide to go in this direction, it will be important to maintain the diversity and independence of views expressed by the Committee members, both in our deliberations here and in our interactions with the public.
Finally, if we explore a form of price-targeting or inflation-targeting, we should hold off on an ultimate decision until we have a thorough understanding of the details of such a regime and their implications for the policy process within the Committee.
Once again, just as reinforcement, I prefer going forward along the lines that Governor Mishkin outlined for us.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The last time we discussed an explicit numerical objective in an organized way I said something to the effect that I thought one reason to have one would be to formalize and institutionalize what I thought the Committee had largely been doing over the past ten or fifteen years.
I continue to feel that way, and in that sense doing it is evolutionary along the lines that some other people have described.
But evolutionary is not insignificant, and I do think this would make some significant changes, which I believe would be October 24-25, 2006167 of 203helpful.
We have already touched on some of the communication and accountability issues, and I certainly share the views that this would be positive with regard to those matters.
<START>Another important related consideration is that it’s a potentially effective way of addressing the issue of time inconsistency.<END>
I do think it’s very important that we tie our short-run decisions to our long-run objective.
I don’t think there is much disagreement about our long-run objective.
Stated generally, that is to achieve and maintain price stability.
I’m eager to see that we put in place some framework
—this is not the only framework that one can conceive
—that accomplishes that objective.
So I think that this would be both helpful and important and that it would be a new influence in policy setting.
That’s its intent.
It does raise, as others have already commented, a number of interesting intellectual issues having to do with whether to have a range or a point estimate, over what time horizon we are trying to achieve the objective, what it all means for how the Committee is going to change the federal funds rate over time, and so on and so forth.
I think those questions are potentially very important.
<START>By the way, just so I can preserve some degree of freedom, let me state explicitly that I’m not persuaded at the moment that a range of 1 to 2 percent is the appropriate target for us, even though that range has been in the public domain for a while.<END>
Finally, how should the Committee choose the inflation objective?
At the end of the day, I think it should be a Committee decision.
But I can see getting there in a more evolutionary manner, and I would associate myself with many of Governor Mishkin’s suggestions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll address the major questions posed in Vincent’s memo in the order presented.
First, I support the enunciation of a long-run numerical inflation objective.
My views on the benefits and costs of enunciating publicly such an objective October 24-25, 2006168 of 203have changed very little since we discussed this topic in January 2005.
Beginning with the benefits, I believe a numerical objective would focus our internal policy deliberations and improve their coherence, particularly if the Committee does agree on a common objective.
A numerical objective appropriately communicated could also improve the public’s understanding of our goals and the strategies for attaining them, thereby helping to align market perceptions with those of the Committee.
<START>Solid anchoring of the public’s inflation expectations could aid us in avoiding deflation in the vicinity of the zero bound on interest rates and could reduce the potential for destabilizing inflation scares following adverse supply shocks, thus enhancing the scope for monetary policy to respond to their real effects.<END>
<START>Finally, the public enunciation of the long-run inflation objective would enhance accountability and transparency in a way that I think is appropriate.<END>
It’s a desirable goal in a democracy.
Although I do perceive there to be net benefits from enunciating a numerical objective, I do not think these gains are enormous relative to the status quo.
<START>The public already has a reasonably good idea of the Committee’s inflation preferences, and inflation expectations are now pretty well, if not perfectly, anchored.<END>
<START>Moreover, the evidence, as I read it, suggests that a central bank’s credibility on inflation depends more on its actual record of performance than on its utterances about its objectives.<END>
<START>So no dramatic improvement in the sacrifice ratio seems likely.<END>
<START>Interestingly, a recent survey that several of you have referred to, and I’m assuming most people have seen, by our former colleague Larry Meyer finds that only a minority of the respondents favored the Committee’s adoption of a numerical inflation objective.<END>
Market participants appear far more interested in improved communication concerning our assessment of the near-term outlook and prospects for monetary policy, and that suggests that as we go October 24-25, 2006169 of 203forward we should place considerable emphasis, as Governor Mishkin emphasized, on enhancing our forecasts in the context of the Monetary Policy Report.
<START>The enunciation of a numerical inflation objective could have costs as well as benefits.<END>
My main worry is the potential for de-emphasis on the other part of our mandate, namely maximum sustainable employment.
Such a de-emphasis could occur in the minds of the public, and I could easily see how it could affect our own deliberations.
I think the current situation provides a case in point.
If the structural Phillips curve has indeed become as flat as FRB/US estimates, an optimal policy for lowering inflation to target brings it down exceptionally slowly when equal weights are placed on the inflation and the output gaps in the loss function.
You can see that in the Bluebook simulations.
<START>With the public focused on a numerical inflation objective, however, it is naturally tempting to seek more rapid convergence to a target.<END>
<START>I think we feel uncomfortable with the paths that we see in the Bluebook, and it would be easy to effectively down-weight our emphasis on the employment objective.<END>
Interestingly, almost half of the respondents to Meyer’s survey believe that the enunciation of a numerical inflation objective would impair the FOMC’s ability to meet its maximum employment objective.
Therefore, enunciation of a numerical inflation goal, in my view, must occur in the context of a clear statement concerning our commitment to the dual objectives.
<START>In this regard, I remain attracted to our Chairman’s 2003 suggestion that we state the target inflation rate as a long-run objective only and emphasize<END>
—again, to paraphrase our Chairman
<START>—that in deciding how quickly to move toward the long-run inflation objective, the FOMC will always take into account the implications for near-term economic and financial stability.<END>
Consideration of the horizon issue is mentioned in the other question section of Vincent’s memo, and I, for one, take this issue to be crucial and October 24-25, 2006170 of 203would be unable to support a numerical objective unless the horizon can be long enough and flexible enough to respond appropriately to employment considerations.
Now, I’d like to turn to the second major question, which deals with governance in essence.
Will the inflation objective be chosen by the Committee members or by the meeting participants, and will it be chosen as a group decision or by summarizing our individual views?
I think there are enormous advantages to reaching a joint Committee decision.
<START>This approach would provide the clearest focus in our policy deliberations and Committee communications, and it would probably work best in anchoring inflation expectations.<END>
<START>It would also provide a well-defined standard against which we could be held accountable.<END>
However, I, too, recognize that it is probably wise to move in this direction cautiously.
I would certainly support, as a first step, Governor Mishkin’s proposal to report a consensus of responses to an annual survey concerning long-run numerical inflation objectives of the participants.
This approach would be a measured stance, more measured than a Committee vote, and I think it would be less likely to be divisive within the Committee and vis-à-vis the Congress.
<START>Such a survey respects the possible diversity within the Committee, and the Congress might be less likely to object to the Committee participants’ stating their individual interpretations of the monetary policy mandate than to the formal adoption of an inflation objective.<END>
Of course, choosing to use a survey now would not preclude us from voting as a Committee on a single objective later on.
We could, as an alternative, communicate the Committee’s long-run inflation objective through lengthening the horizon of our inflation forecasts.
<START>Such an approach, however, has significant disadvantages in my view relative to a straightforward survey of opinions.<END>
Consider the current situation.
<START>If the extended Greenbook forecast is accurate, adding just a year or two to the forecast we prepare for the semiannual Monetary Policy Report would not work.<END>
<START>In fact, to October 24-25, 2006171 of 203convey our implicit inflation objectives, if we accept the optimal policy path in the Bluebook, we might have to add five years or more to those forecasts.<END>
<START>Moreover, if we extend the inflation forecast, we will need to extend also forecasts, as Governor Mishkin noted, of real GDP and the unemployment rate, and some members of the public and the Congress could misinterpret these estimates as the Committee’s goals for these variables;<END>
<START>at a minimum, such estimates could lead to unproductive discussions about what the correct estimates of those key concepts are.<END>
That is an exercise I would not relish.
Finally, on the question of whether policy settings will be affected by a long-run inflation objective.
In some sense, the answer has to be “yes.” For example, I argued that the benefit of having an inflation objective is that it would help to anchor public expectations of policy, and if it did, it would affect bond rates and other financial variables and their responses, presumably in constructive ways, and would therefore feed back onto policy.
But the real issue is this:
Will a publicly announced inflation objective affect the weights that we put on the elements of our dual mandate?
Will it cause us to respond more strongly to inflation and less strongly to employment?
As I said before, I am concerned that this could happen, if only inadvertently.
If we go this route, I myself would make every effort to prevent such a distortion to the weights that I use in analyzing policy decisions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you know, since we’ve started talking about this issue, I’ve been undecided
—“open-minded” is perhaps another way to say it.
Wearing my supervisor’s hat, I see that we’ve been talking to players in the markets about how important transparency is to the effective functioning of financial markets and to financial transactions.
So it’s hard for me to give a rationale for why the central bank is not more transparent.
Being part October 24-25, 2006172 of 203of a democracy means that for us as a central bank
—especially since we weren’t directly elected by the citizens
—transparency is very important.
However, the unintended consequences of what setting a goal would mean have always held me back.
That’s why I support the process that has been laid out here.
We really do need to take the time to think through all the consequences and, as best we can, identify some possible unintended consequences.
So the evolutionary approach
—let’s look at it all together before we decide
—I very strongly endorse because, at the end of the day, our credibility is paramount
—it is something that we have to cherish as much as we possibly can.
I also want to think a little more about the dual mandate issue as we go forward.
I tend to believe that having a more explicit target and continuing to achieve low and consistent inflation will, in effect, support and encourage growth and full employment.
So the issue may be one of communicating that relationship.
I really feel strongly about this.
I have no empirical basis but just fifteen years as a corporate CFO.
One disconnect that you have as a CFO in the corporate world is that you live in a world of nominal, not real, rates of growth.
You worry about growth of earnings per share, and you want to know what your top-line revenue is going to do, so you think about prices and output.
<START>Having a nominal anchor for inflation would actually support corporate decisionmaking, give people better discipline about pricing power versus riding the wave of inflation, alert them when inflation is below target, and make them understand that this could be a short-run downturn in top-line revenue growth.<END>
When I think back to the ’80s, a lot of companies thought top-line growth was stupendous, and it took their eyes away from really working and operating efficiently.
So I think that having a nominal anchor would actually enhance the real-world tie between our role as the central bank and corporation decision processes.
<START>October 24-25, 2006173 of 203Again putting on my supervisory hat, I think that one of the critical things as we state this objective is that we clearly say how financial stability fits in.<END>
<START>We’ve been talking about central banks moving more and more to inflation targeting, but they have also been focusing more and more on financial stability and the role of the central bank in financial stability.<END>
That is one of the implementation issues we need to think through.
<START>What is the framework in which we will look at financial stability, and where might it conflict with our price objectives and inflation objectives?<END>
Regarding how we would choose an inflation objective, I am very leery of one of the proposals in the staff memo to use longer-term forecasts.
<START>I agree with Governor Mishkin that we can improve the Monetary Policy Report, but making longer forecasts is fraught with a lot of risk, and I don’t really see there’s much benefit to it.<END>
After all, our objective is not to be the best forecasters in the world.
It’s to control inflation.
So I don’t think it adds a whole lot of value.
As President Yellen said, everybody will be asking, “What are the underlying assumptions?” It will get us sidetracked away from our overall objectives.
I prefer the alternative in the staff memo that the way forward is what we did years ago when we took the rates of growth and money supply, and we just surveyed all of us.
Maybe along the lines suggested a bit earlier, we just say, “Here is the range of price objectives.” Just announcing a long-term forecast doesn’t clearly say what the objective is.
If we want to set an objective, let’s set an objective and not just give a long-run forecast.
Another part of setting an objective is spending a lot of time thinking about the time frame over which we are going to achieve it.
Saying that this is our long-run objective is one thing.
It’s very different to say how quickly we’re going to return to the goal when we move away from that goal.
<START>In the discussion around the table yesterday, many of us said that inflation, October 24-25, 2006174 of 203even in the forecast, is running a bit higher than our comfort zone.<END>
We know we’ve been above it for a couple of years, but with this forecast we’ll be above our comfort zones for five years.
In effect, having an objective
—and knowing what each other’s objectives are
—would have changed the discussion we had around the table.
If we really believe that we’re above our comfort zone, then how can we make the decisions we’re making?
What is the path?
That would have implications for the staff.
If we really want to hit an objective, strategy, as President Plosser said, is the real issue.
How do you execute?
We can all set great goals, but it’s execution that matters.
A nominal objective would force the staff to spend a lot more resources in talking about the path of policy and the way we would respond to variations around that path.
That perhaps could actually improve decisionmaking.
<START>Finally, getting back to the transparency issue, I think an explicit objective would put good governance around us, particularly in the difficult times when we are varying from our objectives, because we would have to talk about the tradeoffs we have with our dual mandates or financial stability concerns or whatever is creating a long-run deviation from that path.<END>
So I come back to my thought that the effort to look at this is worthwhile, but I really encourage us to think about all the consequences as we go forward.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me frame my remarks around the relevant constituencies, trying not to avoid answering the hard questions.
The prism through which I think about this is, What’s the political acceptance for what we’re trying to do?
What’s the market acceptance and what’s the policy acceptance for what we are trying to do?
As I think about the three issues and weigh the costs and benefits, I find the costs of each are easy to elaborate in great detail.
The benefits appear to me to be very real but hard to pin October 24-25, 2006175 of 203down with confidence as to both when we would achieve those benefits and how they would accrue to the credibility of this institution.
I am most in accord with President Yellen’s description, which is that there may well be net benefits to going down this path but the costs are much easier to put our hands around.
We’re approaching this discussion through the prism of inflation targeting, which is really the elephant in the discussion.
In some ways, I dare say it made our previous discussion tough because we were tiptoeing around the core inflation-targeting question.
Inflation targeting has taken a life of its own in academia, in the capital markets, and in the political environment.
<START>Although inflation targeting is a proper framework for the discussion here, it is a very dangerous way in which to approach our public discussion.<END>
Let me discuss that point in a little detail.
Inflation targeting, certainly on Capitol Hill and to many market participants, suggests that some mechanical exogenous force will be an absolute constraint on the FOMC’s actions.
<START>That’s not the way most people here today have talked about inflation objectives, but it does taint the discussion in our relevant constituencies outside the building, and we have to be very much aware of that fact.<END>
It strikes me that, once we’ve figured out more or less our own path to making an institutional decision on this, we should be discussing it more broadly outside the institution as a continuation and manifestation of what the Fed has long done.
<START>Instead of using words like “inflation targeting” outside the institution, we should use words like “price stability.” Talking about this as the next generation and the formalization of the comfort-zone language, which either by design or by practice has marked many of our discussions in the past year, is a much more useful way for us to make meaningful progress in Washington and in the capital markets.<END>
October 24-25, 2006176 of 203You saw from Larry Meyer’s survey that there was, I think, a decided tone of “Hey, we just want to know what the right answer is.
Tell us what you guys are going to do next.
We just want data that give us the answer because then we can put them into our Excel spreadsheets and life will be grand.” [Laughter] I think that’s a trap that we do not want to fall into.
What we want to be doing, rather than generally trying to provide them with greater clarity than we can provide about what our decisions are going to be, is to give them better information on what we’re using to make decisions.
<START>I fear that, if we announce an inflation target per se, and provide some specificity about that announcement, we will have engendered credibility questions that we will need to answer.<END>
In the most recent cycle of our interest rate decisions, very few of us, I think, have somehow done things differently if an inflation-targeting regime had been in place.
would My own sense is that we can’t believe that we need to hamstring ourselves with such an exogenous force.
At the other extreme, we don’t want to go down this path if we say inflation targeting doesn’t change our flexibility at all.
So the relevant question is, what does this do to our flexibility?
If the answer is that it doesn’t constrain our flexibility at all, then it is really unwise because of all those costs that we’ve talked about.
If the answer to that question is that it does constrain our flexibility significantly, then we have a huge problem in all our constituencies.
So we end up having to admit, as we go down this path, that it does somewhat constrain our flexibility but saying that the FOMC is as prepared as ever to respond to real market developments with respect to employment, output, and financial crises.
So where does that put us?
Again, the debate should be framed as a continuation of what we’ve long done.
After we announce our conclusions from these discussions, at some point we would need to reject the straw man of what inflation targeting has become.
<START>If an interrogator on October 24-25, 2006177 of 203Capitol Hill or in the capital markets says, “This is the goal, this is the number, and you will get inflation down to that goal within X number of years,” the response has to be “no.” That is, that’s not how we’re thinking about the next generation of transparency.<END>
Regarding an incremental approach to getting from where we are to where we want to be, I would begin, once we’re ready to go prime time with our announcement, by avoiding the adoption of inflation targeting per se and by letting that straw man be put out there and shooting it down to suggest that’s not where we are.
My next measure would be to accelerate the timing of existing information, by which I would reference the minutes, the lag in the forecast, and the generation of our central tendency.
Then I’d add frequency.
I think the idea of going from a semiannual to a quarterly presentation of our information, as Governor Mishkin suggested, would be next in the evolution of being more transparent to the markets about what we mean by “price stability.” Then I would consider adding robustness to the data provided
—that is, what data sets that are not in the public realm and that we use for our own decisionmaking could be helpful?
<START>Finally, looking at how that information has proceeded along this path of transparency, we then ask ourselves whether we need to have a formal vote on the big question that Vincent laid out for us or whether a vote is unnecessary because we’ve already proceeded so far down the path that we’ve ended up with a rather, though not totally, explicit definition of what price stability means.<END>
As a final comment
—we’ve discussed around this table whether this decision is an individual or a collective one.
In my judgment, a consensus decision is a good one.
But I don’t think we should fool ourselves.
Federal Reserve policy has been personalized, and no matter what we do, it will continue to be personalized in the form of the Chairman.
What the markets and the Congress will be most interested in is, “Well, I hear that’s the central tendency view of October 24-25, 2006178 of 203the FOMC.
What’s your view?” I want to make sure as we go through this process that, because we know that questions will be asked of the Chairman, we haven’t constrained his flexibility.
He must dutifully report perhaps what our consensus views are, but we shouldn’t let there be any ambiguity about what are our views and what are his views.
To the extent that there’s a difference, perhaps he is obligated to describe that.
But I wouldn’t want this process ending up by constraining the Chairman about what he could say because at the end of the day, whether all of us like it or not, it is the Chairman’s judgment, much more than any of ours, that influences our monetary policy.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Well, I don’t have any written material prepared, Mr. Chairman
—just notes I’ve taken, in part because I confess that before this conversation I was somewhat nonplussed about this issue.
That is, I’m a little perplexed about why we’re talking about it now, given what many commentators have said about where we are presently.
We have achieved significant credibility with the previous two Chairmen of the Committee and you and with the actions of the Committee.
I have been asking my own staff in Dallas to give me the compelling reason to do this now.
I’ve heard four compelling arguments, or arguments that at least purport to be compelling, during this discussion.
One is that it will improve the policymaking process and focus, although I think President Minehan properly expressed some skepticism as to whether it would actually change the focus, intensity, and process that we have had.
The second is that it would coordinate and better anchor public expectations.
<START>Governor Mishkin, with great enthusiasm by the way, made that argument.<END>
His remarks were not only insightful, but they were also charming.
[Laughter] The third is that it would plant our current legacy;
I think Governor October 24-25, 2006179 of 203Kohn touched on one of those sensitive nerves.
The fourth is a subset of the third point:
<START>the political risk of loss of a Chairman with willpower.<END>
I won’t go into all the aspects of this that I have concerns about.
But I don’t want to bat away President Moskow like a mosquito here.
I think he made an important point, which was summarized by President Pianalto, who drew on her ancestry with the term “festina lente,” which means “make haste slowly.” That’s why I would like to suggest in one dimension only
—rather than discuss what everybody else has already talked about:
the political dimension of what we are discussing.
<START>I see an explicit numerical target as extremely risky politically unless we manage it carefully, and I would just ask all of us to bear in mind what those political risks are.<END>
We do have a dual mandate.
I agree with those who have said that we do not want to run the risk of changing our current charge from the Congress.
As I listened to Governor Mishkin
<START>—again, I found his arguments remarkably brilliant and persuasive<END>
<START>—I was thinking to myself that I would love to be in a room with you and hear you use those brilliant arguments with, say, a Senate Majority Leader like Harry Reid, or a Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee like Charlie Rangel, or a Chairman of the Financial Services Committee like Barney Frank.<END>
<START>We have to be careful of the risk that either you then have them say, “That’s fine, but tell me what your employment target is because you have a dual mandate” or you end up negotiating an inflation target higher than you want it to be.<END>
I happen to know those three men very well.
I have appeared before them
—I think President Moskow and I along with President Yellen have probably appeared before the Congress more than anybody else at this table, individually and certainly collectively, and I can imagine that conversation taking place.
So I would proceed slowly, or hasten slowly, not just in the analytical aspect of this but also in explaining why we want to tie ourselves to this mast.
Is it that we are afraid of the siren October 24-25, 2006180 of 203call of the lack of discipline because we don’t think we can bring about the discipline that’s required?
We need to consider that there are political aspects of this in light of which we may not even want to open that Pandora’s Box.
That’s the only advice I would give or comment I would make at this juncture, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Oh, let me make one other comment.
I keep hearing about Larry Meyer’s poll.
We have a dean of a business school;
I’m an M.B.A.;
and we have other M.B.A.s around the table.
Uncertainty is the enemy of decisionmaking.
Of course they want more frequent forecasts.
Governor Kohn and I talked about this before.
They want a full frontal view.
I find a full frontal view most unbecoming.
[Laughter] Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Speak for yourself.
[Laughter] Governor Kroszner.
MR.
KROSZNER.
I don’t know why President Fisher pointed to me when he said that.
I do not endorse his approach.
[Laughter] Certainly, I think it’s appropriate
—since we’re getting very close to or maybe have passed our lunch, when we’ll talk about the 100th anniversary of the Fed
—that we are thinking about something that is really quite historic here, potentially a major change in the way that policymaking is undertaken at the Federal Reserve.
The memo that we have is excellent.
The discussion that we have had has been excellent.
Even if it has been a bit lengthy, these issues are important, and it takes time to make sure that our views are aired.
After all the views that have been aired, however, I can add little, so I’ll give just a very short indication of some of my thoughts, keying off what a lot of others have said.
The way that I think about the issue is that we have our dual mandate, and we should do everything thinking about how best to achieve our dual mandate of maximum employment growth consistent with low and stable inflation.
The question is, Does being more explicit about what “price stability” means help us to get to our objective better?
I think in many October 24-25, 2006181 of 203circumstances that it can.
People have brought up issues about whether or not it could interfere with that, and it’s very important that it not in any way be interpreted, either by the Committee members or the outside world, as being inconsistent with our ability to achieve that dual mandate.
<START>One concern that I brought up yesterday was that I don’t think we understand short-run or intermediate-run inflation dynamics very well.<END>
I want to make sure that we don’t overpromise.
When you look at the one example in the Bluebook simulations that gets inflation down to 1½ percent over quite a long period, you see that it would require us to move our policy rate up 100 to 125 basis points for the next year to two years.
That strikes me as a very different approach from what many people around the table would be willing to take, although perhaps if we did have an explicit 1½ percent goal, people would be willing to do that.
But it’s very, very important to make sure that we understand whether we think that’s the right path.
That is the consideration that President Yellen brought up yesterday.
There are a number of issues with those simulations, such as the foreign exchange movements and other things, that may make us uncomfortable with them.
If we don’t understand the path very well, it is very dangerous for us to be making even long-run commitments to something when we’re not quite sure how we can get to it.
We know that in the very long run we can get there.
But if it’s so long that we’re not achieving it in real time, that can actually undermine our credibility and make us appear less transparent rather than more transparent.
<START>So I just want to make sure that we work very hard to push our understanding of inflation dynamics and that we know how we can achieve the goal if we enunciate such a goal.<END>
As I said, in many, perhaps most, circumstances enunciating such a goal can be valuable, although taking a particular number at a particular horizon could be problematic.
<START>October 24-25, 2006182 of 203To get the main benefits and give guidance to the markets, we would want the goal to be a consensus decision rather than everyone’s having his or her own goal, which could result in less transparency and less credibility.<END>
I think it could affect the way that we undertake policy.
In some sense, if it doesn’t, then what’s the point of doing it?
It has to have some effect;
otherwise, it won’t be credible to the markets, and then it’s simply not worth the candle.
<START>As I said, in that context, we have to make sure that we understand inflation dynamics very well so that we can explain to the world what the consequences of the goal would be for maximum employment growth and the evolution of the economy.<END>
<START>Thus my main concern is that we don’t know enough about the short-run or intermediate-run inflation dynamics to feel comfortable with articulating a goal.<END>
We could articulate a goal in a general way
—as a range, say
—and not be tied down to a particular number that could be revised.
That would be helpful;
but in making all these decisions, we have to be very mindful about understanding how we can achieve the goal.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Lacker had a two-handed intervention.
MR.
LACKER.
With your indulgence, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to comment on the role of the dual mandate and sketch out how I’d like to see this discussion evolve.
I feel motivated to do this because this consideration has played a greater role in today’s discussion than I had anticipated
—this is just a byproduct of my own lack of foresight and intelligence, I think
—and also because I took swipes at the dual mandate earlier in my career on the Committee and was batted back by previous Vice Chairmen and others.
[Laughter] What I want to say first is that I sense a substantial convergence of views.
As demonstrated by Governor Kohn’s use of the best-contribute formulation, I think there’s convergence of the sense of what it means around here.
<START>(Governor Kohn’s statement, by the way, was outstanding, and I’d associate myself with October 24-25, 2006183 of 203all of it, top to bottom.) But I sense that some of our policy disagreements are on occasion interpreted as differences in views on the appropriate weights to place on employment and inflation in a policymaker welfare function or loss-minimization function.<END>
Casting it that way tempts one to view those weights as reflecting value judgments analogous, for example, to my preference for grits over eggs at this morning’s breakfast.
<START>I realize that what I’m about to say runs a great risk of seeming pedantic and academic, but I think it’s important.<END>
I’ll start provocatively by saying that I don’t care about output per se, and I don’t think any one of us does, and I don’t think any one of us cares about inflation per se.
We care about the welfare of the citizens of our country.
That’s an obvious point to make, but I’ll just remind you that the practice of viewing policymaking through the lens of the analytical device of a mathematical policymaker facing a loss function with weights on employment and inflation arose during the 1960s.
In contrast, policy analysis everywhere else in economics was grounded in models in which the consumer was actually mathematically present
—that is to say, the models treated explicitly the preferences of consumers and then crafted policies to maximize those in a framework in which you could explicitly calculate what consumer preferences were.
At the time, the state-of-the-art monetary policy framework did not include consumers explicitly;
these were reduced-form models
—you know, the Patinkin generation of models.
<START>Today, the state-of-the-art monetary models capture a rich array of inflation and output dynamics and do treat preferences of our citizens explicitly.<END>
<START>These models are capable of deriving optimal policy, and optimal policy so derived can be represented as the solution to a maximization problem by a policymaker with given weights.<END>
<START>But that, of course, is very different from thinking of those weights as stemming from non-economic value judgments about the utility value of employment and inflation.<END>
So, in principle, the weights that are most appropriate to use to represent October 24-25, 2006184 of 203policymaking can be scientifically investigated.
They can be analyzed through models at this level and through the data and can be compared regarding goodness of fit and other measures as well.
<START>The congressional mandate in the ’70s codified existing practice and encapsulated the notion that we’ve got weights and that we view ourselves as having a loss function regarding these two things when we really just have one loss function and that relates to our citizens’ welfare that we view ourselves as having a loss function regarding these two things when we really just have one loss function and that relates to our citizens’ welfare.<END>
I’d point out that surely we have heavily influenced the interpretation of those mandates.
You look at the act, and three objectives are there.
I think that we’ve helped induce people to call it a dual mandate by encouraging them to drop the moderate interest rate objective.
So, in principle, we could influence the evolution of popular interpretation and understanding of these other objectives as well.
<START>I’d also point out that the way the Congress codified the objectives was without weights, and so the act is not at all inconsistent with the state-of-the-art approach to monetary economics.<END>
I say this because I’d like to move us beyond the relatively sterile debates over whether my weight is higher or lower on inflation or output, and I hope that we can evolve in both our discussions about the dual mandate and our analytical approach to the use of it in meetings ahead.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
I’m tempted to say that I was hoping we would run out of time.
[Laughter] I’ll be very brief.
Let me just compliment Don and his subcommittee and the Chairman for how you’ve laid out the issues.
This decision is important to think through carefully, even if we quickly find a comfortable center of gravity.
It’s going to be consequential, I’m sure.
October 24-25, 2006185 of 203On the questions
—I’m changing them slightly.
Would an explicit, publicly disclosed, numerical definition of “price stability” be helpful?
Probably, but it depends on how we do it.
It depends on what else we do about the way we talk about our forecast, and it depends a lot on how we think through the implications of the way we make policy.
How will, how should, how would, how could the FOMC choose or choose to reveal an inflation objective?
Three broad options that are implicit or explicit in this memo are worth thinking through.
I’m sure that, if we choose to reveal publicly a quantitative definition of our view of long-term inflation, we have to do it as a decision of the Committee.
It’s hard for me to imagine how one could do that on the basis of some averaging of preferences, which would change with the composition of the Committee over time.
Much of what’s been said about the other two choices is right and sounds sensible.
Would the quantification of an inflation objective be a new influence?
Of course it would.
That has to be why it’s worth thinking through.
As Janet implied, thinking through what it would mean for our behavior is a critical part of this process.
I’m going to discuss the other questions very briefly and make just two points about process.
<START>First, when you look at the broad evidence, I think it is fair to say that the evidence is weak on the achievable credibility gains relative to what we’ve already achieved.<END>
I’m uncertain, of course, whether those gains come from actions over time or what you disclose about your regime, your objectives, your framework.
<START>The evidence is somewhat stronger against the concerns of the skeptics and the critics in that there’s little basis in the experience of other countries to justify the broad concerns exist<END>
<START>—that embracing the softer responsible variants of inflation targeting bring with them too much risk;<END>
that you lose flexibility to respond;
that you’re forced into suboptimal weights among your various objectives;
<START>that, for example, you are October 24-25, 2006186 of 203compromised in your capacity to respond to threats to financial stability.<END>
I’m not sure that’s right, though.
Of course, we’re not New Zealand, Norway, or Sweden.
We say that a lot.
But we should talk through what it is that makes us different.
How are we different, and how might that difference make us view the evidence?
In some sense the question we face is, Do the soft variants of the approach offer convincing credibility gains without significantly reducing the risks and concerns that have to accompany consideration of this objective?
That basic tradeoff is what is critical.
Second, how do ignorance and uncertainty about inflation dynamics, about the responsiveness of inflation to some of its traditional determinants, about the shape of the Phillips curve, and about inertia and persistence affect our choice of regime?
How does uncertainty about all the other dimensions of how monetary policy works and how we measure this affect our choice of regime?
<START>This uncertainty is critical to how we choose among alternative paths for bringing inflation back to target, how we choose among alternative horizons, and how we think about policy consistent with those different paths.<END>
All the variants of the regimes on the table, all of which are of the softer form, would still force us to be more explicit in public about where we are seeking to move inflation and over what horizon.
<START>I think we have to ask ourselves whether we can be confident about how compelling those arguments will be in public given the relative weakness of the analytical foundation that exists to help inform those choices.<END>
Even with a no horizon, a long horizon, or a variable horizon approach to the disclosed explicit inflation objective, you don’t avoid confronting the choice about your horizon or how you come up with an alternative horizon, and so forth.
I think that the dimension of ignorance and uncertainty we live with is inherent, and it is not going to change dramatically over time.
Thus it has to inform how we think through these broader options.
October 24-25, 2006187 of 203The third question is, how would alternative variants to the regime affect the dynamics around the policy setting?
As I said, and many others said, they will and must affect it.
You have to assume they will.
It’s prudent to assume they will.
It’s very important to think through those dynamics.
Would we really be comfortable
—even in a very long-run horizon, no horizon, or flexible horizon regime
<START>—producing a forecast that has inflation staying well above our target for very long periods of time?<END>
<START>I’m not sure that you wouldn’t want to assume that over time the Committee would be less comfortable with that and want to hope and declare as an objective that we move inflation down quicker over time.<END>
I don’t think analysis or evidence is going to help us think through those dynamics, but I don’t think we can assume them away.
I think they’re important.
I have two quick comments about process.
One is
—I’ll call it the Kroszner proposal, though he didn’t make it.
<START>[Laughter] I think we should spend more time, and Don should build into his time frame more in-depth discussion, on what we think we understand about the models that underpin our decisions and what’s in those models about inertia and all the fundamental determinants of inflation.<END>
We’ve had a lot of turnover in the Committee.
We discussed it once over lightly
—in August, I believe.
We should discuss it in more depth, at least to make sure we have a common understanding about what we’re working with and what the limitations and benefits are relative to the alternatives.
Two, I think it’s important not to get into the process discussion prematurely.
A lot of thoughtful, interesting ideas were put forth about intermediate steps toward some broad change in regime.
I don’t think it’s worth spending a lot of time on alternative variants of the intermediate steps until we’ve really thought through ultimately where we want to go.
If we spend time on and get enough depth about the merits of that choice and we October 24-25, 2006188 of 203find some consensus with which we’re comfortable, then we can go back and figure out how we want to get there.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
It’s been a very long morning.
I appreciate everyone’s patience in this long but very useful discussion.
Let me take just a couple of minutes.
I’m not going to try to respond to all the points that were raised.
I just want to make just a couple of observations.
There was a lot of discussion about how this would affect policy, and indeed, I think it would affect policy.
But, remember, this debate is about communication.
I think it’s very important that we communicate better.
<START>While our policy has been good, we have had difficulties<END>
—I certainly have
—in communicating with the public and the markets.
If we can find a more effective, clearer way to do that, I think the benefit would be significant.
Let me just say a couple of words
—and this goes somewhat against Tim’s comments
—about evolution.
Whatever we do, I would agree with several people around the table, be incremental and evolutionary for several reasons.
should First, we have to make sure that we understand what we’re doing.
We have to learn how to implement what it is we’re doing.
Second, we have to maintain continuity with the previous regime, not have any sharp changes in our policy or our perceptions.
Third, a transitionary, evolutionary approach will give us a chance to educate the public, educate the Congress, and get some reaction and feedback that will perhaps allow us to make corrections as necessary.
In addition, I think that our steps need to face two real constraints.
The first is that we do have a dual mandate
—that whatever we may say here, we have to persuade the Congress and the public that we will look at both parts of the mandate and that we will not reduce our interest in employment and output.
The second constraint is our institutional structure, the size of our October 24-25, 2006189 of 203Committee, and those features that the Bank of England, for example, have.
does not All those things have to be factored into our thinking.
Let me suggest a way one might think about proceeding that I think meets some of these concerns.
It might be useful, for example, for us at some point to clarify what we mean by the “comfort zone,” a term that is out there and is causing confusion.
I would prefer to do it collectively, but we can think about ways of doing that.
If we could confirm what the comfort zone is and what it means, I think that would be a step in the right direction.
In particular, I would argue that we should define the comfort zone as the range in which core inflation should remain most of the time.
Over the past ten years, it has remained between 1½ to 2 percent most of the time.
But all we would say about policy is that it should have some bias that will take us, in the long run, back toward that core range.
While not setting fixed horizons on the comfort zone, we need to exploit our projections and forecasts, which can describe to the public what we think the next two years will look like in terms of the paths of inflation and output.
I would associate myself with several people who have commented that perhaps the best thing we can do, even if we downplay the comfort zone or the target, is to provide more information to the public about our forecast, more-regular monetary policy reports, and considerably more information about our outlook and our approach.
Again, my preferred approach would be to provide some information about the comfort zone.
But for the public the big change would be the additional information we’re providing, which would address Meyer’s point about what the public is looking for.
When I make the speech describing this regime, I would go so far as to say
—and this is a little radical
—that the Federal Reserve is not adopting inflation targeting;
what we are doing is simply providing more information.
<START>We’re providing more information about where the Committee thinks it wants inflation to be on October 24-25, 2006190 of 203average over longer periods of time, and we’re providing extensive additional information about the forecast and our views about the economy.<END>
If we do it that way, we will probably avoid some of the pitfalls that have been mentioned.
Again, I want to thank everyone for terrific input and to note that this process will be ongoing.
We are in no hurry.
We should go on until we feel that we have a conclusion with which we are comfortable and that we’re all willing to support.
Let’s confirm that the date of the next meeting is Tuesday, December 12.
The meeting is adjourned.
Lunch is available next door.
Please bring your lunch back, and we’ll have a short presentation on the centennial while we’re having lunch.
Thank you so much.
END OF MEETING October 24-25, 2006191 of 203
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 317
