
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

Some people have raised the question about whether we are hostage to the market.
I personally don’t feel we are hostage to the market at all.
At some point the market will have to live with our decision, and if we are going to do something that is different from what the market expects, so be it.
But I certainly do not think that this Committee is being held hostage to the market.
On the statement, I thought Bill Poole’s philosophy of minimum changes until we are ready to give a different signal is a very good philosophy, and in that regard I would say two things.
First, some people have suggested possibly tweaking number five, and I just do not see the real benefit of doing that.
That this may help change some expectations is a very subtle psychological point, and I certainly would not want to go to the bank on that.
We are much better off staying the way we are.
Now, having said that, I bring up the word “possible,” which comes around and bites me in the tail a bit because we did have “possible” in the January FOMC statement.
So I’ll fold my tent on that.
[Laughter] I think we are free to use the word “possible” there in the interest of consistency.
Second, on the statement itself:
In the earlier version that was circulated to the Committee, some specific data were referred to, and someone made the comment here that it is important for us to explain to the public what data we are thinking about.
I forget who said that.
But I really agree with Janet’s comment, and then Tom sent a note in too, saying that we want to keep the statement as March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release131 of 167 short as possible and then use the minutes for that purpose.
The minutes, again, come out three weeks after the meeting.
We have accelerated them.
We also use speeches, but certainly the minutes are a perfect vehicle for elaborating on the statement itself.
And I think that philosophy is a very good one.
<START>Then I just wanted to say a few words about inflation and Fed credibility.<END>
<START>We are all very pleased with the low inflation numbers that we have seen so far, and a number of people have mentioned the importance of Fed credibility and keeping inflation low.<END>
As we know, the Greenbook forecast has core inflation going up above 2 percent, and I think we don’t know exactly how long it would stay at that.
We do not know if it is going to go above 2 percent, and we don’t know how long it is going to stay above that level.
But I am uncertain myself as to how long it could stay above 2 percent without having an impact on inflationary expectations.
This is just something we have to take into account and say we want to be vigilant about.
There is a lot of uncertainty here.
We just have to keep monitoring it.
In terms of the real economy, the best forecast is that growth will be near potential or higher this year.
So I think we definitely want to maintain as much flexibility as possible in our statement now to allow for the possibility that we may want to move even higher than the Greenbook assumptions in the future.
Again, it is going to depend on the data, as we have all said, and we just do not know at this point, and I think the language in alternative B gives us this leeway.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
We have a two-hander.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Oh, I’m sorry.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
I don’t know whether this is fair or not.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Absolutely.
March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release132 of 167 MR. POOLE.
I have a proposal to offer here that makes use of the minutes, as Michael suggests.
We make our statement after this meeting with minimal change and then use the minutes to say four things.
One, the Committee believes that, after May, accommodation will have been largely removed.
Two, policy will be responsive to the data.
<START>In the light of that, three, if the economy remains strong and inflation risks remain a concern, some further rate increases may be necessary depending on the data.<END>
Four, data indicating that inflation risks are receding would lead most likely to the policy rate remaining unchanged.
If we said that, we could then at the next meeting essentially do away with sentences 4 and 5 in the policy statement.
We would have found a way to exit from the forward guidance that has been in the statement.
And then along the way, if the data come in suggesting that further policy tightening is appropriate, we use the minutes to indicate why the rate changes, but we have mostly gotten out of the forward guidance.
So here is a specific proposal to try to explain this in the minutes with as much clarity as we possibly can.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’m in support of a 25 basis point increase today.
I am favoring alternative B, but I want to make some comments about the wording.
One of the things I am struggling with, in addition to some of the points everybody has made around the table, is the apparent presence of a tremendous amount of liquidity in the markets.
I look at how much we have raised rates, but the fact that there is so much out there that the banks are trying to lend and that other markets are trying to invest tells me that there is a lot of liquidity.
I think that the liquidity pressures are an inflationary risk, and that is something that will influence my decision about whether or not we need to stop.
Because of the amount of liquidity out there, I am not comfortable saying we are there yet.
March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release133 of 167 The second thing I would like to point out is that I like President Guynn’s new beard, [laughter] but I also support his recommendation to look more closely at alternative A, line 5.
One of the reasons I like A-5 or something along that line is the use of words like “evolution” and “implied by incoming information.” Compared with what we now have in line 5, these words give a different tone
—that we are looking at a slow-moving set of data coming in, not one piece of data and not one series of data.
As in every meeting, I heard around the table today that, given the monthly volatility in all the series we look at, all of us are taking all of these together.
We are smoothing through one-month blips, and words that are closer to “evolution” than to “change” give us a better sense that we are looking at the whole tone of information coming in.
I would like us to move down that path going forward.
I can stick with the wording today, but I think that that kind of approach may make people less dependent on one series of data in one month in the release.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Kroszner.
MR.
KROSZNER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also support the 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate target.
Obviously the question that we are dealing with now is not just optimal monetary policy but also optimal information disclosure and optimal communication policy.
There are a lot of moving parts right now, a lot of changes, and so for the moment, I would probably favor being leaner rather than fuller in descriptions even if we decided to go forward in the longer run with fuller descriptions, which I think is perfectly reasonable.
As has been described, there are a lot of alternatives
—not just the statement but also the minutes.
There are speeches, and speeches on communications could be given specifically.
There are also background sessions with key players in the journalism community and elsewhere.
So I think that something on the order of B or even a slimmed-down B would be most appropriate at the moment.
I would not lean toward going to something like A-5 yet.
That may provide us with a March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release134 of 167 very good basis for thinking about what we might want to do next time.
So I applaud Vincent and others who helped to create alternative A, in some sense a way to get us thinking about where we might be moving and some of the costs and benefits of doing that.
But particularly given that I have heard somewhat different views from Committee members about where they, given current data and current Greenbook projections, would be likely to go, I do not think we want to signal something too clear at the moment.
Also, we have had some discussions about whether or not we can take back 25 basis points.
I don’t really see the economy as being on such a knife edge that we will know that it’s exactly 5 or exactly 4¾ or exactly 5¼.
<START>I think it is highly unlikely that we go to 5¼ and get information that we know that we have gone exactly 25 basis points too much and have to have a retrenchment.<END>
It is more likely that the economy would evolve and then we would think that things had really moved in a different direction, and if we were to have to move down the line, it would be more than a 25 basis point move.
Historically that has been typical, although not always the case, and has been true both in the United States and elsewhere.
So we should not overemphasize that we will get it exactly right and that we will know exactly where we will be.
We have to be in a comfort zone not only on inflation but also in terms of where our target rate is.
<START>It is useful to think in those kinds of terms about where we will be going and also to realize that retrenchments are unlikely to be the sort that a few months later we take back a little even if that’s what the market may be predicting.<END>
But I leave that to others who may have much more experience in that;
maybe my view is a little naïve.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, too, support the 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate and would just like to make a couple of points about the market and market expectations.
March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release135 of 167 It does strike me as a particularly inopportune time to miss market expectations.
Given the changes in the economy that we have discussed over the last day and a half, particularly a slowdown in housing, potentially some growth in the business side, increased expectations of growth overseas, and, to be candid, the changes here at the Federal Reserve, it strikes me that we should be taking incremental steps both in terms of message changes and in terms of the sorts of statements we have.
<START>So this would be, I think, a very successful meeting if everyone yawned at the statement and the market reactions were somewhat boring this afternoon and tomorrow.<END>
An issue was raised about whether we’re leading the market or the market is leading us.
It strikes me that the markets
—and I particularly have in mind traders down on the floor
—are looking to us because I think they’re also confused, and so they don’t know where else to look.
This is sort of a safe place for them to cast their eyes and sharpen their pencils.
I hope, over the course of the May and June meetings, that they, like us, will be seeing other data points that will give them a clearer crystal ball and that they will be looking both to us and to some other data points to inform their thinking.
But right now, I think their sense of things is fairly cloudy.
So with that, we have a particularly large burden of presumption in figuring out whether we make changes to what was done in January.
A final point on markets and the ownership of the statement, Mr. Chairman, which you referenced earlier:
The typical trader in these markets doesn’t fully appreciate what we’re voting on and the entirety of this statement, and my own view is that’s a little more than would be ideal to be aired in the public forum.
<START>For traders to be reading one paragraph and saying, “Oh, that’s Chairman Bernanke,” and to be reading the other paragraphs and saying, “Well, that’s the consensus of the Committee,” strikes me as inviting into their debate a little too much interpretation beyond the data March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release136 of 167 set.<END>
So I think our discussion going forward in terms of who owns what would probably best be carried out in the same close confidence that previous discussions here were.
Finally, in keeping with the suggestion that I think President Poole made about our making as few changes as possible to the January statement at present, the only wordsmithing I would offer in alternative B is the first two words of section 3:
“as yet.” I’m trying to show as much congruence as possible with the January statement, and so when I see key words like “still” in alternative B, I think that’s roughly equivalent to “nevertheless.” But “as yet” really is borrowed in some ways from alternative C, which suggests to me almost an inevitability.
That is, we expect inflation to be coming.
“As yet” we don’t see it, but it is almost inevitable.
And it strikes me that the “as yet” words are potentially market-moving words and that they will perhaps suggest more vigilance regarding inflation, more concern about inflation expectations than we had only a couple of months ago.
So the minor suggestion might be to strike the words “as yet” and continue with alternative B as written before us, and that in either regard I firmly support.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think we really do have a remarkable degree of consensus around the table about the forecast, and you did a very nice job of capturing that consensus.
The consensus is really quite close to the Greenbook, closer than it has been perhaps in recent meetings.
The Greenbook forecast is conditioned on a monetary policy assumption that has us essentially stopping at 5 with the path pretty flat from 5 on.
<START>The question, of course, for us today is whether we want to alter current market expectations about the path of policy, and I think it is hard to find a compelling case to do so, either from what we discussed around the table or from what the Greenbook provided.<END>
The Bluebook provided alternative prisms to look at the implications of past policy.
The presumption is that we don’t want March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release137 of 167 to change expectations substantially because we don’t see a case for changing the current stance of monetary policy as embodied in those expectations.
The question is how best to do it, and I think B is probably the closest we’re going to get to that.
I agree with the concern that Sandy began with and which I think Dino echoed
—that there is some possibility, maybe even a likelihood, that B is interpreted as raising the probability of not just a move in May but a move beyond May.
Again, I don’t see any need to do that.
I don’t think it should be our objective to try to raise the probability around June.
The question really is how to avoid that.
I do think that adding the sustainable growth reference in the second row and adding “possible,” as Vince explained, helps against that risk, but it probably doesn’t take away all of that risk.
<START>The problem with doing things that create the risk of pushing down the curve is that people would react to that by saying, “Well, what does that mean about how confident they are about the strength of underlying demand growth?” One consequence of an alternative that would be designed to push down that curve would be, in some sense, questions raised about how confident we are in our forecast about the underlying strength of demand growth, which I don’t think that we have a basis for signaling at this point.<END>
Is there some risk we are going to go too far?
Of course there is.
What are the best tools we have to assess that risk?
Again, I think the Greenbook and the Bluebook give us a number of tools to assess that risk;
<START>and if the Greenbook forecast, with a monetary policy path close to what’s priced in the markets, showed a different trajectory of output growth and a different trajectory of inflation, then there would be more substantial reason for us to be concerned that the path that’s roughly priced in now creates too much risk that we would be pushing demand growth below potential over the period.<END>
And, again, I think it is hard to say that.
It has been said that the output-based policy March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release138 of 167 rules we use aren’t a particularly good reason to be concerned about that because of the way they are constructed.
Are we too hostage to the markets in our current approach?
I think that is always something to be worried about.
Again, the best check against that risk is to look at the implications of these alternative policy paths for the forecast.
I think it’s hard to find in the range of paths that the staff has given us significant justification for concern against that risk today.
So I would support moving 25 today;
and for the reasons discussed, I think B does a pretty good job of capturing the basic objective of a signal that’s fairly neutral to expectations.
I’d rather take the risk at the margin that we’re pushing it up a bit than the risk that we end up pushing it down.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Thank you for this very helpful conversation.
It helps inform today’s decision and also helps inform how we will be thinking about policy for the next few meetings.
As I discussed, I see the economy as still being basically quite strong, and it needs to moderate to become consistent with its long-run potential.
The vehicle by which that is going to happen is the slowing in the housing market.
I think we ought to raise the rate today and not to signal an immediate end for several reasons.
First, we could think of our policy in terms of the mortgage rate rather than the funds rate.
The mortgage rate is currently about the same as it was when we began tightening in June 2004, and it is still providing support to the housing market.
<START>If we failed to act today or signaled that we are definitely done, we would create a rally in the long-term bond market and in the mortgage market.<END>
We would create, I think, some risk of re-igniting what is currently a cooling market.
I think that would be a mistake.
<START>Second, I talked, as many of us did, about the small but nevertheless probable risk that inflation will rise slightly in the next few March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release139 of 167 quarters and the potential costs of that to our credibility and to our future policy need to respond to higher inflation.<END>
So my recommendation to the Committee is that we raise the federal funds rate target 25 basis points today.
We are circulating, and you have received, a draft statement that is very close to option B, which I’ll discuss in just a moment.
What I would like to emphasize is that section 4, which says that policy firming may be needed is in fact a flexible statement, and I think it’s entirely possible, depending on the intervening data and the evolution of the economy, that we may choose to signal a halt or even to not move in May.
It depends very much on what we see in the housing market, what we see in the economy, and what we see in the inflation data.
So I believe this does create significant flexibility.
A couple of other comments.
First, I realize that there are arguments on both sides about expanding even modestly the language in the rationale.
I think this language is not more explicit or lengthier than the language we have seen in some statements that this Committee has issued in the past few years.
It has the benefit in this particular case of slightly moderating the hawkish tone of the statement and of acknowledging that we see, for example, the economy to be returning to a sustainable pace.
So I think it does serve some purpose, and I think it is worth including.
<START>I appreciate President Poole’s suggestion, but I do not think that the minutes and the statement are perfect substitutes.<END>
The statement, after all, is much more timely, and it represents something closer to a consensus or a median view of the Committee as opposed to the minutes, which try to express the range of views and discussion around the table.
<START>One other suggestion about retaining or taking part 5 from statement A. I see the arguments on both sides.<END>
But I think the sense around the table is that the change was not sufficient to justify the innovation to the January statement, and so I think we ought to stay with the January language.
March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release140 of 167 If you look at the statement, it is very close to B. We did make a couple of changes suggested by President Yellen, which I think clarify what we are trying to say
—in particular, in the middle paragraph:
“the prices of energy and other commodities appears to have” (Are the subject and the verb mismatched?)
—“the run-up . . .
appears to have only a modest effect,” and “productivity gains have helped to hold the growth of unit labor costs in check.” So we are obviously not ruling out other influences that are important.
So that is my proposal
—that we move 25 basis points today, that we issue the statement you have before you, and that we watch very carefully the data during the intermeeting period.
The Bluebook presented a number of options
—types of language that would allow us to pause, to pause with an upward bias, to move and pause, various combinations.
So I think we do have quite a bit of flexibility when we come back to meet in May.
We have already had a policy go-round.
So I don’t want to do that all again, but if there is anyone who particularly would like to comment, here’s your chance.
Yes, President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I agree with the statement.
But just on President Poole’s suggestion for putting those four points in the minutes, I want to say that I don’t think we should do it.
I don’t know what the process here would be.
I mean, I don’t think we should say that the accommodation has been largely removed in the minutes, which will come out three weeks after this meeting and three weeks before the May meeting.
I don’t see any benefit to it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
It illustrates the difference between the minutes and the statement.
The statement is a consensus view or at least a median view.
The minutes should express the range of opinion and would include that view but perhaps other views as well.
Are there any other comments?
Are we ready for a vote?
March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release141 of 167 MS. DANKER.
I will read the directive wording from page 25 of the Bluebook.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 4¾ percent.” And now the risk assessment from the statement that was just handed out:<END>
<START>“The Committee judges that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance.<END>
In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to foster these objectives.” Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Geithner Yes Governor Bies Yes President Guynn Yes Governor Kohn Yes Governor Kroszner Yes President Lacker Yes Governor Olson Yes President Pianalto Yes Governor Warsh Yes President Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
We need to take an action.
There will be a short break.
[Recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
We would like to return to the meeting and discuss briefly the format of today’s meeting, and also we need to make a few decisions about what we’re going to do in May.
Debbie is going to introduce the discussion.
MS.
DANKER.3 3 The materials used by Ms. Danker are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).
The next item on the agenda calls for us to address the date of the next meeting, which the Chairman has indicated that he wishes to confirm for Wednesday, May 10.
More broadly, however, this is an opportunity, while memories March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release142 of 167 are still very fresh, to review the experience of this meeting and to think about possible enhancements to the format of future meetings.
In the past for the FOMC, various formats have been used.
Just for example, in terms of the two-day schedule, the FOMC introduced two-day meetings back in 1972 because it felt that it needed additional time every so often to take a longer-term perspective on policy.
Thus, during the mid-1970s, when the Committee was meeting about monthly, three or four or as many as five of those meetings each year were two-day affairs.
More recently, since 1990, the Committee has consistently held two two-day meetings each year, scheduled to coincide with the Federal Reserve’s semiannual report to the Congress.
<START>To help focus your comments about the current meeting, we distributed at the break a list of questions you may wish to address in any comments you may have.<END>
Before hearing those comments, though, I want to mention what I think is the baseline assumption about the path forward after today regarding the meeting schedule.
First, the Committee will meet for one day next time, just as originally planned, because the timing of international meetings in May makes it difficult to turn that meeting into a two-day one.
Of course, if it would be helpful, that May meeting could be scheduled to begin a little early, say 8:30 in the morning, to give you additional time.
Then, in June, the Committee already has a two-day meeting scheduled.
At that point, having had some more experience with this format, the Committee might be prepared to decide whether to shift most of its remaining 2006 meetings to a two-day format.
As Vincent’s memo from earlier this month pointed out, your September meeting will have to be confined to one day, again largely because of the international meeting schedule.
But the August, the October, and the December meetings could be expanded to an additional day if you wish.
Around the time of the June meeting each year is when we would typically be publishing the tentative schedule for meetings for the following year
—for 2007, in this case.
But that announcement could always be delayed a little this year to allow for time to decide on the usefulness of the two-day format, and any changes to the 2006 schedule could then be announced at the same time.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
We’re open for comments on the format or suggestions for the future.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
I like what we did
—there’s a lot to like about the last two days.
<START>I think we ought to give ourselves several two-day meetings and see if we can get really comfortable with the notion.<END>
I certainly felt more comfortable.
I detected comfort around the table.
I still found the first go-round a bit tedious.
And if we’re going to really have time to probe, we need March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release143 of 167 to find a way to shorten the statement part of that, so we don’t lose our focus.
The split in the past, trying to cram into one day the economic outlook go-round and the policy discussion was not the right balance.
The policy setting is the most important part of what we do, and I really like the notion today that we had a chance to put it all together.
<START>So I guess, Mr. Chairman, my bottom line is that I’d like to see us continue to try this two-day format and see if we can’t make some of those things even better as we have some experience.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I’m more or less in agreement with Jack’s position here.
I thought this meeting went extremely well.
The format feels more comfortable, and I think it will get more comfortable as we get more used to it
—in particular, the interaction between people, which is a little different from what used to happen and I think is helpful.
So I think that, in answer to the first question, the extra time did enhance the discussion and the interaction was good.
I like the separation of the economic and the policy discussions.
I liked being asked to formulate my own idea about policy as opposed to reacting to a policy recommendation.
That was helpful for me in terms of sorting out my thinking, and I like that opportunity.
So I think it’s a separation that is worth preserving.
<START>In terms of the time that the meeting takes, if we get into a period of time in which, as has not been unusual in my twelve-year tenure, months go by and you’re basically monitoring the data and everything seems to be going pretty well, and you don’t need to move policy all that much, and we sort out this whole language stuff, we may find ourselves in a situation that doesn’t require the time that the policy discussion required today.<END>
So while I’m in favor of the flexibility that you get with the two days, we may find we don’t need it.
And I hope we get there.
March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release144 of 167 So I’d be willing to be a little more flexible.
And I know we’ve got to put out dates for the following year.
I think I’d rather go with something that said maybe there will be three or four two-day meetings, if we have to put out a schedule in June, and see how that works for the next year, rather than make a statement that we’re going to do the same thing for some indefinite period of time.
I also think that in terms of a one-day meeting
—and we’ll have to have definitely one in May and we’ll have one in September, and maybe we’ll have more than that if policy evens out or the need for policy change isn’t as great
—I think we could clearly start at 8:30 or even 8:00.
We’re all up and about.
Aside from having a committee meeting or something early in the morning, which I think is a good idea, to the extent we have committee meetings around the Open Market Committee, I think that by starting at 8:00 or 8:30 we can use the morning time more effectively, get more interaction, and extend the day and not bump into the 2:15 time frame.
That’s all I have to say.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
First of all, I like the format much better
—the fact that we have an opportunity to express our opinions on policy before we have to react to you does open the conversation, and it does allow you to not feel that you have to get your policy in during the initial go-round.
Now, as to whether it’s one day or two days, I’m indifferent.
If it works out that we like to have the additional time the day before, I’m fine with that.
Or we will find out next time if we can have the different format within one day.
That will be fine as well.
So I’m most impressed with the different format.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Moskow.
March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release145 of 167 MR. MOSKOW.
I agree with everything that Cathy Minehan said.
I think she captured the reaction perfectly, that this meeting went very well.
This is a point in the cycle when our policy decisions are particularly difficult, but there have been many times when they have been no-brainers.
So maintaining some flexibility to have one-day meetings when we don’t need the two-day meetings would be ideal.
In terms of starting early, just this morning we had a meeting with Susan on the Basel issues.
We had a breakfast upstairs at 7:30, and I think we started at 7:30 and went to 8:30.
You could easily just have a breakfast right here at 7:30 for those who want it and start the meeting at 8:00.
And the Presidents are all here anyway, so I don’t think any of us would mind starting that early in the morning.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
Yes, I applaud the meeting format.
I think it has gone really well.
I think you did a good job as interlocutor.
Is that how you say it?
[Laughter] I hope in upcoming meetings that we can carve out a little time for understanding our different views about the structure of economic relationships that underlie our policy views.
And that would help take the policy discussion deeper than the level of whether you think the yield curve is too hot or too cold.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
I like the format of the meeting for reasons already discussed.
I would hate to lose the special topics that we have done twice a year.
I think that’s what Jeff was referring to.
I think they have been very valuable.
I’d also point out that there’s a practical problem.
Many of the boards of directors of Reserve Banks meet the second Thursday of the month, and a Tuesday–Wednesday schedule right ahead of that is not really practical.
March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release146 of 167 Richmond, in particular, has committee meetings at the end of the afternoon on Wednesday.
Sometimes we do at the St. Louis Fed as well.
<START>So although I think a Tuesday–Wednesday is a better schedule than Monday–Tuesday, it really can’t be right up against the meetings of the boards of directors.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
I was just going to add that I agree with everyone’s statements about the format.
I like it.
I thought splitting the policy from the economic go-round was very good.
I was going to add what Bill just mentioned
—special topics
—because I think that there are several that we should give more time to.
So if we go to a two-day meeting format, there are going to be times when our policy decisions will require more time, but then we can use those other occasions for the special topics.
Communications is one.
Inflation expectations another.
The list is very long.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also liked the format of this meeting
—we really focused on the economics, and then we had more time to talk about policy
—and I hope that we stay with that format.
But I also agree regarding the special topics issue.
Talking about these topics does a lot
—especially it gives us background.
What the staff led us through last summer regarding housing has been very important as we think about how to deal with housing markets now.
So I think that we need to keep those topics because they are the critical elements of policy going forward and talking about them gives us time to think about them way ahead of when we may need to make a decision.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
I would just endorse President Minehan’s summary of reactions and the comments that have been made around the table.
I think the innovations in this meeting have been March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release147 of 167 excellent.
I think the meeting has run very well.
Having more time has certainly enriched the discussion of both the economy and the policy situation.
I agree, too, with President Minehan’s suggestion that there will be times when we probably do not need two days.
I have also been around through some calm times, when there was just not that much to discuss on the policy front, and I think we need some flexibility.
Special topics, I completely agree, are very, very worthwhile, and I would not want to see them go.
On the practical front, I would endorse President Poole’s concern about conflicts with board meetings.
You know, for me there would be no way of getting back for Wednesday afternoon.
We begin our board meetings on Wednesday afternoon as well.
<START>So that’s a practical concern.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would be comfortable deciding now that we are going to do two-day meetings as a matter of course going forward, even though we may not want to fill the time, in part because I think it’s important to give us time to do special topics as many of you have said.
I would generally be in favor of that.
And I think we should figure out how to reconcile our director meetings’ calendars with that.
<START>I think the idea of separating the discussion about the outlook from policy is a good thing to do, but it’s a little awkward to have these conversations about the forecast without people actually revealing what their conditioning policy assumption is, and it is slightly artificial to separate them completely.<END>
So in some sense I think, as the Greenbook does, that we should all take on the obligation in talking about our view of the forecast and the outlook to be a little more explicit about what we think at that stage is the conditioning assumption of the policy.
It doesn’t always matter a lot, but it probably does matter.
March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release148 of 167 In a two-day meeting, it’s probably good to make sure that we have enough time on the first day that everybody has a chance to do an initial statement.
I think chopping it up as we were forced to do today is a little suboptimal.
<START>It’s nicer to give everyone a chance to put their basic views on the table at the beginning, and that may require, as Tom said, that we all be a little more selective in how much we say in that initial round.<END>
It is in some ways a better basis for give-and-take once people have been able to make their initial statement.
Compliments to Dave Stockton for the evolution in the Greenbook presentations of alternative scenarios.
I think that, as Dave implied, there’s probably room for further evolution in how the staff structures its contributions to the meetings.
As we think about it and as you pointed out, Mr. Chairman, how we think about evolution in our monetary policy regime and our communications regime, we should give some thought at this stage to what kind of supporting material we want to have to underpin that evolution.
I think that’s all I’ve got.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Mr. Chairman, I applaud the way this meeting has been run.
It was the most enjoyable I’ve had in my long one-year tenure.
I do want to weigh in with some sympathy for those that come from the western part of the United States and have to go back for board meetings.
Maybe we could front-load these at the beginning of the week and not lag them into Wednesday.
That would be appreciated.
Second, on special topics, I want to underscore them and also suggest that the Banks themselves have very able research staffs, and we might call on their talents to make some of those presentations.
It would, I think, be good for morale, but importantly it would round out viewpoints.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Olson.
March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release149 of 167 MR. OLSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just to comment on two statements, one by President Hoenig and one by President Guynn
—I would think we will learn a lot at the next meeting as to whether or not by starting early we could do it in a single day.
As the discussion started yesterday, it seemed to me that we were in the old pattern of the work expanding to fit the time available.
[Laughter] It seemed to me that the statements got longer, but I did not sense that they were any more substantive than they had been in other years.
But I did like the fact that we had divided the discussion, and I like listening to the analysis before I commented on the policy.
The presumption has been that we all come in here in a mode to learn.
Otherwise we can simply e-mail our result to you.
So I liked that division.
But I think we will learn a lot at the next meeting.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, like everyone else, thought this was a very successful meeting, and I liked the format very much.
The remark I was going to make is the one that Governor Olson just made, which is I think the May meeting will be a nice test as to whether we can meet President Guynn’s plea for concision, and I understand that includes present company.
[Laughter] MR. GUYNN.
That was not what I was trying to say.
[Laughter] MR. KOHN.
I would like to comment on one part that others haven’t commented on, and that is the formulation of the statement and the input of the statement.
I liked the idea that you and Vincent were able to work overnight to change the statement slightly to reflect the consensus around the table.
I think the statement reflects the meeting better than it would have if it were locked in concrete before we started.
And I liked the fact that it can be changed at the meeting by the consensus of the meeting.
<START>But, also, people were appropriately, I think, restrained in their desires to make big changes in the statement, partly laying down markers for future statements, and that’s March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release150 of 167 fine, too.<END>
So there’s a nice balance between making changes and recognizing that we can’t rewrite it at the table.
But we can make it reflect the meeting a little better, particularly with the interval between the economics and the policy discussions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Just a couple of comments.
I thought the format for this meeting was excellent, and it all went quite well.
I would have a bias going forward toward two-day meetings.
Yes, there will be lots of times when the immediate policy decision is straightforward and we won’t have to spend a lot of time on it.
But I think we will have more than enough topics that we are going to want to get into in some depth for quite some time, especially if we start giving serious thought to things like inflation targeting and what we want our statements to say or not say, and so on and so forth.
So I would start with that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I would just like to insert a comment.
This wouldn’t have to be necessarily the way we did special topics, but special topics in the past were announced in January and worked on for four months.
We received a ton of paper and stuff before the meeting.
I think it would be hard to work in a special topic if the meeting weren’t going to take up the whole time.
So we might have to think a little and set out the two-day meetings.
Either that or go always to a two-day format, recognizing that some of the time we wouldn’t use it.
I think there’s some slipperiness there that needs to be thought about more clearly because you just cannot insert a special topic on the run
—it takes work.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Well, thank you for these comments.
Our next meeting is perforce one day.
I would move that we start at 8:30.
So we will begin at 8:30 the next time.
Nevertheless, given today’s meeting, people are going to have to be conscious of time and try to be March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release151 of 167 as concise and direct as possible in your comments.
I agree with Vice Chairman Geithner that we should probably have the experience of the one-day meeting, and perhaps even as soon as next time we can think about whether you’d like to make a change in the calendar.
Let’s be prepared to do that.
Clearly, one option in terms of flexibility that President Minehan and others asked for is to have the possibility of a special topic at a two-day meeting when the business doesn’t seem likely to fill the whole meeting.
I think that rather than preparing six months in advance, we could no doubt have some topics that are prepared on a shorter time frame.
They would be less intensive.
They could be joined by the Reserve Banks as well as by the Board.
So that’s certainly one option for us to think about if we want to go to a two-day meeting more often, not necessarily every time.
But this has all been very helpful.
Do we have any other business?
So, we will meet at one o’clock for lunch to honor President Santomero, and the meeting is adjourned.
Thank you very much.
END OF MEETING March 27-28, 2006Authorized for Public Release152 of 167
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 25
