
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

I have expressed my views on explicit inflation objectives previously.
<START>Just to summarize, economic theory does not sharply pin down the optimum inflation rate, but my preference is a range of 1 to 2 percent for core PCE inflation.<END>
My preference is for core inflation to be 1½ percent, in the center of that zone.
<START>When inflation is outside the zone, policy should be broadly designed to move inflation back to the center of the zone.<END>
However, the time frame for core inflation to return to the center of the zone depends on a number of factors, like the dual mandate that I mentioned earlier.
Finally, an important issue that we should discuss is whether to use core inflation or headline inflation.
<START>Other central banks use headline inflation, and they seem to manage that well.<END>
I’m open to a discussion on this, but I think the communication issues are more complicated for headline inflation when it deviates so much for transitory reasons than for core inflation.
To conclude, I favor taking the intermediate step of extending the forecast horizon to five years, and I’d like to leave open the question of whether to establish quantitative guidelines until we get more experience with that approach.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Thank you.
I want to associate myself with comments that President Lacker offered.
If we are going to do this, we ought to make it very clean and explicit.
I would not favor the approach that President Moskow offered because calling the target a forecast leaves too much October 24-25, 2006132 of 203room for it to change over time.
I think that the central idea of a target is that it is a long-term commitment and not something that ought to change with each new FOMC that comes in.
<START>I believe that a coherent policy for the FOMC requires that the Committee at least act as though it has an inflation target.<END>
We can’t have a coherent discussion if Charlie Plosser and I are both favoring zero percent and other people are favoring 2 percent.
I have often said that I would like zero properly measured, but I think it is far more important to have any reasonable, low range and to say exactly what that number is.
I think we ought to be able to do that.
I have said that the target range should be understood to be permanent unless developments in the literature and the theory suggest that it needs to be recalibrated.
As a matter of governance, each incoming FOMC is going to have to reaffirm that range, but I think it would be understood that there would not be a change without substantial analysis and communication with the general public.
In fact, the constraint that there would be communication with the general public would produce a very, very high hurdle for even discussing a change.
<START>I think that would be appropriate because discussing a change on the inside and springing it on the general public would not reflect good monetary policy.<END>
<START>I also believe that there’s good reason to adopt an inflation range sooner rather than later.<END>
<START>I realize that we need a deliberate process here, but I would argue for doing it sooner, first of all, because our new Chairman has views as an academic that are well known on this subject and because we have been discussing it for some time.<END>
Also, we have an opportunity
—whether it would be successful I don’t know but we shouldn’t pass it by
—to help deal with the current inflation environment.
<START>It is true that, if you take the staff model and arbitrarily dial down the inflation expectations that are embedded in the Phillips curve, you get a very nice result.<END>
Generally, the way that the simulations go, the inflation expectations term grinds away over time, and only the October 24-25, 2006133 of 203creation of a period of slack and lower inflation gradually changes expectations.
<START>If we can wind down inflation expectations discretely through this method, it produces a gain in welfare for the country that I believe we should not lightly pass by, and so I would like to do it sooner rather than later.<END>
I’m not going to go into the details about exactly how we might do it.
I’ve given a lot of thought to those details and the way we talk about them.
As part of the process of talking about a range, I agree that a range of 1 to 2 percent in core PCE inflation would be a very good place to go.
But what do we mean if we say it applies to the medium term?
I could imagine events that would make the medium term longer rather than shorter.
Just to give one example to get the flavor
<START>—if the country went to a value-added tax system, it would dial in price increases for quite some time as a part of moving to essentially a national sales tax.<END>
That would be taken into account, and therefore, a rigid definition would not serve us well.
We would need to be able to explain why the horizon would have to be elastic under certain circumstances, and I think we could do that when we had situations for which we could provide solid analysis.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Mishkin.
MR.
MISHKIN.
Some people who know me quite well have been surprised at how brief some of my statements have been.
So in this case I hope you’ll indulge me a little.
[Laughter] MR. STERN.
The good times are over?
[Laughter] MR. MISHKIN.
As many of you know, I have thought quite a lot about this issue and have written quite a lot about it.
I’ve also been thinking a lot about it recently, particularly in the context of different political environments and structures of committees in which to operate.
I just finished a report on Sweden.
Sweden is not the same as the United States, and the Riksbank is not the same October 24-25, 2006134 of 203as the Federal Reserve, so that will reflect some of my thinking that may be a little bit different from what you have seen before.
Let me go down the decision tree, which I thought was excellent.
The Committee and the staff did a superb job in framing it in a way I find very useful, so I am going to proceed exactly along the lines that they suggest.
The first question is, Is an explicit numerical specification of price stability helpful?
You are not going to be surprised at my answer:
It’s a very strong “yes.” I could go on and on about this because I have written so much about it, but I’ll try to be very brief on these issues.
The key to successful monetary policy is having a strong nominal anchor.
<START>The kind of success that we’ve seen in central banks throughout the world, which would not have been predicted ten or fifteen years ago, is really remarkable, and it is because having a strong nominal anchor allows the markets to do a lot of the work for you.<END>
<START>But also what’s very important to emphasize is that you don’t have to do it with a long-run numerical inflation goal<END>
—the Federal Reserve has been very successful in doing it with an individual.
So I don’t see that this has been a problem in recent years.
I have to tell you that, maybe because I am here, I feel we are very lucky to have had the Chairmen we have had.
It could have come out quite differently.
<START>Having an explicit numerical definition of price stability, a long-run goal for inflation, means that the nominal anchor is less dependent upon who the Chairman is, and I think that’s actually something that is very good.<END>
It’s true in the past that we have not had a problem with that, with Volcker, Greenspan, and now Chairman Bernanke.
MR.
POOLE.
You did before that though.
MR.
MISHKIN.
But we did have a problem before that, and that is exactly my point.
In fact, not only might you not get the right person in the future
—and that could have happened this time around, but we were lucky in that regard
<START>—but even when you have the right person, the October 24-25, 2006135 of 203transition to a new Chairman has been very complicated.<END>
In particular, people might not remember this, but when Greenspan came in, there was an inflation scare in the bond markets.
Long bond rates went up about 200 basis points, and the bond market tanked.
I think that there was also some confusion in the markets when our current Chairman took this office about whether he was a hawk or a dove on controlling inflation.
Luckily, I think that confusion has dissipated, but I think it actually made your life, Ben, a little more complicated than you would have chosen it to be.
<START>So the way I think about this is that I would like the transition to a new Chairman to be very boring, and having an explicit numerical inflation goal for the long run would help in that regard.<END>
<START>Clearly, there are also the standard advantages that having an explicit long-run numerical inflation goal would clarify communication with the public, the markets, and the politicians.<END>
It increases transparency and accountability.
What is not discussed as much
—but I think Bill Poole hit on it
—is that it could clarify and make more coherent discussions inside the FOMC.
I would really like to know, when somebody is advocating a certain setting of the federal funds rate, what his or her inflation goal is.
Jeff Lacker has dissented in this particular meeting.
I have an idea why you did because I think you have been clear on what your goal is.
But if I were confused about that, I would have a harder time understanding why you’re taking the position that you’re taking.
We have seen evidence in looking at how central banks operate that having an explicit goal has actually improved the nature of the deliberations in these committees.
Another thing that is very important is that having an explicit numerical goal would allow us to think about the way of doing monetary policy, which is becoming better understood in the academic literature on optimal policy.
<START>The way we think about doing optimal policy is looking at what is an appropriate inflation path.<END>
In particular, having a long-run goal that you know you’re heading to and then talking about the path to that goal is exactly the right way to think about policy.
October 24-25, 2006136 of 203Let me tell you where I would like to head ultimately and then where I think the Committee should head in the short run.
There’s a slight difference because of some considerations I’m going to bring up.
I’d like to see in the long run exactly what Bill Poole and Jeff Lacker mentioned, which is the FOMC’s agreeing on an explicit long-run numerical inflation goal and doing it in terms of saying that we are defining what we mean by price stability.
So I am in full agreement with you that we should ultimately head there.
Then the discussion of monetary policy, both inside and outside, should focus on what the appropriate path is to get there and how long it should take.
This approach is consistent with what we have learned in terms of modern monetary policy analysis.
It is the way we have learned to think about this and, by the way, is consistent with the kind of policies for the most part that have been pursued by the Federal Reserve over the past ten years.
A key part of the success of the Federal Reserve’s operations is that, in practice, we have actually been operating in that way.
When you have such an approach, there are four basic principles regarding the way you think about changing the path that you think is appropriate in terms of achieving the long-run goal.
First of all, we ask how far away we are currently from the long-run goal
—so where we are really matters.
Second, the nature of the shocks, whether they’re transitory or permanent, is clearly important.
Third, it is very important to be aware of how big the projected output gaps are because we should care about output fluctuations, something I will turn to in a second.
Finally, we also want to be very concerned about financial stability issues because, if something is occurring on the financial stability front, we have to be able to deal with it.
This kind of approach would allow us to have a concern about business-cycle fluctuations, which I think is key for a central bank.
It would also allow us to change policy in response to financial instability concerns.
It should allow us to deal with the LTCM type of situation, in which there was a potential small probability of very October 24-25, 2006137 of 203disastrous things happening.
<START>In fact, it should be consistent with what Greenspan called the risk-management approach.<END>
<START>So I think it is very important to understand that we’re not talking about going to a rigid form of inflation targeting if we pursue this goal.<END>
Now let me turn to the second issue on the decision tree, which is how we express an explicit nominal definition of price stability.
I want to discuss some subtleties that really do concern me right now, which means that I’m going to shift slightly from where I want to get in the long run to where I think we should head in the intermediate term.
Four critical considerations worry me.
The first is the political process.
It is very important that we do not get too far ahead of the Congress on this.
It is extremely important that we express a further definition of what we mean by price stability in a way that is absolutely consistent with the Federal Reserve Act and with the law and with the dual mandate.
This consideration became very clear to me in looking at what happened during the testimony that the Chairman gave when he took his position.
It was clearly a central issue in the testimony that I gave.
<START>It’s very clear that this process is part of the American system and that it differs from many other countries.<END>
So that’s consideration one.
<START>Consideration two is that it’s extremely important that we not be considered to be what Mervyn King artfully has called “inflation nutters.” The British have better training in English than we have<END>
—they always have better phrases for things.
But we need to make very clear that, in fact, we are not inflation fanatics.
A key part of the success of the Federal Reserve has been based on the fact that the Federal Reserve is clearly perceived by the public, the politicians, and the markets as having a weight on output fluctuations in our decisions.
<START>What is also an important part of our success is that, in contrast to many other central banks, we have been willing to express our concerns about output fluctuations and the business cycle.<END>
So in my past writings, I have talked about the dirty little secret of central banking, which is that most central banks are not willing to October 24-25, 2006138 of 203admit that they care about output fluctuations.
I think this is actually a serious problem for them.
<START>Luckily, we don’t have that problem, but if we move toward an explicit nominal long-run inflation goal, we need to be clear that we differ in that regard from other central banks.<END>
The issue here is that this is a primary reason that we’ve had the support of the public and the politicians.
We certainly don’t want to lose that.
That’s the second consideration.
The third consideration is that we differ from other countries in a major way, and when I look at the Riksbank versus the Federal Reserve, I see how different we are.
We have nineteen participants making decisions about monetary policy, and that’s extremely unusual.
The only other comparable situation is the European system of central banks.
Our situation is different not only because there are nineteen people but also because the participants reside in different locations.
Now there are six but there will be seven of us existing in house, and there are twelve of you who factor in different locations and have a very different role.
You are CEOs of an organization, and you have to communicate differently with the public than the Governors do.
I really understand this because I’ve been on both sides, having been at a Reserve Bank and also here.
That situation actually makes things very, very different.
The fourth consideration is that the Federal Reserve has been extremely successful.
That gives people confidence in us and tells us that the more evolutionary we can be the better off we are.
This consideration is important in two senses.
One is that we want to say that we have done a good job in the past, and we are going to continue to do a good job in the future.
Thus we build on the credibility that we’ve established over the past fifteen years or so.
The second sense is political:
<START>We really want to promote political support, and looking as though we’re doing something that is departing from where we were is not a good way to move forward.<END>
October 24-25, 2006139 of 203Now that I have given you basic principles, let me put forth a proposal
—not one to be voted on today but where I would like to see us head.
<START>Although in the long run I would like the FOMC to be able to sit down and agree on what our long-run inflation goals should be in terms of a specific number, I would argue that the four considerations I brought up suggest that we need to go a bit more slowly to that path.<END>
So here is what I would suggest.
As part of our reporting procedures that we do for our Monetary Policy Report twice a year, we produce forecasts.
In a similar vein, I think it would be very effective for all nineteen participants, when they are giving forecasts, to say what their definitions of price stability are and, in fact, provide that number.
But I would recommend that this be done only once a year, not twice a year.
What are the advantages of doing this?
One advantage is that I think we are fairly close or will become fairly close to having agreement on it.
I would argue that the numbers will not be that different among us, and providing our numbers will make it easier for us to come to consensus in the future.
So it is an intermediate step to get us there in the long run.
Another advantage has to do with the fact that we have nineteen participants.
I think it’s very important that all participants are heard from and that we don’t encroach on their particular views until we can actually build a consensus.
So it really fits in with the issue that there are nineteen people in different locations with different jobs to do.
Also, it’s evolutionary;
it really is not a radical departure.
It’s very much in the spirit of saying that we have a dual mandate.
We’ve actually had individuals talking about comfort zones and so forth.
We’re just formalizing the process, and we’re doing it in a way that is a step forward in transparency, so it really moves us very much in the direction we have been going.
The bottom line here is that it gets us close to having an agreement.
I think that is not too far away.
I do want to mention the once-a-year issue, which would come up if the FOMC actually votes on this.
I think people worry about that very much because
—and I agree strongly with October 24-25, 2006140 of 203President Poole and President Lacker
—we do not want to have the number change very much over time.
<START>(We could also talk about some tricky issues that are created by bad inflation expectations dynamics, but not now because they are more complicated.) In practice, we have actually seen something that gives us a lot of information about this issue because one of the concerns that people had when inflation targeting started was that it would be decided by governments.<END>
The problem with governments is that we know what politicians are like
—they have to get elected, and they think short term;
this is one reason that we like to insulate the central bank from the political process.
There was then a concern that, if the government provides a number, it will do so opportunistically.
We have not found that to happen, and the reason it has not happened is that providing a number is so transparent.
When you actually have to give a number, you have to have a darned good reason for changing it.
In fact, I think it would be very unlikely that we would find this Committee, even if we did this on an annual basis, wanting to change it.
Transparency really has huge benefits.
It’s remarkable that, when there have been such changes, they have clearly been for technical reasons and have been in the right direction.
In one case, the Bank of England changed the number because of a change in the calculation of their price index.
It was done in the case of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, with some resistance from the Reserve Bank, but they agreed that the range they went to
—eventually to 1 to 3 from zero to 2
—was a better number for them.
Thus, I think that concern is really not going to be a problem even if we do this once a year.
I have an aside that I wasn’t going to mention, but I think it’s important to mention.
<START>It has to do with the issue of potential GDP and potential employment or a discussion of the NAIRU, and it relates a bit to President Moskow’s suggestion, which I do not think is the right way to go.<END>
<START>If we provide information about our explicit numerical inflation goal, it’s very important to explain why doing so should not drive us to provide a similar definition of potential employment, potential October 24-25, 2006141 of 203output, or the NAIRU for several reasons.<END>
The first is that it’s extremely hard to know what the correct values are for those numbers, and they’re extremely hard to estimate in real time, as we know.
I don’t even know what they are conceptually.
This is a big issue in the academic literature.
We have a good example of this issue right now, which is that the Greenbook has a very different view on this from what we find in the private markets
—you see much slower growth of potential GDP than the markets do.
Any suggestion that we have something like an employment goal would be very, very damaging to us.
We also know that, when the Federal Reserve has acted this way, which they did in the ’70s, it led to disastrous outcomes;
Burns focused too much on output gaps, and it got the Fed into a lot of trouble.
This finding comes from work done by your staff
—in particular, Athanasios Orphanides.
In contrast, it is important to clarify that the reason for the big difference between defining price stability and defining employment goals is that we know from a welfare viewpoint it doesn’t matter much whether we are off by 50 or even 100 basis points.
I think this is the point that Bill made.
<START>He likes zero, taking into account measurement error, but if we said it was 100 basis points more than that, I don’t think it would be that big a deal.<END>
We know that what is really important is to have a number to pin down inflation expectations, and not the specific number.
That is absolutely not true of an employment goal.
So it is very important to get that across, and it is the reason I reacted to President Plosser’s comments about this issue of talking about potential, although I think that he agrees with me.
It is also one reason that I have a concern with the proposal that President Moskow has made.
First of all, I don’t think it is explicit enough.
But I also have the problem that, if you talk about a five-year inflation forecast as a goal, people start to interpret that as a goal, and if you talk about a five-year GDP forecast, they’ll also interpret that as a goal.
<START>I think it leads exactly to a lack October 24-25, 2006142 of 203of clarity that will get us into trouble.<END>
So we need to be much clearer on this.
<START>If you ask me my five-year inflation forecast, that might not be the same thing as my view of the appropriate level of price stability because I have to think about what everybody else’s decisions are going to be, who may be the next Chairman, or whatever.<END>
Another issue, which is not the main subject today, is important to discuss because it may affect what the staff has to do.
<START>I have another proposal, which is completely independent of our decision to go toward an explicit inflation goal;<END>
it is that markets would tremendously benefit from more information about our forecasts, which are now twice a year, and to have that information four times a year.
By the way, this proposal came out very strongly in the Meyer survey, which I’m sure you’re all familiar with.
They were quite in favor of it.
Again, this could be done in an evolutionary fashion.
We have a reporting procedure on monetary policy, which we are mandated to carry out twice a year.
By saying that we’re willing to do it four times a year, we are actually saying that, in the spirit of cooperating with the Congress, we are trying to be even more helpful.
So I think it would fit in very naturally.
What it would require, of course, is a little more work on the part of all of us because we’d have to do it four times a year rather than twice a year.
But I’m willing to do that, and I think other people would be willing to do it as well.
Another key issue is that we need to greatly improve the quality of the written documents that go with this process.
The current Monetary Policy Report is really terrible.
It’s dull;
it’s sex made boring.
I don’t want to criticize too much, but it is.
[Laughter] VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Tell us what you really think.
[Laughter] MR. MISHKIN.
If it were a textbook, and I can tell you I know a lot about this, you wouldn’t sell one copy.
[Laughter] So it’s a problem.
We see this in practice in that the markets pay very little attention to the Monetary Policy Report.
A feature of inflation-targeting regimes is October 24-25, 2006143 of 203that they produce something called inflation reports.
(By the way, I would never want to call it that in the United States;
I would want to stick with Monetary Policy Report
—it is a good name, and it fits into this evolutionary view.) They have improved the quality of these documents so that they receive a lot of attention.
Those reports have become extremely important vehicles for getting the central bank’s views across to the public and for helping the public understand what the central banks are doing;
they actually also provide support for the central bank to pursue optimal policy.
So improving these documents would have tremendous benefits, and I think it could be done, and I actually think the staff would probably enjoy doing them
—well, maybe not.
[Laughter] You’d be working harder, but that’s why you get paid the big bucks.
<START>I think you’d actually enjoy doing this.<END>
<START>In the inflation reports, they’ve moved to using the best textbook writing techniques<END>
—nice colors, boxes.
Ben and I have been involved in this process.
It’s the reason that I can afford my spouse.
It’s a change in the nature of the way this is done, but I think it’s very doable and will have a lot of benefits.
The last box in the decision tree is technical issues.
That’s not what we’re here to discuss today.
There are a lot of them.
How should we report the participants’ forecasts, if we go that route?
What price index should we use?
We would have to agree at least on what price index and whether it is a core or a headline measure before providing our views about what price stability means.
Would it be a point or a range?
What should be the form of the Monetary Policy Report document?
<START>Also, what does economic analysis tell us about the optimal level of long-run inflation rates so that we can actually think about the sense of it?<END>
Even though I’ve written a lot about this, I would like to think about all of it from scratch, and I would encourage the Committee to do that as well.
In that regard, I would like to have the staff do even more work.
The staff would need to provide us with a set of documents to get us to rethink these issues.
There are a lot of technical October 24-25, 2006144 of 203issues.
The documents that you provided for the January 2005 meeting were excellent.
But I would basically have a complete relook because I think there are some changes that we should be aware of, and then we can decide on what index.
<START>Some of us may change our views on exactly what number we think is the right number for the long-run inflation goal.<END>
If we go this route, we might try a dry run on some of these things because of what Governor Kohn mentioned
—once you go this route, it’s not easy to go back;
so you had better get it right.
We might want to try dry runs of what procedure we would use to provide information.
If we have a Monetary Policy Report document, we might try dry runs that we would actually discuss in this Committee.
I think by doing that we would be more likely to get it right.
Anyway, I am sorry to have gone on so long.
I have now made up for the fact that I have been quieter other times, and I’ll try to be quiet in the future if I can.
Thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Plosser.
MR.
PLOSSER.
It probably comes as no surprise to most of you that I share a lot of the views expressed by Jeff, Bill, and Rick, and so I’ll try to reinforce some and maybe fine-tune a couple about which I might have some additional thoughts.
I do applaud the changes that the FOMC has made
—over the past decade, in particular.
It has enhanced its credibility.
It has improved its communication and its transparency about the policymaking process, and I think that has been a great step forward.
<START>In principle, I view the announcement of a long-term numerical definition of price stability or long-term inflation target, however you want to think about it, as another important step in that direction, and in that sense, the announcement is going to be evolutionary rather than revolutionary.<END>
I also believe that it will fundamentally improve the policymaking process without unduly restricting our flexibility to respond to crises.
October 24-25, 2006145 of 203I think it is often important to remind the public and others that we
—the Federal Reserve, the central bank
—have the unique responsibility to maintain price stability.
<START>No other agency of the government is charged with maintaining price stability, and nobody else can do it for us.<END>
So in some sense, when you think about mandates and what our responsibilities are, we are the only vehicle for achieving that.
Specifying our long-term price stability objective numerically would help coordinate expectations by reducing the public’s uncertainty about our goal.
Long-run expectations would become less responsive to short-term inflation, therefore probably less persistent.
This should enhance monetary policy flexibility in many ways.
Thus, rather than being unduly constraining, it could add to our flexibility.
But that’s not to say that a numerical definition would not influence our policymaking;
indeed, there would be little point in specifying a target if we thought that it wouldn’t.
The numerical goal would be a long-run anchor
—the nominal anchor to our monetary policy.
It would help coordinate our own discussions of appropriate policy and serve as the guidepost for our policy deliberations.
At times a policymaker would like to deviate from the commitment to long-term price stability, the so-called time consistency problem.
A precise definition of what we mean by price stability, however, would make it harder to succumb to the temptation to deviate and thereby would improve policy outcomes.
What we know in the context of most policies is that welfare under forms of full commitment generally exceeds welfare under forms of discretion.
Now, that does not mean that there will not be exceptional unforeseen events or events with such low probabilities of occurring that reactions to them would not have been pre-specified but would require deviations from policy as usual.
But these special circumstances are easily recognized.
In such instances, such as 9/11 and other crises, the FOMC will be able to react appropriately.
<START>October 24-25, 2006146 of 203We are fortunate, as Rick pointed out, that a number of other central banks in the developed world have set numerical inflation objectives and inflation targets.<END>
Numerical specification has been viewed quite favorably by those banks, and it seems to produce a moderate improvement in monetary policy.
<START>There is evidence that inflation expectations have become better anchored in these countries and that inflation outcomes have improved without any negative consequences for output growth.<END>
<START>It can be reasonably argued that the FOMC has implicitly targeted inflation over the past ten years.<END>
Twelve-month averages of core CPI inflation have remained inside a band of 1 to 3 percent.
I believe, given the shocks that have hit the economy over this period, that has not been just good luck.
Rather, it has been good policy.
Thus, an explicit setting of a numerical objective would be evolutionary and not revolutionary for the Fed.
Now, I have not come to firm conclusions about the precise formulation of the price stability objective.
We’ll need to consider
—as has been alluded to
—which index, what period over which to define the goal, and whether we should choose a range or a point for the definition.
The choices, to me, are interrelated.
For example, a long horizon would mean a tighter range and perhaps even a point.
A long horizon makes the choice between headline and core inflation less important.
Any proposal will have its pros and cons.
<START>For example, specifying a range may be preferred if it communicates explicit upper and lower bounds, presumably above or below which we would say we are definitely away from price stability.<END>
Of course, because of inflation dynamics, to maintain inflation in that range, policymakers would have to take action before inflation moved above or below those bounds.
<START>On the other hand, a range might induce some complacency on the part of policymakers so that they would not feel any urgency to take action until inflation moved outside the range, at which point it might be too late or at least more costly to restore price stability and October 24-25, 2006147 of 203reestablish our credibility.<END>
If so, a point estimate actually may be best because it would force the policy to be more explicit about why or why not any deviation should be tolerated and for how long.
As I said, I’ve not really come to a firm conclusion about a particular formulation in that regard.
<START>Presumably, deciding on a definition of price stability would entail estimating measurement bias in particular indexes.<END>
Robert Gordon in recent work estimated that the bias in the headline CPI is about 0.8 percent per year.
There are likely different estimates of the bias.
Presumably having ranges will help us determine what those definitions might be.
If we decided and agreed upon a bias, let’s say it was 0.8, should that be our target?
Yes, if price stability is our goal.
<START>However, in this regard, I agree with Bill, Jeff, and Rick that having a unique number may, in fact, be more important than what that number is, so long as it is within a fairly narrow range.<END>
<START>I think that this problem is a little more complex because we also have to consider the view of models in which there is actual optimal inflation.<END>
<START>Many models of optimal monetary policy suggest, depending on the exact formulation of the model, that the optimal rate of inflation falls in a range of slightly negative to slightly positive.<END>
Thus, price stability may be desirable, but it may not be optimal in some circumstances.
Finally, monetary policy is a Committee decision.
<START>We may differ on our forecasts, our models, and our understanding of the channels through which monetary policy affects the economy, but it seems to me that the Committee must agree on its inflation objective.<END>
I don’t see, as has been discussed, how we can formulate coherent policy if we disagree on the numerical long-run goal we are trying to achieve.
In helping communication and the public’s understanding of policy, individual definitions would create much too much confusion.
This problem is evident today.
<START>For example, there seems to be a disconnect between the market’s view of long-run inflation, which according to surveys and financial markets seems to remain around 2½ percent, and the statements October 24-25, 2006148 of 203made by many of us on this Committee who seem to be comfortable with 1 to 2 percent.<END>
Do the markets not believe that we are seriously committed to that goal?
Are we really committed to the goal of 2 percent or below?
By publicly committing to a specific target, we might, I hope, obtain greater congruence of our goals and the market’s expectations.
Of course, we have to remember that we will not succeed at all unless our actions are consistent with our stated objective.
Let me make two really quick points about communications.
First, as I said earlier, sometimes when I’ve read past FOMC statements I’ve said, “Well, why don’t you just say what you mean?” I agree with Rick:
<START>I don’t really like “potential output” either.<END>
I think it’s important that we strive toward achieving a communication strategy in which we are not trying either to confuse the market or to send signals but are basically stating what our forecasts are, what our policy objectives are, and how we propose to get to them.
Second, I’d like to reinforce the idea
—and Rick spent a good deal of time talking about this so I won’t elaborate on it
—of a document like an inflation report
—call it a monetary policy report.
Part of our communication strategy would be greatly enhanced by our ability to communicate on a more regular basis what our views about the economy are and where we think it is going.
As a way of communicating, such a report would be very valuable.
It would be tricky because it needs to be a report of this Committee and not necessarily of the staff.
How we mesh what the staff does with what the Committee thinks can be a very tricky process.
So I recognize that getting to that report entails some discussion about how to proceed, what constitutes the report, and how we communicate the Committee’s views independently or how we aggregate them.
Thus, I appreciate Rick’s argument that maybe we could have some dry runs in thinking about how we aggregate our views.
What variables we need to put in the report, which are the critical ones, and what policy assumptions underlie some of those forecasts are all very subtle and complex issues.
October 24-25, 2006149 of 203I taught in a business school for most of my career
—thirty years of teaching business students.
One thing I said to students was that the tough part of management often wasn’t figuring out where you wanted to go;
the tough part often was figuring out how you get there from where you are.
Indeed, in running an organization, in many cases that is where you run into most of your problems and where you step into the biggest potholes.
Therefore, I’m very sensitive that, if we agree that we want to get to some goal, the trick is figuring out how we get there from where we are.
That is critical.
The last thing I’d like to comment on relates to the so-called dual objective and Rick’s comment about the importance of the central bank’s concern for output and employment, the “dirty little secret” as you referred to it
—that we don’t have to worry about it because the public knows that we are concerned about it.
<START>But I think we have to be very careful in our communications because I worry sometimes that the public’s view of monetary policy is often that we can do anything, and at the slightest deviation or problem, we sometimes step into the hole of leading them to believe that we can either fine-tune or achieve objectives that we really can’t achieve.<END>
So in the context of this discussion, we need to try to communicate to the public that, although we may have a dual mandate in some respects, our ability to achieve certain objectives is very, very limited.
We’ve come dangerously close in this period to going from a position in which monetary policy was never considered to matter for anything to one in which it’s all that matters.
Our communications can play a role in which we are a bit more humble and admit what we can do and what we cannot do.
We should be very careful not to lead the public along a path that suggests we can actually accomplish things that most of us around the table don’t believe we really can.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Minehan.
October 24-25, 2006150 of 203MS. MINEHAN.
<START>Well, it will probably come as no surprise to anybody around this table that I don’t agree with some of the things that have been said, though I have a great deal of respect for the opinions that have been expressed.<END>
I want to go through the questions in a somewhat different order:
<START>first of all, whether or not explicit numerical specification of price stability is helpful;<END>
second, whether I think it would affect policy setting;
and then third, if we’re going to do it, some beginning thoughts
—and they are only beginning thoughts
—on how we would do it.
Is an explicit numerical specification of price stability helpful?
My answer to the question hasn’t changed much since we last talked about this in February 2005.
I don’t think it is.
Based on the evidence then and the updates since, I don’t believe an explicit numerical specification of price stability would have sufficient benefits to U.S.
policymaking to outweigh the potential costs involved in either actually taking our eyes off the other goal of policy or being seen as likely to do so.
<START>There is no doubt that such a specification has been useful in countries with a track record of very high inflation or no central bank credibility.<END>
I think it also was useful in the formation of the ECB, since there was a new central bank with no track record.
In the cases of both the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan, it was part and parcel of their gaining independence, which was important in a number of other ways.
<START>So I don’t think the situation in other countries necessarily applies to the United States, and I don’t think we have a good body of evidence that they’ve done with inflation targets, however they’ve been set, any better than we’ve done over the past whatever relevant time period it is.<END>
It is asserted that an inflation target of some sort enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy by helping to generate market expectations and actions that are consistent with the goals of the central bank.
But it’s not clear to me that our current process doesn’t do that about as well as it can be done while leaving some room for the flexibility that I believe is vital to the policy process.
October 24-25, 2006151 of 203Now if we adopted, and we probably are likely to adopt, some form of price stability specification, what does that do to policy setting?
<START>If such a target or goal is to be credible, then markets ought to have some confidence that the Federal Reserve will react in predictable ways each time the goal is either met or missed.<END>
But we don’t have just one goal.
<START>We have two goals, and how we react to inflation readings or forecasts will depend importantly on the trajectory we see for economic growth, output gaps, unemployment, however we want to phrase it.<END>
Thus, the setting of an objective for just one of our goals could result in somewhat less transparency about what our policy actions right now might actually be;
<START>even worse, having such an objective could result in actually making policy in a way that is insufficiently sensitive to growth.<END>
Every paper we have received on this topic has stressed that aspects of setting a so-called flexible inflation goal can reduce the possible cost of confusion about our commitment to dual goals.
Specifically, we could set a wide range.
We could choose a long period over which to attain the target.
We could choose an inflation measure less subject to volatility, particularly over the long run.
We could communicate extensively about all aspects of our forecast, et cetera, et cetera.
But in the end, if everything about the goal is so flexible or needs continual communication, how does it, in fact, deliver its benefits?
I really wonder what problem we’re trying to solve.
The communications subcommittee asked for our perspectives on the goals of communication.
I believe we can improve how and what we communicate, but I don’t see that the effort to communicate better by definition has to include an explicit numerical target for inflation.
For the best part of twenty-five years, no matter how we have measured inflation, it has moved down.
<START>GDP has faltered only occasionally, and unemployment has really been the envy of the developed world.<END>
This was done without an explicit inflation target, and I wonder whether one would have helped much.
I also wonder whether we October 24-25, 2006152 of 203know enough about what the underlying inflation mechanism is within our economy to lead us to certainty about what the correct range is.
<START>Is it zero properly measured, or is some level of inflation, low and stable, actually good for the way the economy functions?<END>
I am not sure I know the answer to that question, which makes me hesitant to put a numerical range around my goal.
Finally, we do need to consider the likely interaction with the Congress as we set a target for one of our goals but not another.
<START>In my view, the Congress should be very interested in the short-run tradeoffs between that target and growth in unemployment.<END>
<START>It might be hard, for example, to explain the virtues of a goal that’s focused on a 1½ percent midpoint rather than the current inflation of 2½ percent.<END>
Over the long run, I think either one of these numbers could be consistent with solid growth.
But in the short run, moving from one level to another would require some sacrifice, and I think the long-run charts in the Bluebook show that.
<START>There’s no research I know of that proves a lower rate is clearly preferable, though inflation stability at any low level might be.<END>
So how is the sacrifice justified?
What else might that interaction with the Congress provoke?
The possibility for unintended consequences is clear.
Now, I think I’m as committed to being accountable, credible, and transparent as anybody else around this table.
<START>However, I believe that we’ve achieved those goals in spades and that an explicit numerical target has the potential to do some harm.<END>
<START>The possible benefits of setting a numerical target seem to me to lie solely in the advantage to some of being able to point to a number rather than thinking of price stability as the absence of concern about prices in everyday business and consumer activity.<END>
<START>A number conveys precision, but that precision itself could backfire by seeming to require a policy response that may not be optimal.<END>
That probably covers the question about whether a numerical price specification is helpful and the related question 3 about whether the quantification of the long-run objective would serve as October 24-25, 2006153 of 203a new influence on policy setting.
I think it would serve as a new influence on policy setting.
Frankly, I don’t find it hard to understand where people around this table come from at present or where they have come from over the past thirteen years.
<START>I think that if you set out a numerical target, it will change the dynamic around the table, and I’m not sure in a positive direction.<END>
Okay.
I know I am in a small minority.
I know most people see only good or at least nothing bad coming from an explicit specification of price stability.
I know the decision over time is likely to be to pursue such a specification.
If that happens, here’s a general idea of how I think it should be done.
First, I agree with Don and, I think, Rick as well:
One ought to approach this process very carefully.
<START>Once in the public domain, an inflation goal, target, specification, whatever you want to call it, will be there and will be very difficult to take away.<END>
<START>I believe the markets at present think we’re after the lowest feasible level of inflation that we can get consistent with a reasonable level of growth.<END>
Once a number or a range is attached, market perceptions might change in unforeseeable ways.
<START>When or if we take this step, it will be very hard, if not impossible, to reverse it, so we had better be both thoughtful and careful about doing it.<END>
So I like ideas such as Rick’s that there are ways we can evolve to this and we can take some dry runs or intermediate steps that give us a sense of what the longer run might be.
<START>Second, I haven’t given a lot of thought to the possibility of each member of the Committee setting his or her own goal, but it is consistent with my understanding of the way the Committee is intended to function, with each of us bringing our own thoughts and frameworks to the table.<END>
Over time, the resulting diversity of perspective is vital to the way the Committee works.
Thus there is some appeal to the direction in which Rick was going, which is, as a first step, disseminating perhaps twice a year or more frequently the range of FOMC participants’ personal definitions of price stability in conjunction with their near-term forecasts.
I wouldn’t extend the forecast.
<START>The October 24-25, 2006154 of 203difference between the two could well indicate policy concerns even without fully specifying the underlying policy path in the forecast.<END>
I don’t know if that’s where you were headed, Rick, but I see some value in that step as a matter of evolution.
Perhaps a key reason I seem to think more about each participant’s own price stability definition is that it allows for some uncertainty about how the policy discussion will come out.
<START>Maybe unlike others, I see some policy uncertainty as a good thing.<END>
Most of the time we cannot forecast exactly what the Committee will find necessary to do, and I think we should avoid giving the appearance that policy moves are always known months in advance when they aren’t.
Making it clear that nineteen different perspectives and definitions are involved could, I think, contribute to that.
<START>Finally, regardless of whether a numerical specification of price stability is set for the Committee as a whole or reflects a range of our individual preferences, the target specification needs to be a range rather than a single number.<END>
I think of it as an umbrella rather than a target.
We should use a measure based on either the headline or the core CPI on the grounds that most people know what that is.
It is part of the life that they live day by day, and so it resonates in our communication.
We should set a medium-run to long-run target of five years or so over which the specification would be met if the relevant range were exceeded.
I think that gives us enough flexibility to deal with crises of one sort or another.
We should do whatever we can to make sure that we, the central bank, and not the Congress, set the target if we’re going to have a target.
That’s as far as I can go.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In August, this Committee discussed the goals for our policy communications and generally agreed that one goal is to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy and the performance of the economy by helping agents generate October 24-25, 2006155 of 203well-informed expectations consistent with the goals and strategy of the central bank.
The other goal is to enhance the accountability, credibility, and democratic legitimacy of an independent central bank.
I think that an explicit numerical specification of price stability can help us achieve these goals.
I’m in favor of establishing an explicit numerical objective by a vote of the Committee, but I recognize that we have many issues to resolve before we would feel ready to implement such a practice.
The economic research in support of explicit numerical objectives is encouraging but nowhere near conclusive.
The same can be said about the experience of other central banks.
So, unfortunately, there is no single off-the-shelf solution for us.
Our challenge is to craft our own framework
—one that’s achievable, understandable, and believable.
Fortunately, there are steps that we can take to move us in that direction.
A significant internal benefit to adopting an explicit numerical objective is that it would help communication within the Committee.
<START>At a minimum, knowing each other’s inflation objectives would help us understand when we disagree, whether the disagreement concerns our objectives or the means of achieving those objectives.<END>
Externally, greater specificity could help us anchor the public’s inflation expectations.
<START>In our current environment, with inflation low and credibility high, I don’t see the external benefits as being especially large.<END>
However, history does have a way of repeating itself.
<START>If we had to face conditions like those of the 1930s or the 1970s again, having an established practice of achieving explicit inflation objectives could prove helpful, and it could be a potent insurance policy.<END>
So the benefits of having an explicit numerical objective will be significantly greater during those periods of extreme inflationary or deflationary pressures than they are today.
Of course, as others have indicated, an explicit numerical objective has potential costs.
We might want to deviate from our objective for good reason but feel constrained from doing so.
October 24-25, 2006156 of 203Here I’m encouraged by the experiences of other foreign central banks, which suggest that flexibility is available.
<START>There is also the potential loss of credibility from not achieving the objective when we should be achieving it, but that is a cost that I think we should dedicate ourselves not to incur.<END>
Our challenge is to construct a framework in which we have the flexibility to make small deviations from a numerical objective
—but not large and persistent ones.
Two other potential costs matter to me.
First, I want to pursue this option within the mandate that we have from the Congress today.
I’m not sure that inviting new legislation would prove, on balance, to be constructive.
Second, as we explore our options for jointly establishing an explicit numerical objective, I would like to see the independent contributions of individual Committee members preserved.
<START>Turning to Vincent’s question about how we should choose the inflation objective, I prefer, as I said earlier, ultimately to arrive at the objective by a Committee vote rather than by establishing individual objectives.<END>
<START>I think the public would be least confused by a simple statement from the Committee that says its operating definition of “price stability” is X percent, with a range, and that specifies the particular index we’re using and the time horizon by which we’re trying to achieve the objective.<END>
In other words, this approach would be the most understandable.
In choosing the X percent with the range and the time horizon, we’ll have to be sure that we achieve the tests of achievability and believability.
We might benefit from having a period during which the public can get more comfortable with this option.
An expression that I like is “make haste slowly.” One step for getting us started would be to survey the Committee members about their working definitions of “price stability” and to publish the distribution along with our semiannual economic projections.
Obviously, a potential pitfall of this practice, as others have mentioned, is that eventually people are going to know that we’re doing this and October 24-25, 2006157 of 203they’re going to want to know our specific individual objectives.
So as we move forward with that practice, we’re going to have to be aware of that.
Turning to Vincent’s third question
—“Will quantification serve as a new influence in setting policy?”
—I think that we can expect that having an explicit numerical objective could change policy setting in ways that we can’t foresee.
But I can also see some intentional changes to the policy-setting process.
<START>First and foremost, being more explicit about our inflation objective will shift the time horizon of our analysis and our discussions at our meetings into the future a couple of years, which I think is a good thing.<END>
<START>A shift in the focus on the medium term would lead us to spend less time talking about where we are relative to the short-term Greenbook baseline and to spend more time talking about whether we agree or disagree about issues like productivity trends, the transmission mechanism, the cost of inflation, inflation measurement, and so on.<END>
These are now regarded as special topics, but I think they would become more normal fare under a new regime.
I like Governor Mishkin’s and President Plosser’s suggestion to improve the Monetary Policy Report to the Congress and to the public.
Once we start to discuss these longer-term trends, they could be included in the report, and their inclusion would make the report more beneficial.
The positions I’ve taken on these specific questions are positions that I had before I walked into this room, but I recognize that my views are evolving as I’m listening to some of my colleagues’ comments on these issues.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll start at the top of the sheet but then jump around.
So the answer to the first question is “yes”
—I do think that an explicit numerical specification of price stability would be helpful and that the FOMC should move toward such a October 24-25, 2006158 of 203specification.
I always thought this step was a close call in terms of its costs and benefits.
There have been a couple of developments since January ’05, when we last discussed the topic, that have led me to change my position to favor this step.
First, we’ve been through two more episodes
—in the spring of ’05 and the spring of ’06
—when a surge in actual inflation raised questions in financial markets about our intentions and expectations.
In both cases, higher inflation expectations did not persist.
<START>But making our long-term intentions clearer should reduce the risk that temporarily heightened inflation pressures result in increases in expectations that become more permanent and more costly to reverse.<END>
A couple of studies in the past two years have tended to support the hypothesis that a numerical specification might help tie down expectations at least a little within the financial markets.
Second, I think a lack of clarity on this question has increasingly muddied discussions in this Committee and communication with the public.
<START>Within the Committee, it has sometimes been difficult to discern whether differing viewpoints reflect diverse perceptions of the course of inflation and economic growth or of the desirable end point or path for inflation.<END>
The public does not know whether the comfort zones enunciated by various Committee members reflect the views of the Committee or only those of the individuals.
Coming to an agreement on an end point and on the role that end point should play in policy and announcing that agreement should help our discussions and enhance the public’s understanding of our intentions.
Having said that, I think we need to recognize that any explicit inflation specification is likely to exert some pull on policy.
It will not simply institutionalize the Volcker or Greenspan policy regimes, as is sometimes said.
It cannot help but to increase the Committee’s focus on particular numerical outcomes and projections for inflation.
<START>That’s good to the extent that it reduces the odds on a repeat of the cumulative errors of the 1970s, but it also may make it more October 24-25, 2006159 of 203difficult for the Committee to take actions that might be perceived at the time as inconsistent with achieving price stability in the next few years but that were still in the public interest<END>
—say, by countering financial distress, as in 1998, or by moving very, very aggressively against economic weakness, as in 2001, when core inflation was actually rising.
A risk-management approach to policy may well call for aiming away from the price stability objective from time to time.
I continue to believe that monetary policy over the past twenty-five years has been exemplary.
We should be very cautious in tinkering with its design.
Whatever we do must be clearly consistent with the dual mandate and be perceived as such.
This is important for democratic legitimacy.
The Federal Reserve Act includes maximum employment equally with price stability.
I recognize and have often used the principle that price stability enhances maximum employment.
But I also note that proposals introduced in the Congress over the past two decades to make price stability our primary objective have not had support, and they’ve gotten nowhere.
<START>I’m encouraged by the fact that Chairman Bernanke in his hearings didn’t meet too much opposition [laughter] but I think we need to recognize that there have been attempts to change our mandate and there has been no congressional support for those attempts.<END>
I think the last attempt was about ten years ago.
The dual mandate is also good economics.
<START>Fluctuations around potential impede planning and long-term saving and investment decisions, just as do fluctuations around price stability.<END>
<START>We need to take explicit account of these costs as we pursue our price stability objective, and this implies that we should tolerate deviations from price stability on occasion and that the time path to price stability should depend on the circumstances, including the likely costs in lost output along with the deviations from price stability.<END>
Support for the Federal Reserve in the population and among its elected representatives has never been October 24-25, 2006160 of 203higher, certainly never higher in my thirty-seven years at this institution.
That support flows from the results of the past twenty-five years and from confidence that we know what we’re doing and will behave sensibly.
This was the second type of credibility that Chairman Bernanke talked about at the last meeting.
<START>We should not depend on any announcement to have a substantial immediate effect on inflation expectations, where they count most for economic performance.<END>
Professional economic forecasters would have a number to coordinate on, and they probably will.
It may help tie down expectations in financial markets, but even in financial markets, the effects are likely to be small.
Long-run inflation expectations are already well anchored in the United States.
Spreads over indexed debt move around quite a bit, even in inflation-targeting countries.
For example, as we saw in the briefing on Monday, inflation compensation has fallen since July the same amount in Canada that it has in the United States.
As the staff memo on price dynamics noted, the data do not support an inference that such an announcement per se would affect wage-setting and price-setting behavior.
Such influences would come because our behavior and the economic results would change.
These caveats and concerns lead me to favor a numerical definition of price stability without an explicit time dimension rather than an inflation target that we would expect to achieve in a defined time frame.
I have in mind something along the lines of Chairman Bernanke’s suggestion in St. Louis three years ago
<START>—the long-run average inflation rate we will be seeking in order to meet the price stability mandate in our act.<END>
We would not expect to achieve this objective year by year or even necessarily on a two-year-ahead projection.
That would depend on the circumstances.
My expectation, or maybe it’s a hope, be that the benefits of such a formulation would exceed its costs
<START>would—that without greatly impeding the type of flexible October 24-25, 2006161 of 203policymaking that has so benefited the economic performance since 1980, it would help a little to tie down expectations, aid the public in making its plans, clarify internal and external communication, and make it more difficult for future FOMCs, when all of us have retired, to allow inflation to drift higher.<END>
I don’t have well-defined views on the exact specification of this definition
—the index, its level, point or range, whether it should be expressed in terms of total or core
<START>—but these specifications will be critical in judging the eventual likely balance of costs and benefits.<END>
If we go down this route, we’ll have a lot of work to do.
Besides the details of the specification, it’s vitally important that the Committee think through very carefully the role that any definition of price stability would play in policy formulation and that we convey our expectations to the public.
It would have implications for all our modes of communication as well as for the inputs to policymaking and would call for considerable communication to the Congress and the public to prepare the way.
Understanding what we’re doing and explaining it to the public in turn requires that the Committee come to a decision on the definition and the way it will be treated in policymaking.
So I favor the “jointly” arm of Vincent’s chart.
I can see some of the suggestions of aggregating the views of individual policymakers as a possible way station, but I’m concerned that such aggregation will raise as many questions as it answers.
If we go to a numerical definition of price stability, we should be prepared to explain and justify it fully, and that requires the Committee to consider those implications explicitly.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
First Vice President Barron.
MR.
BARRON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In light of the hour and the fact that many of my more learned colleagues have yet to speak, I’ll try to be brief.
<START>My comments come from one October 24-25, 2006162 of 203who has been with the Federal Reserve System for some thirty-nine years, has been seated on the sidelines of this Committee for fifteen years, and has observed the evolution of communications and the critical importance of transparency.<END>
I’d like to make two observations.
<START>First, if the goal of adopting an explicit target is to institutionalize credibility, then this should not be a big concern now.<END>
<START>The Committee has credibility, and the recent market evidence on low market volatility and contained inflation expectations is clearly consistent with the conclusion<END>
—the recent Wall Street Journal article notwithstanding
—that this Committee has credibility.
Over the long run, however, there are some looming fiscal issues
—specifically, the projected growth of nondiscretionary spending
—that make the conduct of monetary policy very difficult.
<START>From this perspective, an explicit target may provide additional reassurance to the market that the Committee can pursue its low-inflation objectives with some independence from the pressure to accommodate fiscal deficits.<END>
Second, as many have noted, to move to an explicit numerical target raises a number of both practical and political issues.
These issues concern not only the specifics of the target, the choice of the time horizon, and the methods employed to ensure transparency and accountability but also the nature of the negotiations to ensure congressional acceptance and support.
The System’s mandate has been modified several times, most recently in December 2000.
<START>If, and I would emphasize “if,” the Congress required or even suggested additional legislation, I believe the risks and potential costs of opening up the Federal Reserve Act might be great.<END>
For example, the Committee might also get numerical targets for employment or even specific targets for housing or other sectors that might be of special interest to individual members of the Congress.
<START>My bottom line is that, given the risks, I take some comfort in the current vagueness of the wording of the Federal October 24-25, 2006163 of 203Reserve Act as it relates to monetary policy objectives and the way it has been interpreted over the past many years.<END>
My sense is that the Committee may well be close to having the right balance with regard to communicating its objectives and ensuring credibility.
Although, clearly, the Congress can change our mandate any time, I would urge caution in providing the impetus for such change until we have thought long and hard about the costs and benefits of that change.
Having said all that, I find a great deal of comfort in Governor Mishkin’s approach at gradualism.
<START>I would certainly be comfortable with that approach if we could avoid nailing, so to speak, a tablet to the halls of the Congress saying, “This is going to be our explicit target.” I think to do so would simply lure them into a fight that I wouldn’t want to take on at this time.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, in preparing for today’s comments, I found it interesting and somewhat instructive to look back to similar discussions that this Committee has had in the past.
This includes not just our more recent ones but an extended debate that took place in July 1996.
I can confirm, therefore, that we have a deliberative process.
<START>[Laughter] Looking back over how my own views have evolved, I am as convinced now as before about the importance of an unqualified commitment to price stability as the underpinning of our monetary policy.<END>
<START>I have long had an interest in how an inflation-targeting approach to policy might help us, and that’s where I think it gets interesting because I think the devil is in the details, if you will.<END>
<START>As the staff and I have tried to work through some of the details we would have to confront in implementing such an approach, I have become somewhat less enamored than I was about the usefulness of establishing an explicit numerical inflation objective.<END>
I am not necessarily opposed to such a October 24-25, 2006164 of 203step, and if we were to go there, I’m more drawn to Governor Mishkin’s approach than to others I’ve heard.
<START>But I do have concerns about the value of doing so, as well as how such a decision would be implemented and how it might alter the decisionmaking process and our discussions within this meeting<END>
—the so-called unintended consequences of moving along this line.
Let me address these points by framing my comments according to the questions in Vince’s memo.
First, is it helpful?
As I understand the literature on central bank transparency and credibility, the value of establishing an explicit numerical definition of price stability comes from anchoring the public’s inflation expectations and reducing the volatility of these expectations.
In this regard, I have been struck by how well anchored inflation expectations have been in the current tightening cycle here in the United States.
This is in contrast, I realize, to some historical contexts, but the fact of the matter is that they have remained quite anchored.
How much further improvement would come from the adoption of an explicit target at this point, I question.
Would it be meaningful?
I’m not so sure.
<START>Another argument is that adopting an explicit numerical objective would make it more difficult for future Committees to backslide on their commitment to price stability.<END>
I find this argument somewhat weak.
Short of a change to the Federal Reserve Act, future Committees would not be bound, nor would they feel bound, to actions taken by this Committee.
I can see someone pushing forward at some time, in terms of the dual mandate, an issue relative to stable output as becoming a new important element.
Moreover, my reading of the literature comparing the performance of inflation-targeting and non-inflation-targeting countries suggests that there is very little measurable difference in performance to this point.
<START>In the absence of a clear benefit of establishing an explicit numerical objective, we also need to look at its costs.<END>
One possible cost is the constraint that might be placed on short-run October 24-25, 2006165 of 203policy decisions.
In this regard, I wonder how an explicit numerical objective might have altered our response to the weakening economy in 2001, which Governor Kohn mentioned.
Since core inflation measures tend to lag output, core inflation was still rising as we began to reduce rates.
Would we have been as able to cut rates as readily if we had established an explicit numerical objective?
Perhaps yes, perhaps no.
How should the objective be chosen?
Turning to the question of choosing an explicit numerical objective, I see a host of procedural and logistical issues.
As to procedure, I feel strongly that any decision should reflect unanimity on the part of the Committee;
otherwise, the credibility of such a decision is immediately called into question.
<START>Establishing unanimity about the details of an objective could prove difficult.<END>
For example, I would not be comfortable with using the core PCE deflator exclusively in defining a measure of price stability.
Theoretically, PCE is generally judged superior to the CPI because chain weighting avoids the substitution bias in the CPI.
In another important dimension, however, the case for the PCE is much weaker.
Perhaps most notably, the core PCE deflator is subject to regular and sometimes significant revisions.
The revisions to PCE over the past six years have not been trivial;
moreover, they have all been in the same direction.
By underestimating inflationary pressures during this period, core PCE sent misleading signals about those pressures.
Moreover, the CPI plays a much larger role in the institutional fabric of this economy.
<START>I find it interesting that so few members of the financial community produce forecasts of PCE inflation, even as they view it as the Fed’s preferred measure.<END>
More important, TIPS-derived measures of inflation expectations are based on the CPI.
Thus, to line up market inflation expectations with the PCE we are forced to go through the sort of exercise that is reported in the current Bluebook.
I wonder how accurate or useful such a translation might be over an extended time.
Consequently, if we were to go the October 24-25, 2006166 of 203route of establishing an explicit numerical objective, I would advocate not tying ourselves exclusively, for example, to the PCE.
As to whether an explicit or implicit approach is preferable, I would lean toward an explicit approach of surveying members on their long-run objectives.
I feel this approach would be more transparent and efficient than expanding the horizon of central tendency forecasts.
How would an objective influence policy setting?
I believe there would be effects, but gauging these effects would be difficult without a more thorough and detailed understanding of how the objective would be implemented.
If we decide to go in this direction, it will be important to maintain the diversity and independence of views expressed by the Committee members, both in our deliberations here and in our interactions with the public.
Finally, if we explore a form of price-targeting or inflation-targeting, we should hold off on an ultimate decision until we have a thorough understanding of the details of such a regime and their implications for the policy process within the Committee.
Once again, just as reinforcement, I prefer going forward along the lines that Governor Mishkin outlined for us.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The last time we discussed an explicit numerical objective in an organized way I said something to the effect that I thought one reason to have one would be to formalize and institutionalize what I thought the Committee had largely been doing over the past ten or fifteen years.
I continue to feel that way, and in that sense doing it is evolutionary along the lines that some other people have described.
But evolutionary is not insignificant, and I do think this would make some significant changes, which I believe would be October 24-25, 2006167 of 203helpful.
We have already touched on some of the communication and accountability issues, and I certainly share the views that this would be positive with regard to those matters.
<START>Another important related consideration is that it’s a potentially effective way of addressing the issue of time inconsistency.<END>
I do think it’s very important that we tie our short-run decisions to our long-run objective.
I don’t think there is much disagreement about our long-run objective.
Stated generally, that is to achieve and maintain price stability.
I’m eager to see that we put in place some framework
—this is not the only framework that one can conceive
—that accomplishes that objective.
So I think that this would be both helpful and important and that it would be a new influence in policy setting.
That’s its intent.
It does raise, as others have already commented, a number of interesting intellectual issues having to do with whether to have a range or a point estimate, over what time horizon we are trying to achieve the objective, what it all means for how the Committee is going to change the federal funds rate over time, and so on and so forth.
I think those questions are potentially very important.
<START>By the way, just so I can preserve some degree of freedom, let me state explicitly that I’m not persuaded at the moment that a range of 1 to 2 percent is the appropriate target for us, even though that range has been in the public domain for a while.<END>
Finally, how should the Committee choose the inflation objective?
At the end of the day, I think it should be a Committee decision.
But I can see getting there in a more evolutionary manner, and I would associate myself with many of Governor Mishkin’s suggestions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’ll address the major questions posed in Vincent’s memo in the order presented.
First, I support the enunciation of a long-run numerical inflation objective.
My views on the benefits and costs of enunciating publicly such an objective October 24-25, 2006168 of 203have changed very little since we discussed this topic in January 2005.
Beginning with the benefits, I believe a numerical objective would focus our internal policy deliberations and improve their coherence, particularly if the Committee does agree on a common objective.
A numerical objective appropriately communicated could also improve the public’s understanding of our goals and the strategies for attaining them, thereby helping to align market perceptions with those of the Committee.
<START>Solid anchoring of the public’s inflation expectations could aid us in avoiding deflation in the vicinity of the zero bound on interest rates and could reduce the potential for destabilizing inflation scares following adverse supply shocks, thus enhancing the scope for monetary policy to respond to their real effects.<END>
<START>Finally, the public enunciation of the long-run inflation objective would enhance accountability and transparency in a way that I think is appropriate.<END>
It’s a desirable goal in a democracy.
Although I do perceive there to be net benefits from enunciating a numerical objective, I do not think these gains are enormous relative to the status quo.
<START>The public already has a reasonably good idea of the Committee’s inflation preferences, and inflation expectations are now pretty well, if not perfectly, anchored.<END>
<START>Moreover, the evidence, as I read it, suggests that a central bank’s credibility on inflation depends more on its actual record of performance than on its utterances about its objectives.<END>
<START>So no dramatic improvement in the sacrifice ratio seems likely.<END>
<START>Interestingly, a recent survey that several of you have referred to, and I’m assuming most people have seen, by our former colleague Larry Meyer finds that only a minority of the respondents favored the Committee’s adoption of a numerical inflation objective.<END>
Market participants appear far more interested in improved communication concerning our assessment of the near-term outlook and prospects for monetary policy, and that suggests that as we go October 24-25, 2006169 of 203forward we should place considerable emphasis, as Governor Mishkin emphasized, on enhancing our forecasts in the context of the Monetary Policy Report.
<START>The enunciation of a numerical inflation objective could have costs as well as benefits.<END>
My main worry is the potential for de-emphasis on the other part of our mandate, namely maximum sustainable employment.
Such a de-emphasis could occur in the minds of the public, and I could easily see how it could affect our own deliberations.
I think the current situation provides a case in point.
If the structural Phillips curve has indeed become as flat as FRB/US estimates, an optimal policy for lowering inflation to target brings it down exceptionally slowly when equal weights are placed on the inflation and the output gaps in the loss function.
You can see that in the Bluebook simulations.
<START>With the public focused on a numerical inflation objective, however, it is naturally tempting to seek more rapid convergence to a target.<END>
<START>I think we feel uncomfortable with the paths that we see in the Bluebook, and it would be easy to effectively down-weight our emphasis on the employment objective.<END>
Interestingly, almost half of the respondents to Meyer’s survey believe that the enunciation of a numerical inflation objective would impair the FOMC’s ability to meet its maximum employment objective.
Therefore, enunciation of a numerical inflation goal, in my view, must occur in the context of a clear statement concerning our commitment to the dual objectives.
<START>In this regard, I remain attracted to our Chairman’s 2003 suggestion that we state the target inflation rate as a long-run objective only and emphasize<END>
—again, to paraphrase our Chairman
<START>—that in deciding how quickly to move toward the long-run inflation objective, the FOMC will always take into account the implications for near-term economic and financial stability.<END>
Consideration of the horizon issue is mentioned in the other question section of Vincent’s memo, and I, for one, take this issue to be crucial and October 24-25, 2006170 of 203would be unable to support a numerical objective unless the horizon can be long enough and flexible enough to respond appropriately to employment considerations.
Now, I’d like to turn to the second major question, which deals with governance in essence.
Will the inflation objective be chosen by the Committee members or by the meeting participants, and will it be chosen as a group decision or by summarizing our individual views?
I think there are enormous advantages to reaching a joint Committee decision.
<START>This approach would provide the clearest focus in our policy deliberations and Committee communications, and it would probably work best in anchoring inflation expectations.<END>
<START>It would also provide a well-defined standard against which we could be held accountable.<END>
However, I, too, recognize that it is probably wise to move in this direction cautiously.
I would certainly support, as a first step, Governor Mishkin’s proposal to report a consensus of responses to an annual survey concerning long-run numerical inflation objectives of the participants.
This approach would be a measured stance, more measured than a Committee vote, and I think it would be less likely to be divisive within the Committee and vis-à-vis the Congress.
<START>Such a survey respects the possible diversity within the Committee, and the Congress might be less likely to object to the Committee participants’ stating their individual interpretations of the monetary policy mandate than to the formal adoption of an inflation objective.<END>
Of course, choosing to use a survey now would not preclude us from voting as a Committee on a single objective later on.
We could, as an alternative, communicate the Committee’s long-run inflation objective through lengthening the horizon of our inflation forecasts.
<START>Such an approach, however, has significant disadvantages in my view relative to a straightforward survey of opinions.<END>
Consider the current situation.
<START>If the extended Greenbook forecast is accurate, adding just a year or two to the forecast we prepare for the semiannual Monetary Policy Report would not work.<END>
<START>In fact, to October 24-25, 2006171 of 203convey our implicit inflation objectives, if we accept the optimal policy path in the Bluebook, we might have to add five years or more to those forecasts.<END>
<START>Moreover, if we extend the inflation forecast, we will need to extend also forecasts, as Governor Mishkin noted, of real GDP and the unemployment rate, and some members of the public and the Congress could misinterpret these estimates as the Committee’s goals for these variables;<END>
<START>at a minimum, such estimates could lead to unproductive discussions about what the correct estimates of those key concepts are.<END>
That is an exercise I would not relish.
Finally, on the question of whether policy settings will be affected by a long-run inflation objective.
In some sense, the answer has to be “yes.” For example, I argued that the benefit of having an inflation objective is that it would help to anchor public expectations of policy, and if it did, it would affect bond rates and other financial variables and their responses, presumably in constructive ways, and would therefore feed back onto policy.
But the real issue is this:
Will a publicly announced inflation objective affect the weights that we put on the elements of our dual mandate?
Will it cause us to respond more strongly to inflation and less strongly to employment?
As I said before, I am concerned that this could happen, if only inadvertently.
If we go this route, I myself would make every effort to prevent such a distortion to the weights that I use in analyzing policy decisions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you know, since we’ve started talking about this issue, I’ve been undecided
—“open-minded” is perhaps another way to say it.
Wearing my supervisor’s hat, I see that we’ve been talking to players in the markets about how important transparency is to the effective functioning of financial markets and to financial transactions.
So it’s hard for me to give a rationale for why the central bank is not more transparent.
Being part October 24-25, 2006172 of 203of a democracy means that for us as a central bank
—especially since we weren’t directly elected by the citizens
—transparency is very important.
However, the unintended consequences of what setting a goal would mean have always held me back.
That’s why I support the process that has been laid out here.
We really do need to take the time to think through all the consequences and, as best we can, identify some possible unintended consequences.
So the evolutionary approach
—let’s look at it all together before we decide
—I very strongly endorse because, at the end of the day, our credibility is paramount
—it is something that we have to cherish as much as we possibly can.
I also want to think a little more about the dual mandate issue as we go forward.
I tend to believe that having a more explicit target and continuing to achieve low and consistent inflation will, in effect, support and encourage growth and full employment.
So the issue may be one of communicating that relationship.
I really feel strongly about this.
I have no empirical basis but just fifteen years as a corporate CFO.
One disconnect that you have as a CFO in the corporate world is that you live in a world of nominal, not real, rates of growth.
You worry about growth of earnings per share, and you want to know what your top-line revenue is going to do, so you think about prices and output.
<START>Having a nominal anchor for inflation would actually support corporate decisionmaking, give people better discipline about pricing power versus riding the wave of inflation, alert them when inflation is below target, and make them understand that this could be a short-run downturn in top-line revenue growth.<END>
When I think back to the ’80s, a lot of companies thought top-line growth was stupendous, and it took their eyes away from really working and operating efficiently.
So I think that having a nominal anchor would actually enhance the real-world tie between our role as the central bank and corporation decision processes.
<START>October 24-25, 2006173 of 203Again putting on my supervisory hat, I think that one of the critical things as we state this objective is that we clearly say how financial stability fits in.<END>
<START>We’ve been talking about central banks moving more and more to inflation targeting, but they have also been focusing more and more on financial stability and the role of the central bank in financial stability.<END>
That is one of the implementation issues we need to think through.
<START>What is the framework in which we will look at financial stability, and where might it conflict with our price objectives and inflation objectives?<END>
Regarding how we would choose an inflation objective, I am very leery of one of the proposals in the staff memo to use longer-term forecasts.
<START>I agree with Governor Mishkin that we can improve the Monetary Policy Report, but making longer forecasts is fraught with a lot of risk, and I don’t really see there’s much benefit to it.<END>
After all, our objective is not to be the best forecasters in the world.
It’s to control inflation.
So I don’t think it adds a whole lot of value.
As President Yellen said, everybody will be asking, “What are the underlying assumptions?” It will get us sidetracked away from our overall objectives.
I prefer the alternative in the staff memo that the way forward is what we did years ago when we took the rates of growth and money supply, and we just surveyed all of us.
Maybe along the lines suggested a bit earlier, we just say, “Here is the range of price objectives.” Just announcing a long-term forecast doesn’t clearly say what the objective is.
If we want to set an objective, let’s set an objective and not just give a long-run forecast.
Another part of setting an objective is spending a lot of time thinking about the time frame over which we are going to achieve it.
Saying that this is our long-run objective is one thing.
It’s very different to say how quickly we’re going to return to the goal when we move away from that goal.
<START>In the discussion around the table yesterday, many of us said that inflation, October 24-25, 2006174 of 203even in the forecast, is running a bit higher than our comfort zone.<END>
We know we’ve been above it for a couple of years, but with this forecast we’ll be above our comfort zones for five years.
In effect, having an objective
—and knowing what each other’s objectives are
—would have changed the discussion we had around the table.
If we really believe that we’re above our comfort zone, then how can we make the decisions we’re making?
What is the path?
That would have implications for the staff.
If we really want to hit an objective, strategy, as President Plosser said, is the real issue.
How do you execute?
We can all set great goals, but it’s execution that matters.
A nominal objective would force the staff to spend a lot more resources in talking about the path of policy and the way we would respond to variations around that path.
That perhaps could actually improve decisionmaking.
<START>Finally, getting back to the transparency issue, I think an explicit objective would put good governance around us, particularly in the difficult times when we are varying from our objectives, because we would have to talk about the tradeoffs we have with our dual mandates or financial stability concerns or whatever is creating a long-run deviation from that path.<END>
So I come back to my thought that the effort to look at this is worthwhile, but I really encourage us to think about all the consequences as we go forward.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me frame my remarks around the relevant constituencies, trying not to avoid answering the hard questions.
The prism through which I think about this is, What’s the political acceptance for what we’re trying to do?
What’s the market acceptance and what’s the policy acceptance for what we are trying to do?
As I think about the three issues and weigh the costs and benefits, I find the costs of each are easy to elaborate in great detail.
The benefits appear to me to be very real but hard to pin October 24-25, 2006175 of 203down with confidence as to both when we would achieve those benefits and how they would accrue to the credibility of this institution.
I am most in accord with President Yellen’s description, which is that there may well be net benefits to going down this path but the costs are much easier to put our hands around.
We’re approaching this discussion through the prism of inflation targeting, which is really the elephant in the discussion.
In some ways, I dare say it made our previous discussion tough because we were tiptoeing around the core inflation-targeting question.
Inflation targeting has taken a life of its own in academia, in the capital markets, and in the political environment.
<START>Although inflation targeting is a proper framework for the discussion here, it is a very dangerous way in which to approach our public discussion.<END>
Let me discuss that point in a little detail.
Inflation targeting, certainly on Capitol Hill and to many market participants, suggests that some mechanical exogenous force will be an absolute constraint on the FOMC’s actions.
<START>That’s not the way most people here today have talked about inflation objectives, but it does taint the discussion in our relevant constituencies outside the building, and we have to be very much aware of that fact.<END>
It strikes me that, once we’ve figured out more or less our own path to making an institutional decision on this, we should be discussing it more broadly outside the institution as a continuation and manifestation of what the Fed has long done.
<START>Instead of using words like “inflation targeting” outside the institution, we should use words like “price stability.” Talking about this as the next generation and the formalization of the comfort-zone language, which either by design or by practice has marked many of our discussions in the past year, is a much more useful way for us to make meaningful progress in Washington and in the capital markets.<END>
October 24-25, 2006176 of 203You saw from Larry Meyer’s survey that there was, I think, a decided tone of “Hey, we just want to know what the right answer is.
Tell us what you guys are going to do next.
We just want data that give us the answer because then we can put them into our Excel spreadsheets and life will be grand.” [Laughter] I think that’s a trap that we do not want to fall into.
What we want to be doing, rather than generally trying to provide them with greater clarity than we can provide about what our decisions are going to be, is to give them better information on what we’re using to make decisions.
<START>I fear that, if we announce an inflation target per se, and provide some specificity about that announcement, we will have engendered credibility questions that we will need to answer.<END>
In the most recent cycle of our interest rate decisions, very few of us, I think, have somehow done things differently if an inflation-targeting regime had been in place.
would My own sense is that we can’t believe that we need to hamstring ourselves with such an exogenous force.
At the other extreme, we don’t want to go down this path if we say inflation targeting doesn’t change our flexibility at all.
So the relevant question is, what does this do to our flexibility?
If the answer is that it doesn’t constrain our flexibility at all, then it is really unwise because of all those costs that we’ve talked about.
If the answer to that question is that it does constrain our flexibility significantly, then we have a huge problem in all our constituencies.
So we end up having to admit, as we go down this path, that it does somewhat constrain our flexibility but saying that the FOMC is as prepared as ever to respond to real market developments with respect to employment, output, and financial crises.
So where does that put us?
Again, the debate should be framed as a continuation of what we’ve long done.
After we announce our conclusions from these discussions, at some point we would need to reject the straw man of what inflation targeting has become.
<START>If an interrogator on October 24-25, 2006177 of 203Capitol Hill or in the capital markets says, “This is the goal, this is the number, and you will get inflation down to that goal within X number of years,” the response has to be “no.” That is, that’s not how we’re thinking about the next generation of transparency.<END>
Regarding an incremental approach to getting from where we are to where we want to be, I would begin, once we’re ready to go prime time with our announcement, by avoiding the adoption of inflation targeting per se and by letting that straw man be put out there and shooting it down to suggest that’s not where we are.
My next measure would be to accelerate the timing of existing information, by which I would reference the minutes, the lag in the forecast, and the generation of our central tendency.
Then I’d add frequency.
I think the idea of going from a semiannual to a quarterly presentation of our information, as Governor Mishkin suggested, would be next in the evolution of being more transparent to the markets about what we mean by “price stability.” Then I would consider adding robustness to the data provided
—that is, what data sets that are not in the public realm and that we use for our own decisionmaking could be helpful?
<START>Finally, looking at how that information has proceeded along this path of transparency, we then ask ourselves whether we need to have a formal vote on the big question that Vincent laid out for us or whether a vote is unnecessary because we’ve already proceeded so far down the path that we’ve ended up with a rather, though not totally, explicit definition of what price stability means.<END>
As a final comment
—we’ve discussed around this table whether this decision is an individual or a collective one.
In my judgment, a consensus decision is a good one.
But I don’t think we should fool ourselves.
Federal Reserve policy has been personalized, and no matter what we do, it will continue to be personalized in the form of the Chairman.
What the markets and the Congress will be most interested in is, “Well, I hear that’s the central tendency view of October 24-25, 2006178 of 203the FOMC.
What’s your view?” I want to make sure as we go through this process that, because we know that questions will be asked of the Chairman, we haven’t constrained his flexibility.
He must dutifully report perhaps what our consensus views are, but we shouldn’t let there be any ambiguity about what are our views and what are his views.
To the extent that there’s a difference, perhaps he is obligated to describe that.
But I wouldn’t want this process ending up by constraining the Chairman about what he could say because at the end of the day, whether all of us like it or not, it is the Chairman’s judgment, much more than any of ours, that influences our monetary policy.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Well, I don’t have any written material prepared, Mr. Chairman
—just notes I’ve taken, in part because I confess that before this conversation I was somewhat nonplussed about this issue.
That is, I’m a little perplexed about why we’re talking about it now, given what many commentators have said about where we are presently.
We have achieved significant credibility with the previous two Chairmen of the Committee and you and with the actions of the Committee.
I have been asking my own staff in Dallas to give me the compelling reason to do this now.
I’ve heard four compelling arguments, or arguments that at least purport to be compelling, during this discussion.
One is that it will improve the policymaking process and focus, although I think President Minehan properly expressed some skepticism as to whether it would actually change the focus, intensity, and process that we have had.
The second is that it would coordinate and better anchor public expectations.
<START>Governor Mishkin, with great enthusiasm by the way, made that argument.<END>
His remarks were not only insightful, but they were also charming.
[Laughter] The third is that it would plant our current legacy;
I think Governor October 24-25, 2006179 of 203Kohn touched on one of those sensitive nerves.
The fourth is a subset of the third point:
<START>the political risk of loss of a Chairman with willpower.<END>
I won’t go into all the aspects of this that I have concerns about.
But I don’t want to bat away President Moskow like a mosquito here.
I think he made an important point, which was summarized by President Pianalto, who drew on her ancestry with the term “festina lente,” which means “make haste slowly.” That’s why I would like to suggest in one dimension only
—rather than discuss what everybody else has already talked about:
the political dimension of what we are discussing.
<START>I see an explicit numerical target as extremely risky politically unless we manage it carefully, and I would just ask all of us to bear in mind what those political risks are.<END>
We do have a dual mandate.
I agree with those who have said that we do not want to run the risk of changing our current charge from the Congress.
As I listened to Governor Mishkin
<START>—again, I found his arguments remarkably brilliant and persuasive<END>
<START>—I was thinking to myself that I would love to be in a room with you and hear you use those brilliant arguments with, say, a Senate Majority Leader like Harry Reid, or a Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee like Charlie Rangel, or a Chairman of the Financial Services Committee like Barney Frank.<END>
<START>We have to be careful of the risk that either you then have them say, “That’s fine, but tell me what your employment target is because you have a dual mandate” or you end up negotiating an inflation target higher than you want it to be.<END>
I happen to know those three men very well.
I have appeared before them
—I think President Moskow and I along with President Yellen have probably appeared before the Congress more than anybody else at this table, individually and certainly collectively, and I can imagine that conversation taking place.
So I would proceed slowly, or hasten slowly, not just in the analytical aspect of this but also in explaining why we want to tie ourselves to this mast.
Is it that we are afraid of the siren October 24-25, 2006180 of 203call of the lack of discipline because we don’t think we can bring about the discipline that’s required?
We need to consider that there are political aspects of this in light of which we may not even want to open that Pandora’s Box.
That’s the only advice I would give or comment I would make at this juncture, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Oh, let me make one other comment.
I keep hearing about Larry Meyer’s poll.
We have a dean of a business school;
I’m an M.B.A.;
and we have other M.B.A.s around the table.
Uncertainty is the enemy of decisionmaking.
Of course they want more frequent forecasts.
Governor Kohn and I talked about this before.
They want a full frontal view.
I find a full frontal view most unbecoming.
[Laughter] Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Speak for yourself.
[Laughter] Governor Kroszner.
MR.
KROSZNER.
I don’t know why President Fisher pointed to me when he said that.
I do not endorse his approach.
[Laughter] Certainly, I think it’s appropriate
—since we’re getting very close to or maybe have passed our lunch, when we’ll talk about the 100th anniversary of the Fed
—that we are thinking about something that is really quite historic here, potentially a major change in the way that policymaking is undertaken at the Federal Reserve.
The memo that we have is excellent.
The discussion that we have had has been excellent.
Even if it has been a bit lengthy, these issues are important, and it takes time to make sure that our views are aired.
After all the views that have been aired, however, I can add little, so I’ll give just a very short indication of some of my thoughts, keying off what a lot of others have said.
The way that I think about the issue is that we have our dual mandate, and we should do everything thinking about how best to achieve our dual mandate of maximum employment growth consistent with low and stable inflation.
The question is, Does being more explicit about what “price stability” means help us to get to our objective better?
I think in many October 24-25, 2006181 of 203circumstances that it can.
People have brought up issues about whether or not it could interfere with that, and it’s very important that it not in any way be interpreted, either by the Committee members or the outside world, as being inconsistent with our ability to achieve that dual mandate.
<START>One concern that I brought up yesterday was that I don’t think we understand short-run or intermediate-run inflation dynamics very well.<END>
I want to make sure that we don’t overpromise.
When you look at the one example in the Bluebook simulations that gets inflation down to 1½ percent over quite a long period, you see that it would require us to move our policy rate up 100 to 125 basis points for the next year to two years.
That strikes me as a very different approach from what many people around the table would be willing to take, although perhaps if we did have an explicit 1½ percent goal, people would be willing to do that.
But it’s very, very important to make sure that we understand whether we think that’s the right path.
That is the consideration that President Yellen brought up yesterday.
There are a number of issues with those simulations, such as the foreign exchange movements and other things, that may make us uncomfortable with them.
If we don’t understand the path very well, it is very dangerous for us to be making even long-run commitments to something when we’re not quite sure how we can get to it.
We know that in the very long run we can get there.
But if it’s so long that we’re not achieving it in real time, that can actually undermine our credibility and make us appear less transparent rather than more transparent.
<START>So I just want to make sure that we work very hard to push our understanding of inflation dynamics and that we know how we can achieve the goal if we enunciate such a goal.<END>
As I said, in many, perhaps most, circumstances enunciating such a goal can be valuable, although taking a particular number at a particular horizon could be problematic.
<START>October 24-25, 2006182 of 203To get the main benefits and give guidance to the markets, we would want the goal to be a consensus decision rather than everyone’s having his or her own goal, which could result in less transparency and less credibility.<END>
I think it could affect the way that we undertake policy.
In some sense, if it doesn’t, then what’s the point of doing it?
It has to have some effect;
otherwise, it won’t be credible to the markets, and then it’s simply not worth the candle.
<START>As I said, in that context, we have to make sure that we understand inflation dynamics very well so that we can explain to the world what the consequences of the goal would be for maximum employment growth and the evolution of the economy.<END>
<START>Thus my main concern is that we don’t know enough about the short-run or intermediate-run inflation dynamics to feel comfortable with articulating a goal.<END>
We could articulate a goal in a general way
—as a range, say
—and not be tied down to a particular number that could be revised.
That would be helpful;
but in making all these decisions, we have to be very mindful about understanding how we can achieve the goal.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Lacker had a two-handed intervention.
MR.
LACKER.
With your indulgence, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to comment on the role of the dual mandate and sketch out how I’d like to see this discussion evolve.
I feel motivated to do this because this consideration has played a greater role in today’s discussion than I had anticipated
—this is just a byproduct of my own lack of foresight and intelligence, I think
—and also because I took swipes at the dual mandate earlier in my career on the Committee and was batted back by previous Vice Chairmen and others.
[Laughter] What I want to say first is that I sense a substantial convergence of views.
As demonstrated by Governor Kohn’s use of the best-contribute formulation, I think there’s convergence of the sense of what it means around here.
<START>(Governor Kohn’s statement, by the way, was outstanding, and I’d associate myself with October 24-25, 2006183 of 203all of it, top to bottom.) But I sense that some of our policy disagreements are on occasion interpreted as differences in views on the appropriate weights to place on employment and inflation in a policymaker welfare function or loss-minimization function.<END>
Casting it that way tempts one to view those weights as reflecting value judgments analogous, for example, to my preference for grits over eggs at this morning’s breakfast.
<START>I realize that what I’m about to say runs a great risk of seeming pedantic and academic, but I think it’s important.<END>
I’ll start provocatively by saying that I don’t care about output per se, and I don’t think any one of us does, and I don’t think any one of us cares about inflation per se.
We care about the welfare of the citizens of our country.
That’s an obvious point to make, but I’ll just remind you that the practice of viewing policymaking through the lens of the analytical device of a mathematical policymaker facing a loss function with weights on employment and inflation arose during the 1960s.
In contrast, policy analysis everywhere else in economics was grounded in models in which the consumer was actually mathematically present
—that is to say, the models treated explicitly the preferences of consumers and then crafted policies to maximize those in a framework in which you could explicitly calculate what consumer preferences were.
At the time, the state-of-the-art monetary policy framework did not include consumers explicitly;
these were reduced-form models
—you know, the Patinkin generation of models.
<START>Today, the state-of-the-art monetary models capture a rich array of inflation and output dynamics and do treat preferences of our citizens explicitly.<END>
<START>These models are capable of deriving optimal policy, and optimal policy so derived can be represented as the solution to a maximization problem by a policymaker with given weights.<END>
<START>But that, of course, is very different from thinking of those weights as stemming from non-economic value judgments about the utility value of employment and inflation.<END>
So, in principle, the weights that are most appropriate to use to represent October 24-25, 2006184 of 203policymaking can be scientifically investigated.
They can be analyzed through models at this level and through the data and can be compared regarding goodness of fit and other measures as well.
<START>The congressional mandate in the ’70s codified existing practice and encapsulated the notion that we’ve got weights and that we view ourselves as having a loss function regarding these two things when we really just have one loss function and that relates to our citizens’ welfare that we view ourselves as having a loss function regarding these two things when we really just have one loss function and that relates to our citizens’ welfare.<END>
I’d point out that surely we have heavily influenced the interpretation of those mandates.
You look at the act, and three objectives are there.
I think that we’ve helped induce people to call it a dual mandate by encouraging them to drop the moderate interest rate objective.
So, in principle, we could influence the evolution of popular interpretation and understanding of these other objectives as well.
<START>I’d also point out that the way the Congress codified the objectives was without weights, and so the act is not at all inconsistent with the state-of-the-art approach to monetary economics.<END>
I say this because I’d like to move us beyond the relatively sterile debates over whether my weight is higher or lower on inflation or output, and I hope that we can evolve in both our discussions about the dual mandate and our analytical approach to the use of it in meetings ahead.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
I’m tempted to say that I was hoping we would run out of time.
[Laughter] I’ll be very brief.
Let me just compliment Don and his subcommittee and the Chairman for how you’ve laid out the issues.
This decision is important to think through carefully, even if we quickly find a comfortable center of gravity.
It’s going to be consequential, I’m sure.
October 24-25, 2006185 of 203On the questions
—I’m changing them slightly.
Would an explicit, publicly disclosed, numerical definition of “price stability” be helpful?
Probably, but it depends on how we do it.
It depends on what else we do about the way we talk about our forecast, and it depends a lot on how we think through the implications of the way we make policy.
How will, how should, how would, how could the FOMC choose or choose to reveal an inflation objective?
Three broad options that are implicit or explicit in this memo are worth thinking through.
I’m sure that, if we choose to reveal publicly a quantitative definition of our view of long-term inflation, we have to do it as a decision of the Committee.
It’s hard for me to imagine how one could do that on the basis of some averaging of preferences, which would change with the composition of the Committee over time.
Much of what’s been said about the other two choices is right and sounds sensible.
Would the quantification of an inflation objective be a new influence?
Of course it would.
That has to be why it’s worth thinking through.
As Janet implied, thinking through what it would mean for our behavior is a critical part of this process.
I’m going to discuss the other questions very briefly and make just two points about process.
<START>First, when you look at the broad evidence, I think it is fair to say that the evidence is weak on the achievable credibility gains relative to what we’ve already achieved.<END>
I’m uncertain, of course, whether those gains come from actions over time or what you disclose about your regime, your objectives, your framework.
<START>The evidence is somewhat stronger against the concerns of the skeptics and the critics in that there’s little basis in the experience of other countries to justify the broad concerns exist<END>
<START>—that embracing the softer responsible variants of inflation targeting bring with them too much risk;<END>
that you lose flexibility to respond;
that you’re forced into suboptimal weights among your various objectives;
<START>that, for example, you are October 24-25, 2006186 of 203compromised in your capacity to respond to threats to financial stability.<END>
I’m not sure that’s right, though.
Of course, we’re not New Zealand, Norway, or Sweden.
We say that a lot.
But we should talk through what it is that makes us different.
How are we different, and how might that difference make us view the evidence?
In some sense the question we face is, Do the soft variants of the approach offer convincing credibility gains without significantly reducing the risks and concerns that have to accompany consideration of this objective?
That basic tradeoff is what is critical.
Second, how do ignorance and uncertainty about inflation dynamics, about the responsiveness of inflation to some of its traditional determinants, about the shape of the Phillips curve, and about inertia and persistence affect our choice of regime?
How does uncertainty about all the other dimensions of how monetary policy works and how we measure this affect our choice of regime?
<START>This uncertainty is critical to how we choose among alternative paths for bringing inflation back to target, how we choose among alternative horizons, and how we think about policy consistent with those different paths.<END>
All the variants of the regimes on the table, all of which are of the softer form, would still force us to be more explicit in public about where we are seeking to move inflation and over what horizon.
<START>I think we have to ask ourselves whether we can be confident about how compelling those arguments will be in public given the relative weakness of the analytical foundation that exists to help inform those choices.<END>
Even with a no horizon, a long horizon, or a variable horizon approach to the disclosed explicit inflation objective, you don’t avoid confronting the choice about your horizon or how you come up with an alternative horizon, and so forth.
I think that the dimension of ignorance and uncertainty we live with is inherent, and it is not going to change dramatically over time.
Thus it has to inform how we think through these broader options.
October 24-25, 2006187 of 203The third question is, how would alternative variants to the regime affect the dynamics around the policy setting?
As I said, and many others said, they will and must affect it.
You have to assume they will.
It’s prudent to assume they will.
It’s very important to think through those dynamics.
Would we really be comfortable
—even in a very long-run horizon, no horizon, or flexible horizon regime
<START>—producing a forecast that has inflation staying well above our target for very long periods of time?<END>
<START>I’m not sure that you wouldn’t want to assume that over time the Committee would be less comfortable with that and want to hope and declare as an objective that we move inflation down quicker over time.<END>
I don’t think analysis or evidence is going to help us think through those dynamics, but I don’t think we can assume them away.
I think they’re important.
I have two quick comments about process.
One is
—I’ll call it the Kroszner proposal, though he didn’t make it.
<START>[Laughter] I think we should spend more time, and Don should build into his time frame more in-depth discussion, on what we think we understand about the models that underpin our decisions and what’s in those models about inertia and all the fundamental determinants of inflation.<END>
We’ve had a lot of turnover in the Committee.
We discussed it once over lightly
—in August, I believe.
We should discuss it in more depth, at least to make sure we have a common understanding about what we’re working with and what the limitations and benefits are relative to the alternatives.
Two, I think it’s important not to get into the process discussion prematurely.
A lot of thoughtful, interesting ideas were put forth about intermediate steps toward some broad change in regime.
I don’t think it’s worth spending a lot of time on alternative variants of the intermediate steps until we’ve really thought through ultimately where we want to go.
If we spend time on and get enough depth about the merits of that choice and we October 24-25, 2006188 of 203find some consensus with which we’re comfortable, then we can go back and figure out how we want to get there.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
It’s been a very long morning.
I appreciate everyone’s patience in this long but very useful discussion.
Let me take just a couple of minutes.
I’m not going to try to respond to all the points that were raised.
I just want to make just a couple of observations.
There was a lot of discussion about how this would affect policy, and indeed, I think it would affect policy.
But, remember, this debate is about communication.
I think it’s very important that we communicate better.
<START>While our policy has been good, we have had difficulties<END>
—I certainly have
—in communicating with the public and the markets.
If we can find a more effective, clearer way to do that, I think the benefit would be significant.
Let me just say a couple of words
—and this goes somewhat against Tim’s comments
—about evolution.
Whatever we do, I would agree with several people around the table, be incremental and evolutionary for several reasons.
should First, we have to make sure that we understand what we’re doing.
We have to learn how to implement what it is we’re doing.
Second, we have to maintain continuity with the previous regime, not have any sharp changes in our policy or our perceptions.
Third, a transitionary, evolutionary approach will give us a chance to educate the public, educate the Congress, and get some reaction and feedback that will perhaps allow us to make corrections as necessary.
In addition, I think that our steps need to face two real constraints.
The first is that we do have a dual mandate
—that whatever we may say here, we have to persuade the Congress and the public that we will look at both parts of the mandate and that we will not reduce our interest in employment and output.
The second constraint is our institutional structure, the size of our October 24-25, 2006189 of 203Committee, and those features that the Bank of England, for example, have.
does not All those things have to be factored into our thinking.
Let me suggest a way one might think about proceeding that I think meets some of these concerns.
It might be useful, for example, for us at some point to clarify what we mean by the “comfort zone,” a term that is out there and is causing confusion.
I would prefer to do it collectively, but we can think about ways of doing that.
If we could confirm what the comfort zone is and what it means, I think that would be a step in the right direction.
In particular, I would argue that we should define the comfort zone as the range in which core inflation should remain most of the time.
Over the past ten years, it has remained between 1½ to 2 percent most of the time.
But all we would say about policy is that it should have some bias that will take us, in the long run, back toward that core range.
While not setting fixed horizons on the comfort zone, we need to exploit our projections and forecasts, which can describe to the public what we think the next two years will look like in terms of the paths of inflation and output.
I would associate myself with several people who have commented that perhaps the best thing we can do, even if we downplay the comfort zone or the target, is to provide more information to the public about our forecast, more-regular monetary policy reports, and considerably more information about our outlook and our approach.
Again, my preferred approach would be to provide some information about the comfort zone.
But for the public the big change would be the additional information we’re providing, which would address Meyer’s point about what the public is looking for.
When I make the speech describing this regime, I would go so far as to say
—and this is a little radical
—that the Federal Reserve is not adopting inflation targeting;
what we are doing is simply providing more information.
<START>We’re providing more information about where the Committee thinks it wants inflation to be on October 24-25, 2006190 of 203average over longer periods of time, and we’re providing extensive additional information about the forecast and our views about the economy.<END>
If we do it that way, we will probably avoid some of the pitfalls that have been mentioned.
Again, I want to thank everyone for terrific input and to note that this process will be ongoing.
We are in no hurry.
We should go on until we feel that we have a conclusion with which we are comfortable and that we’re all willing to support.
Let’s confirm that the date of the next meeting is Tuesday, December 12.
The meeting is adjourned.
Lunch is available next door.
Please bring your lunch back, and we’ll have a short presentation on the centennial while we’re having lunch.
Thank you so much.
END OF MEETING October 24-25, 2006191 of 203
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 170
