
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I agree with many of the rest of you that inflation risks rose over the intermeeting period, though I think I see a more limited rise than I sensed from some of the comments I have heard.<END>
Several factors do suggest higher inflation risk.
Stronger growth than expected has left resource utilization a little higher than we thought
—only a touch, I think, but still higher.
The core CPI and PCE data were disappointing
—were higher than anticipated.
That, however, did follow several months in which those data came in lower than we had expected.
And if you look at the Greenbook’s 2006 projection, it reverses a downward revision from last time.
That is not to say it is not worrisome, but we were revising down for a while, and now we have had an upward revision.
<START>I think the commodity price increases are hard to understand, especially outside the energy area, where you can think about supply disruptions.<END>
Both the energy prices and the commodity prices could feed through to a limited extent into headline inflation.
I think they do indicate, at the very least, that global demand has continued to be quite strong.
In that regard, they would add to global inflation risks.
The decline in the dollar is a bit worrisome.
The pass-through to import prices has been very, very small over recent decades.
But to the extent that the lower dollar is not passed through to import prices, it would be squeezing the profits of those people who are exporting to the United States, and I think, through either channel, this suggests at least a slight reduction in the competitive pressures on domestic producers
—not big, but a slight reduction.
We did have a small uptick in inflation expectations looked at through the markets or the Michigan survey.
However, those expectations are still in the range of recent years, and I can recall a number of May 10, 200660 of 120occasions post-Katrina and in the last few springs in which they have ticked up in similar situations and then come back down again, particularly after energy prices leveled out.
None of these signs of higher inflation are very significant in and of themselves or if they were taken one by one;
but taken together, they cannot be dismissed.
They do suggest at least a small rise in inflation expectations and a small rise in inflation risk that could start pushing up underlying inflation further.
<START>That said, the data we have received over the intermeeting period should give us a little more confidence that conditions are being put in place or are in train to limit these risks and to keep the upside risk limited.<END>
The trajectory of information over the intermeeting period, especially on consumption and housing, points to quite a bit of moderation of growth in the second quarter.
We are looking at 3-point-something, and the issue is what the point-something is;
it is not 4-point-something or 5-point-something.
Housing market information, I think, confirms that there is a slowdown in process that will restrain aggregate demand going forward.
Sales have bounced around a lot, but inventories have risen substantially by any measure.
That is going to be weighing on prices.
The price data are ambiguous and hard to read.
If you take a heroic leap and start seasonally adjusting the existing house prices on a month-by-month basis instead of a twelve-month basis, it looks as though they have been flattening out.
But we will get better data later.
If, indeed, prices are flattening out, we have not yet really seen that effect on consumption.
So in that sense, the tightening of policy and the flattening-out of housing prices are still in the pipeline.
Higher long-term interest rates:
<START>Some of that increase is an endogenous response to global growth and would require a higher path of short-term rates to keep inflation under control, but some of it is in the risk premium.<END>
The extent to which the risk premium has risen will damp demand for any given course of monetary policy.
The energy-price increase will contribute to moderating growth of domestic demand, provided that we do not allow that energy-price increase to reduce real interest rates.
May 10, 200661 of 120Like some others here, I am kind of encouraged by the data on labor compensation.
They are mixed, but I have interpreted them on balance to suggest that pressures on businesses from labor cost developments are muted.
The ECI is certainly consistent with that, and so are four-quarter changes in compensation per hour and unit labor costs.
The markup of price over unit labor cost actually increased from a very high level to an even higher level.
I agree with President Poole that businesses will not voluntarily give up that markup, but we do have a recent experience if you look in the late ’90s.
That markup peaked at the end of ’97, I believe, and dropped very, very sharply in ’98 and ’99, despite the fact that the economy was growing with some vigor.
You can see that on page 39 of the Greenbook.
So perhaps we need to think about that episode and how it happened.
<START>Certainly we have a precedent for vigorous growth and declining markup absorbing rising compensation costs.<END>
So where does that leave me overall?
I agree with the staff.
The most likely outcome
—given the structure of interest rates, financial conditions, markets, and a flattening of energy prices
<START>—is for stable underlying inflation, core PCE to stay in the neighborhood of 2 percent, where it has been since early 2004.<END>
<START>But I am a little more nervous about the stability than I was at the last meeting.<END>
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>In preparing for the meeting, one of the things I focused on was the graph that I like that tracks the staff forecasts over time because I am really torn between where I see growth going and where I see inflation expectations.<END>
<START>In looking at the graph, one can clearly see, if you look back through Greenbooks to September ’05, that staff forecasts of core PCE inflation have been basically flat whereas real GDP growth forecasts for this year have increased quite a bit.<END>
<START>The ’07 numbers are stable at a lower inflation rate and a lower growth rate.<END>
But what troubles me so much, and somebody already mentioned it, is how much the various indicators of core inflation have picked up over recent periods in the actual data.
As President Lacker May 10, 200662 of 120mentioned, we have core PCE up 2.4 percent in the past couple of quarters.
We have core CPI up 2.7 percent.
If you look at core GDP prices over the whole of last year, you are running at just under 3 percent over that period;
and that is without what we cannot quite measure yet, which is how much energy prices are passing through.
The longer companies see that energy prices are going to remain high or go even higher
—instead of being just a one-shot hurricane effect
—the more likely we are to see some of these prices being passed through.
<START>So I am getting concerned about whether the lagged effects of the monetary policy changes so far are going to be enough to moderate the inflation that we are now observing to reach the goal of lower core inflation numbers in ’07.<END>
On the real side, one area that I think is critical is the housing market.
As you all know, I have continued to worry about what is going on in housing and mortgages and have wanted to give you another perspective on what we are observing.
<START>Most of you are well aware that we put out some supervisory guidance for comment awhile back on nontraditional mortgage loans, which include various forms of interest-only, adjustable-rate, negative-amortization mortgages.<END>
<START>If you look at the 2005 earnings reports of the large mortgage banks and the large savings and loans that do mortgage lending, these institutions have a really striking amount of interest rate risk embedded in their negative amortization loans.<END>
As you know, most of the product is securitized and sold.
So the relative share of these products originated in the last couple of years that are on the banks’ books is small overall.
<START>But the numbers have gotten so bad that now the setters of accounting standards want banks to disclose how much interest income they are recognizing as income that they have not collected, through this negative amortization.<END>
<START>In other words, they bill the customer for this interest, but instead of making the customer give them the cash every month, they just add the amount to the outstanding balance and it creates negative amortization.<END>
For some of these big organizations, the amount represents 5 or 10 percent of net income from last year.
So the number is May 10, 200663 of 120growing, and we are looking to make sure that banks are appropriately putting aside reserves for the portion that may not be collectible.
In the past few weeks, I have become aware that the rising interest rates are creating more problems for customers in servicing debt.
What President Hoenig has observed in Colorado in interest-only adjustable-rate mortgages is just the beginning.
The Greenbook showed how much the subprime sector is going up;
and we know, because ARMs are a big chunk of those mortgages, that it is starting to be felt.
As we go forward and more of these ARMs, especially those that have three-year lock-in periods, start to reprice, we will be seeing more of it.
<START>Now, the mortgage industry, ever creative and ever worrying about the ability of homeowners to pay amid rising rates, has now decided to create negative-amortization, fixed-rate mortgages.<END>
What these mortgages do is say, “Just borrow for your house.
You have a monthly payment, no amortization of principal, and you do have to pay not even the full fixed rate.
<START>We will just continue to add to your principal, and you pay what you can afford every month versus what you really owe us on the fixed rate every month.” This process just continues, and one thing that bothers me for the long run is the extent to which housing could slow this year and slow the economy.<END>
<START>I just wonder about the consumer’s ability to absorb shocks.<END>
The buildup of home equity and the ability to borrow against it have helped individual homeowners when they have had layoffs, medical problems, divorces
—all the things in life that create month-to-month problems for cash flow.
With the growth of negative amortization, home equity is not being built up anymore.
<START>Negative amortization clearly helps consumer spending because consumers, in effect, have a smaller amount of their take-home pay that has to go to the mortgage payment every month, and so it is available to be spent elsewhere.<END>
It is probably a more pernicious type of home equity withdrawal because you don’t take an action to withdraw it.
Now it is planned that you will have negative amortization.
<START>It clearly changes the way we look at the role of savings as a precautionary balance to get the May 10, 200664 of 120consumer through bad times, and it also has long-run implications regarding the importance of asset values vis-à-vis default rates both for the banking sector and for the household sector.<END>
<START>So the growing ingenuity in the mortgage sector is making me more nervous as we go forward in this cycle, rather than comforted that we have learned a lesson.<END>
Some of the models the banks are using clearly were built in times of falling interest rates and rising housing prices.
It is not clear what may happen when either of those trends turns around.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
MR.
WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I hesitate to joke here at my second FOMC.
<START>I made a joke at my first that the inaugural meeting requires the new Governors to sing, and my colleague took me up on that.<END>
[Laughter] So I will not offer a joke about dancing this time.
[Laughter] In the interest of time.
[Laughter] Going to the central tendency in terms of where the economy is, I suppose I consider myself much more optimistic than the Greenbook forecast about the state of the economy.
I think some of the shocks to the economy, energy prices being the latest, speak in some ways to the durability, the flexibility, and the resilience of this economy which, on the one hand, I shake my head about but, on the other hand, I think we have to believe to some degree.
I will not go into too many of the facts, which have already been described, but consumption was up 5½ percent in the first quarter.
Business capital expenditures were up about 16½ percent on an annualized basis, with strong durable goods orders.
And the increase in tax receipts that Governor Olson spoke about is a very good leading indicator, even though some of the details behind that increase are hard to know.
President Poole referenced the growth in corporate profits.
Let me add a couple of notes on that.
What we are really seeing in the equity capital markets is, by and large, profitability-driven growth in the S&P and in the Dow as opposed to some sort of P/E multiple expansion.
It does give some of us more May 10, 200665 of 120confidence in the strength that we are seeing in the equity capital markets as well as another source of optimism as to what some of the income-statement benefits might be to consumers.
As we think about what might be the elephants in the markets, certainly the housing market is one from FOMC meetings that preceded my time here.
The new elephants in the market in terms of tone and tenor are inflation and inflation expectations.
I would like to talk about them more in just a moment.
When we look at the data since our last meeting, though there is a lot of noise, on balance I share the view that they tend to be more positive than expectations.
<START>Average nonfarm payroll growth in the past six months was almost 200,000, including the April figure, and the idea of less-robust labor markets appears belied by the solid gains that we have seen in hours worked, the acceleration in wages, and the low unemployment rate, which is still at 4.7 percent.<END>
So our thinking about a possible slowdown in the second half of the year has to at least be balanced or perhaps partly counterbalanced by what could be the first meaningful gains in take-home pay for nonsupervisory workers.
Understanding those income-statement benefits to real consumers is probably a more certain exercise at this point than trying to figure out the effect on the consumer of the housing markets, which Governor Bies spoke about.
On the business front, I am at least as optimistic as I was six weeks ago about the state of business investment.
CEOs, when they have seen the appreciation of share prices in the last quarter, even as they have seen prices appreciate for many of their competitors, remain more robust, more excited, and, I think, more eager to spend money.
<START>We have seen an increase in the backlog in debt underwriting by most of the big bulge-bracket firms, and so though some of that money is, no doubt, being spent on stock repurchases, some debt is being raised in expectation of merger and acquisition activity.<END>
At least part of it is based on a view that, as there is more uncertainty priced in the markets for the second half, companies are getting their ducks in a row to obtain some extra liquidity.
May 10, 200666 of 120Let me make one final point before briefly talking about inflation.
I am encouraged, like the rest of you, about the synchronized global growth that we are talking about.
My biggest concern, particularly in May of an election year, is about what is likely to be a bipartisan foray into creeping protectionism in the dialogue of politicians here in Washington between now and the November elections.
The position discussions about free trade that we have heard on both sides of the aisle over the past several years are, I think, going to diminish very significantly.
There could also be many more discussions in highly contested congressional election districts about the need to isolate the U.S.
markets, to cut ourselves off from a lot of foreign opportunities.
<START>To be candid, the business community probably isn’t that eager to enter this debate with a message oriented toward free trade.<END>
So I do think that creeping protectionism may become stronger between now and November and will have consequences for our economy to integrate with foreign markets and to continue to expand.
We may have more difficulty fighting back in some of the export markets, even with some depreciation of the dollar.
The Federal Reserve has a possible role in trying to moderate some of that discussion.
Finally, just a moment on inflation:
<START>I guess the way I would characterize it from a market perspective, and I think this is consistent with Dino’s and the Vice Chairman’s comments, is that market expectations of inflation are more fragile than they were some months ago.<END>
I would not describe myself as an alarmist about that.
However, the traders at many of the securities firms and the folks who are hitting the trading buttons are contemporaries of mine.
They are from a generation that has not experienced inflation at first hand the way that some folks around this table have.
<START>The psychological point of that statement is that, though we may have seen some laxity in their concern about inflation over the preceding six months and even today, that laxity could turn into some irrationality if inflation expectations get above our reasonable expectations and our comfort level.<END>
<START>On balance, I think that the markets, particularly those marginal traders, are looking for some leadership from the Federal Reserve.<END>
Perhaps we have seen May 10, 200667 of 120somewhat less market discipline in the TIPS markets and in some of the other markets, such as commodities.
Other folks have spoken more eloquently than I about what is happening in the TIPS markets and some of the dangerous signs in the surveys, so I will only offer two final notes.
First, on the energy market side and on the commodity side, it is harder and harder to describe the run-up in prices as solely or even predominantly demand driven.
When I think about the new retail products that are now finding their way to typical broker–dealer relationships at retail-oriented chains, I see a massive surge of inflows into new silver-oriented mutual funds and copper-oriented exchange-traded funds.
A lot of that speculative money is coming very late into these markets, and that situation should suggest to us that some folks, rightly or wrongly, are assigning some sort of inflation hedge to that product, with retail investors, as usual, being the last to get in on it.
Finally, on the energy front, I have been thinking about the difference between where we are now and where we might be several months from now.
I was encouraged by the same-store sales numbers that we saw in April, even in March and April together.
Those numbers are very encouraging, but as we get into the summer driving season, the energy prices may be seen as persistent.
The market may take a view that the higher prices are more permanent than most consumers believe now, and I think that’s probably an extra reason for our caution on the inflation front.
<START>So on balance, Mr. Chairman, I am quite optimistic about the strength of the economy but at least as leery about the expectations for inflation going forward.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
It worries me that we are in the hands of some exuberant 30-year-olds.
[Laughter] MR. OLSON.
He had to rub it in.
[Laughter] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Kroszner.
MR.
KROSZNER.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
You will hear me singing a familiar song from last time, although not exactly the same song, and unfortunately I did forget my tap shoes.
<START>The May 10, 200668 of 120song that I want to sing from last time is the continued strength and resilience of the economy plus concerns about inflation expectations moving out of line.<END>
Consumption growth has been moderating a bit, but exactly as Governor Olson said, with the continuation of some of the changes in the tax laws, real disposable income will still have a boost.
We have seen very strong global demand, particularly on the consumption side in many countries that have been lagging in consumption.
In addition, we are also seeing strong investment demand, both domestically and internationally, and I think that is something that we have to take into account going forward.
As for the key risks going forward, one, of course, is the housing market.
There has been a lot of discussion of that, and I do not think I have very much more to add.
We have to see what the lagged effects of interest rate changes are there, but that is something to be determined.
Some puzzles that have persisted since last time concern the lack of pass-through of a number of things.
Of the heightened energy and commodity prices to core inflation, we have seen some uptick.
But I share Governor Kohn’s analysis, or his conclusions from the analysis, that there are some signs but that one should not be overly wary because we have had a bit of downtick, then a bit of uptick.
<START>When we are talking about monthly movements of 0.1 percent, a simple rounding error can make things seem suddenly much higher or much lower.<END>
It could be a 50 percent difference from what we expect when we really are just seeing a rounding error, although we do have to be very aware of this.
Obviously, we have not seen pass-through of higher productivity gains to compensation.
This situation puzzles me quite a bit because, historically, by now we would be seeing more robustness of compensation, not just real disposable income, but compensation.
We have not seen that.
Productivity apparently continues to move fairly strongly.
Looking forward, I am concerned about this area even though the current data seem to suggest that the costs of labor are perfectly reasonable.
Rather than looking just at May 10, 200669 of 120the current data but using a little theory to look forward suggests that this may be an area that could be coming up in the future.
Even if there are higher costs in the labor market, are they going to be pushed through to final demand prices?
We have had a good discussion of the evidence on what has happened in the past.
Will you necessarily see the margins staying up or moving down, and will that cause the changes in underlying cost to be passed forward?
Potentially it won’t, and potentially there could be large movements.
But, again, we are in somewhat uncharted territory.
We do not have a lot of evidence here.
Another set of puzzles concerns the yield curve term premiums, and we, of course, have already had a lot of discussion about those and about the slight uptick in both the survey-based and market-based measures of inflation expectations.
<START>Obviously, that is something that we need to be very, very concerned about because the last thing that we want is to allow our actions in any way to be interpreted as a lack of concern about inflation, which could lead to an unanchoring of inflation expectations.<END>
That said, I certainly do not see such unanchoring in the markets.
<START>Also, the yield curve, although it has certainly moved up from being flat or even slightly negative, is still showing a difference between the two-year and the ten-year of only 15-20 basis points, which is not very large.<END>
And the much flatter yield curves are a worldwide phenomenon, driven by factors not just within the United States and not just about U.S.
expectations.
I also very much agree with President Stern that we should not put too much emphasis on high-frequency numbers.
We have to think about the recent numbers in a more systematic way.
What are we likely to see going forward?
What are the risks going forward, given some theory, given some historical experience?
Coming back to the theme that I sang about last time
—about Fed credibility not being the impossible dream, but a reality
—I think we do have that reality, and it is certainly something we do not want to give up.
Just to tweak President Geithner a bit, I hope his comments should not be interpreted as May 10, 200670 of 120saying that we want to introduce uncertainty into the marketplace.
The last thing that the FOMC should be doing is introducing uncertainty.
<START>Certainly we do not want to be producing moral hazard and having inappropriately low uncertainty when real risk factors may be out there.<END>
We certainly want to be very wary of that;
we do not want to contribute to that.
<START>But as Tim said, and I very much agree, we are in a very uncertain time, and to suggest that we are uncertain about where the economy is going is valuable.<END>
But to suggest that the market participants are not focusing enough on uncertainty, that there should be more uncertainty, and that we should do something about it is perhaps not the way to go.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you, and thank you all for your very concise comments.
[Laughter] We will take a fifteen-minute coffee break.
[Coffee break] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
At this point I would normally try to summarize the remarks around the table.
But since you have all just heard them and since my own views are not terribly different from many who have spoken, I think in the interest of time I will just go ahead and talk briefly on my own behalf about what I see the economy doing, and then we will turn to the policy go-round.
First of all, with respect to growth, I think we are following the path laid out by the Greenbook toward greater moderation in the second half.
The main difference is that, since our last meeting, the uncertainty around that prospective path has increased.
<START>Obviously, the key to this moderation is the housing market, and fundamental analysis would suggest that the combination of high prices and rising interest rates would make affordability a problem and would bring housing starts and housing prices down.<END>
So far we are seeing, at worst, an orderly decline in the housing market;
but there is still, I think, a lot to be seen as to whether the housing market will decline slowly or more quickly.
<START>As I noted last time, some May 10, 200671 of 120correction in this market is a healthy thing, and our goal should not be to try to prevent that correction but rather to ensure that the correction does not overly influence growth in the rest of the economy.<END>
<START>I would also note that there are going to be some offsets to the decline in residential investment.<END>
<START>We’ve noted increases in nonresidential construction, which is about half the size, as a share of GDP, of residential construction and, in terms of contribution to GDP, could make up something like a half of the direct impact of a decline in residential spending.<END>
We also have gotten a sense that capital spending is relatively strong, and world growth is also strong, which may enhance our exports.
So there are some countervailing factors to help cushion the presumed decline in the housing market.
But as we talk about the housing market, which is 6 percent of GDP, or nonresidential construction, which is 2.7 percent of GDP, we have to pay very close attention to consumption, which is 70 percent of GDP and which really is the center of the forecast for the rest of the year.
The soft landing scenario viewed in the Greenbook requires that consumption grow the rest of the year at something around 3.4 percent, which is roughly what it has been doing in the last year or so on average.
I think that is broadly plausible.
There are factors on both sides of it.
Supporting consumption, obviously, are some increases in compensation likely coming forward both in terms of hourly wages and in terms of hours worked, job availability, and to some extent maybe increases in stock prices.
On the negative side, many people have pointed out the effect of rising interest rates and softening in housing prices.
Energy is actually a bit of a mixed bag.
Energy prices are obviously a negative for consumption in level terms, but we have had a big drag on consumption for the past two years from increasing energy prices, and so if energy prices do stabilize, the drag will actually be less in 2006 than in previous years.
So, again, I do think that the slowdown that has been forecast by the Greenbook is plausible, but like a number of people around the table, I would note that so far it is largely a prospective slowdown and that the data have only begun to support that development.
May 10, 200672 of 120On the inflation side, I have somewhat more concern, like a number of people.
Core inflation has been remarkably stable, and I do not think it is going to rise very much;
but to the extent that there are risks, they are very largely to the upside.
And I also have some concerns about the possible emergence of some inflation psychology, which is a very negative thing for our policymaking.
The factors that support higher inflation are well known.
First, energy and commodity prices.
I would point out that, rather than being transitory, they have now undergone a long, sustained increase, which evidently must at some point get into the cost structure of firms.
Second, the weakening dollar over the past month or so may be sufficient to add some pressure.
Third, the effect of compensation, I understand, is a little ambiguous.
<START>There are some factors working in the other direction, including markups and productivity, but clearly the sense around the table is that compensation is beginning to move up somewhat, and the risks there I think are also to the upside.<END>
Finally, it is worth noting that, at a technical level, some of the components of the inflation indexes are moving upward
—in particular, owners’ equivalent rent.
It economically makes sense that, if house prices have risen so much, rents will begin to rise.
Since that is a very large share of both the CPI and the PCE core measures, that is going to be an upside risk for us.
Now, again, I do not want to overstate the problem.
I think that core inflation will remain contained, to use our language, but I am concerned about those risks.
Clearly, the markets have seen a strengthening of the economy and increased inflation risk.
Despite all of our communication and language, it is summarized by an increase of about 25 basis points in where they think the federal funds rate is going to end up later this year.
We have seen and already discussed the increase in inflation compensation and in other measures of inflation expectations.
<START>Much of our confidence that the pass-through from energy, from the dollar, and from labor costs to final goods inflation will be low is predicated on the view that inflation expectations are low and well contained.<END>
<START>When that premise begins to break down, then all the other elements of the analysis also begin to come under pressure.<END>
<START>May 10, 200673 of 120Finally, as a number of people have noted, although we do not have an official definition of price stability, we are at the upper level of what might plausibly be called the region of price stability, and further increases will be difficult and potentially costly to reverse.<END>
<START>So looking forward to the policy discussion, I think we are going to have to take into account the emerging inflation risk.<END>
At the same time, there is an awful lot of uncertainty about what is going on in the economy.
It is going to be a difficult balancing act to try to maintain as much flexibility as possible so that policy can respond to new data as they arrive.
At this point I would like to turn over the floor to Vincent, who will talk about the policy options.
MR.
REINHART.2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Over the intermeeting period, the data came in stronger than the tone of the Committee’s deliberations in March would have led any listener to suspect.
As a result, Committee communications that reflected that discussion
—including the minutes, speeches by some of you, and the Chairman’s testimony
—tended to pull down the expectations of future policy action, plotted in the top panel of your first exhibit, even as data releases tended to push them up.
On net, the data won, and the path of policy expectations, the middle left panel, rotated up 25 to 35 basis points.
The term structure of nominal Treasury yields also rotated up, implying increases in nominal forward rates, the blue bars in the middle right panel, of 25 to 55 basis points.
These gains outstripped the rise in real forward rates, the green bars, resulting in significant increases in inflation compensation, the difference in the height of the bars.
Inflation compensation over the next five to ten years is plotted in the bottom panel.
How you interpret these movements is likely a critical element in your policy choice today.
On the one hand, the recent rise in inflation compensation, the shaded yellow area, has not moved it noticeably above its range of variation in the past two years.
<START>Indeed, at 2¾ percent, forward inflation compensation is lower than at times when the Committee described inflation or inflation expectations in previous policy statements as “contained” or “well contained,” the blue shaded areas.<END>
If you think that is still the case, then you also probably believe that you have scope to be patient in policy setting.
On the other hand, if you focus on the 20 basis point rise over the intermeeting period, you might conclude that there’s been a partial outbreak of inflation jitters
—not a pandemic, mind you, but the first instance of trader-to-trader transmission.
[Laughter] The anti-virus typically prescribed is a vigorous assertion of your willingness to tighten policy.
Other evidence of possible inflation concerns is the subject covered at the top of your next exhibit.
<START>From left to right, survey measures of household inflation expectations have moved up for both near-term and longer-term horizons, and the value of the dollar has fallen sharply on foreign exchange markets.<END>
It might be that financial market participants place some weight on domestic spending retaining considerable momentum, putting pressures on resources.
One such scenario was played out in the Greenbook and is summarized in the 2 The materials used by Mr. Reinhart are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).
May 10, 200674 of 120middle panels.
In the “Domestic Boom” alternative scenario, the growth of spending does not moderate much
—perhaps because a slowing in house-price appreciation does not materialize and firms begin to dip into their ample cash coffers to fund investment.
<START>Inflation differs little from the baseline, but that is, in part, because policy responds, raising the nominal funds rate to 6¼ percent<END>
—as in the dashed line at the right.
This provides an opportunity to repeat a point made at Monday’s briefing.
<START>Such an action would be inconsistent with current market expectations in that it would place the rate at the top of the 90 percent confidence band implied by options prices (the blue span).<END>
But our understanding of the economy
—as encapsulated in stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model
—is sufficiently imprecise (the green range) that such an outcome shouldn’t be all that surprising.
<START>Speaking of surprises, a major objection to tightening 50 basis points at this meeting to show your anti-inflation resolve, as in alternative C of the Bluebook, is that it would catch market participants unaware.<END>
Indeed, as shown in the bottom panel, it would be the biggest surprise of the modern era of FOMC announcements, at least as measured from futures market readings just before the statement had been released.
In contrast, the 25 basis point action discussed in exhibit 3 is exactly what the market is looking for.
<START>Moreover, the staff projects that the economy will hit what you might consider to be a sweet spot, with the unemployment rate (the top left panel) zeroing in on its natural rate and core PCE inflation (the top right) receding to 2 percent.<END>
That forecast is predicated on firming action today and none thereafter.
Alternative B in the Bluebook was structured to accompany such an action with the message that there is some chance that you might be done today, but you might not.
As can be seen in the middle left panel, energy prices have moved up sharply, which poses the classic tension of dragging down spending while imparting some lift to inflation.
In that regard, the relationship between changes in energy prices and core inflation
—as at the middle right
<START>—has been tenuous at best over the past twenty years, suggesting you might prefer to focus more on the consequences of the oil shock on aggregate demand than inflation.<END>
If so, you might view that source of additional restraint as a substitute for further monetary policy firming.
A ¼ point hike today will bring the real federal funds rate, the solid line in the bottom panel, toward the high end of the range of estimates of its equilibrium
—another reason you might view yourself as done, or at least close to done.
Indeed, if you give credence to the simulations presented in the Bluebook you might view yourself as already done, which is why we included alternative A, the subject of exhibit 4.
If you have an inflation goal of 2 percent and agree with the staff assessment that the equilibrium real rate is around 2¾ percent, then the current nominal funds rate of 4¾ percent probably has a lot of appeal.
<START>When we ran simulations of the version of the FRB/US model in which market participants are forward looking, holding the funds rate at 4¾, as in the top left panel, instead of tightening some and backing off a bit later, does not matter much for the paths of the unemployment rate and inflation (the bottom panels).<END>
Thus, from the perspective offered by the staff model, you can go home now and not come back until the next decade, which by the way will make the work of Governor Kohn’s subcommittee easier.
[Laughter] May 10, 200675 of 120Your last exhibit gives alternative statement language, where the items in red denote new wording relative to the March statement and those in blue represent changes relative to what you saw in the Bluebook.
Some concern was expressed that alternative B did not convey sufficient concern about inflation risks, so we’ve tightened it up somewhat.
As can be seen, this alternative, first, stresses that current economic growth is quite strong (row 2);
second, in row 3 it now simply repeats the March language verbatim;
and third, it drops the word “modest” in referring to the outlook for policy firming.
One last one-word change did not get onto the table.
<START>In the second sentence of row 2, we’re proposing to go back to the March language and refer to a growth as “likely to moderate to a more sustainable pace” instead of “toward a more sustainable pace.” That concludes my prepared remarks.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you, Vincent.
Are there any questions for Vincent?
If not, I hope we can have a go-round and have people’s views on the policy.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
As I said before, I think we are essentially okay on the real side, but my concerns have risen about inflation.
<START>I recognize the potential for slowdown later this year, but my sense is that our inflation problem is much more of an immediate issue for us.<END>
I think we have to take seriously the possibility that inflation expectations might deteriorate further even though, as Vince said, they are within the band that we have characterized as contained.
My sense is that any statement today that moves the market’s expected policy path down is going to cause inflation expectations to move up.
That’s my bottom line today, and I think we should strive to avoid that.
Second, and here I will echo something I said and something the Vice Chair said, I am very unhappy with the way in which markets have reacted over the past several weeks.
As I said earlier, markets marked up their expected policy path but also marked up expected inflation.
It would have been better, in my view, if they had marked up the policy path more and the inflation path less.
I just do not see the utility of the market’s believing in a reaction function for us that has oil price shocks pushing core inflation materially higher when they occur.
Our statement today is an important opportunity to influence the public’s understanding of our reaction function, and that is the lens I am using to think about policy today.
It is fine to say that policy is going to be data dependent, but it is important how the public believes our policy is going to depend on the May 10, 200676 of 120incoming data.
Unfortunately, we are at a difficult point here.
The public is suspecting that a pause might be imminent, and so increasing the statement’s emphasis on data dependence is likely to increase the probability they assign to a pause and thus bring down the yield curve.
As I said, I think that would be a mistake.
We need to strengthen the public sense of how strongly we intend to respond to increases in core inflation.
So this has to do with the slope of the reaction function.
Ultimately the data dependence that the market expects is going to be informed by the data dependence that the market actually sees.
This is why I proposed in my memo on Friday that we modify row 4 in alternative B to place more emphasis on inflation risks.
The way it is worded in the version that Vince just circulated does that very well
—in fact, better than I did.
But in any event, whatever we do, we should strive to make sure our statement does not bring down the expected policy.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have some notes.
I do not usually write them out, but I have them written out today.
First, let me say that I agree with the comment that Governor Warsh made awhile back that the economy is strong and has excellent growth prospects.
The economy is not fragile, and our job, of course, is to keep it that way.
Our interest rate policy should depend on the state of the real economy and not just on the inflation threat.
<START>In the model with contained actual and expected inflation, the real rate of interest would fluctuate with the state of the economy.<END>
Given the worldwide integration of capital markets, what is relevant is the state not just of the U.S.
economy but also of the world economy.
<START>The fed funds rate target should depend on the GDP gap even though the predictive value of the gap for inflation is low.<END>
This is a message that markets ought to hear because monetary policy must be responsive both to the state of the real economy and to inflation risks.
May 10, 200677 of 120Now, as for the lag in monetary policy effects, which I think is an important part of the concern that we will overstay or overshoot on the tight side, we should note that the increases in the federal funds rate through late last year were predicted in the market at the outset of the rate increases in mid-2004.
Roughly speaking, the economy should already have reacted to the first 300 basis points of fed funds rate increases.
The lag argument applies to rate increases beyond the 4 percent fed funds rate.
Inflation expectations have risen roughly 20 basis points since our March meeting.
Raising the funds rate target 25 basis points today barely keeps up with inflation expectations.
Many of us have commented that we are between the Scylla of unemployment and the Charybdis of inflation.
Now, I went back and actually looked up a bit about that story, and quite frankly, it was because I did not know how to spell Charybdis.
[Laughter] And then I found that this story, written over 2,000 years ago, was actually an example of risk management.
Some of you who are better classical scholars than I will remember that in Homer’s Odyssey, Odysseus is given advice by Circe to sail closer to Scylla for Charybdis could drown his whole ship.
Odysseus then successfully navigates the ship past Scylla and Charybdis, but Scylla manages to catch six of his men, devouring them alive.
<START>Well, Charybdis is our inflation risk.<END>
We would like to navigate down the center of these hazardous waters, but in conducting monetary policy, we are in a pre-GPS world.
Visibility is limited, and as I look at the data and talk with business contacts, I think I hear breakers, if you will, in the direction of Charybdis, which is our inflation risk.
But as every sailor knows, the fog does funny things to sound.
I may be wrong, but I think I hear inflation breakers in the distance.
I have concern both about ending rate increases too soon and about overshooting on the high side.
These two risks need to be balanced in light of the relative cost of increasing rates too much or too little.
<START>In my view, it is better to take the risk of raising the funds target too much than of stopping too soon.<END>
If we stop too soon and inflation rises further, the costs of bringing inflation back down are likely to be May 10, 200678 of 120considerable.
<START>We may not lose the ship, but Charybdis can cause a lot of damage.<END>
<START>As we have learned all too painfully over the years, Charybdis is not just inflation, but rather inflation now plus higher unemployment later.<END>
Charybdis, therefore, has her own Scylla just behind her as demonstrated very nicely in alternative simulation number five.
<START>Even if inflation does not rise but we conclude that a strong economy requires further restraint, market disruption and mixed signals from the FOMC could be a problem.<END>
It is not helpful for the market to view the FOMC as a source of whipsawing, which would be the case if we pause and then resume rate increases relatively quickly.
When we pause, we should be reasonably confident that we can expect, although not commit, to pause for several meetings.
Under current circumstances, we would confuse the market by pausing for only one meeting, I believe.
Conversely, pausing later after further rate increases or backing rates down a bit after a pause should encourage fairly prompt resumption of expansion and minimize market disruption.
If we take monetary restraint too far, the Scylla of unemployment risk may claim a few victims, but I would rather take that risk than the risk of getting any closer to Charybdis.
If we raise the funds target 50 basis points, the message to markets should be that the FOMC will now make policy decisions one meeting at a time without commitment as to decisions at future meetings.
The message ought not to be that the funds rate is likely to be unchanged.
No guidance is not the same as “no change” guidance.
If we cannot get this message across in the statement, we certainly should be able to do so in the minutes.
Markets should not interpret our policy decision at this meeting as a precursor to a pause.
<START>If we raise the funds rate target 25 basis points, we will have to maintain probably forward guidance to avoid sending misleading signals.<END>
We could end forward guidance by indicating in the minutes that we do not intend to use similar language in June but that dropping the forward guidance is not necessarily a May 10, 200679 of 120precursor to a pause.
We will make that judgment meeting by meeting as we assess the significance of new information for the outlook.
<START>I am well aware that 50 basis points would be a large shock to the market, and to be very honest with myself about what that might mean, I have said to myself that the Dow might fall as much as 150 or 200 points and the long bond yields might rise 10 to 15 basis points.<END>
I am willing to impose this shock to get ahead of the markets.
<START>I believe it would be better to act decisively now rather than later in response to accumulating bad news.<END>
I want to talk just a moment also about the minutes of this meeting.
These minutes will appear shortly after the May 25 release of the preliminary first-quarter GDP number, which the staff now puts at 5.3.
So the upward revision there is significant.
I think that the next unemployment report comes out on June 2, which would be shortly after the minutes also.
I made a couple of points that I think are very important.
One, the minutes need to be true to the transcript, which will be released a little less than six years from now.
It is extremely important for the long-run credibility of the institution that there not be any disconnect between the minutes and the transcript.
I believe that the minutes should report that the Committee discussed alternative C. Two, we have an opportunity in the minutes to do several things that I think are important.
First, we can use them to show the Committee’s concern with inflation and inflation expectations.
We have had extensive discussion beginning with the staff presentation about those issues.
<START>I think that the market is actually going to take that concern as something of a surprise and a shock because it has viewed our stance as being not very concerned about inflation.<END>
If we reflect in the minutes the discussion around the table, I think the market will take that as some genuinely new information.
<START>Second, we ought to use the minutes as an opportunity to get out from under the forward guidance and to explain that the guidance is not intended to provide any signal about what our action is likely to be.<END>
I would not take the guidance out of the May 10, 200680 of 120statement of this meeting for the reasons that I think Jeff has explained very well.
But we should be able to use the minutes to say that, when the Committee wants to make such an announcement that a pause is likely, we will do so directly with plain language
—we are not going to do it indirectly.
I think we ought to be able to make that clear in the minutes.
<START>Third, we should also say in the minutes that policy decisions will be based on the implication of new information for the economic outlook that we receive between meetings.<END>
So those are things I think we could get across in the minutes with the space to do so.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to share, as I did the last time, a little different perspective on this.
I continue to agree with the Greenbook and others’ projections that the economy should slow as we move through the rest of this year and next year.
I think that’s an important factor to consider because the policy actions we take today are geared toward those periods as well.
I don’t want to give the impression that I’m not concerned about inflation, because I am.
Part of my concern is not that we will end too soon but that we will be too quick to reverse our position.
Let me explain.
What we have now is that current GDP growth and some of the inflationary events are the effect of past substantial accommodative policy.
Now our instincts are to keep increasing the rates until we actually see the slowing.
Thus, we tend to overshoot in terms of tightness.
That sounds familiar to me.
<START>I think I’ve seen this movie, and that’s part of my concern.<END>
As I said, I am concerned about inflation.
In fact, I wish we had gotten where we are today a little sooner, but we didn’t.
Our challenge is to hold firm now and to hold firm when the economy begins to slow, and our instincts will be to ease, especially as the speculative excesses begin to wash out of the economy and we have a lot of people saying that it’s absolutely imperative that we ease to offset that speculative washout.
May 10, 200681 of 120I think that’s really our challenge.
I’m not concerned so much about just today.
It’s more the larger context ahead of us.
What I’m trying to say is that I judge we are about where we ought to be.
<START>We should allow the market to work the rest of the yield curve and the economy, so that we bring the imbalances that are in play now back into balance and, when that happens, we hold our discipline and not let our instincts to ease and offset that discipline very quickly take over.<END>
That’s really the future challenge of monetary policy as we work through the rest of this year and into the next.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Well, I think Bill Poole has summarized a lot of what I would have said.
I forecasted that in the memo that was sent around.
I would advocate tightening 50 basis points.
I would dispute only one comment of President Poole’s.
Getting ahead of the markets is less important than getting ahead of the economy.
I do take note of your FOMC surprise chart.
The question really is, If we undertake an action, will it lead to a market reaction that might affect the economy negatively?
It’s not so much that we have a market surprise.
We’re going to have market surprises at any time, and I can walk you through, after thirty years of operating a hedge fund, a four-year cycle of market surprises.
A market surprise is going to hit us at some point, but the question is, Is it a trip wire?
There is a risk that the trip wire would be the housing market.
We’ve discussed that to a great degree, although you, Mr. Chairman, I think gave us some good data on the offset.
I think it’s important for us to get ahead of what I view
—not just because of the anecdotal evidence we have but also because of the work done by our staff
—as a significant expansion in capital expenditures with growth shifting to very strong business investment, excess liquidity that is going to fuel that investment, and as we all discussed, significant indications that inflation is stronger than we would like to see it.
We see that analytically, as I said earlier, with the way we calculate inflation in Dallas, but also from the anecdotal evidence.
May 10, 200682 of 120Having said that, I think the wording that is now in alternative B is more attractive.
I know there are some who would like to provide what I call a full frontal view of what we look like and what we discussed.
But as I like to say, Mr. Chairman, in romancing the market sometimes a little modesty might be more effective in achieving the ultimate goal.
I think we’ve achieved that to an extent.
I do not like the language that we see growth as likely to moderate because I don’t have confidence in that statement and I’m not sure it’s necessary.
I’d prefer the wording that President Poole sent around in terms of its brevity.
However, in the interest of perhaps more exposure, or a more-revealing presentation, I would like to add one word, which is the word “global” before “resource utilization.” [Laughter] Thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In the last couple of meetings I have had concerns that I think others are sharing, or did share, that we not go too far in this round of tightening, given what I thought were perhaps transitory price pressures, some extra capacity in labor markets, and financial markets that were finally becoming less accommodating with all that would mean for asset markets, in particular housing.
Certainly there continue to be these downside risks.
The housing falloff that we’re beginning to see signs of could hit not just residential construction but also consumption harder than we expect, and rising energy costs could exact a greater tax on spending.
But as I noted, we have yet to see much of that projected slowing in the incoming data.
It’s still a forecast.
Others have focused on that as well.
The more important thing that has happened, and it has certainly changed my mind with regard to the balance of risk, is the change in the inflation environment.
Market contacts tell me that they perceive the Fed as being behind the curve on inflation.
Now, normally I wouldn’t take market chatter May 10, 200683 of 120very seriously.
But given the tilt in incoming data, thinking about it a bit is worthwhile if we are concerned, as we should be, about our continuing credibility.
<START>At this point, as I said earlier, I am more uncertain than I have been about where policy should be and how fast it should get there, and that uncertainty automatically takes me to alternative B. I think 25 basis points, not 50, is the right move today even though over the course of the next several meetings we may well move for 50 or beyond that.<END>
I just think that 50 basis points would come as a shock to markets and, frankly, given that I’m really not certain about where things are, would overdo things in terms of my own perspective of where we need to be right now.
<START>When you are uncertain, moving slowly is usually the wiser policy.<END>
So that’s my policy perspective
—25 basis points.
I was going to fool around with alternative B, and I have a whole bunch of language in here to fool around with alternative B, but it gets me to exactly the same place as this new language.
<START>[Laughter] So I’m really happy that we have taken out the references to inflation being contained<END>
—I think it was in row 3
<START>—and modest firming in row 4.<END>
Not that things might not work out that way, it’s just that I’m not as certain that I want to say that directly and give the impression, which would have been reinforced by that language, that we’re more likely than not to stop at the next meeting.
I agree with others who have said that, if possible, we should aim for making things a little
—I hesitate to use this word
—more uncertain about what we’re going to do at the next meeting rather than give the certainty of a pause.
I have a question, however.
The second part of the sentence in row 4 and the sentence in row 5 seem to me to say about the same stuff.
Do we need them both?
I must be missing something subtle here because to me they just seem to overlap a lot and make us double data dependent.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
It’s the belt-and-suspenders approach.
[Laughter] However, when we get to the final discussion, I’ll ask for a straw vote on whether to drop row 5.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Thank you.
That’s it.
May 10, 200684 of 120CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I stated earlier, I basically agree with the staff’s current baseline projection that, with the rate action today, we have a monetary policy that supports the return of GDP growth to somewhere near its long-term potential, along with both core and headline inflation beginning to turn back down as the year proceeds.
I stated at our last meeting that I was willing to see the fed funds rate move above my best estimate of where neutral is to a level that might be somewhat restrictive as insurance against some of the adverse inflation effects of energy-price shocks that have hit the economy for more than two years now.
<START>I noted with interest that a member of the Board staff reported on Monday at the Board briefing that the staff thinks that energy shocks will add ¾ percent to core PCE inflation this year.<END>
Estimates such as this one give me some comfort in deciding to reach beyond my estimate of neutral, but there are limits as to how far I’m willing to reach.
We all know that there is a historical relationship between energy-price shocks and weakness on the real side of the economy.
<START>I also know, Mr. Chairman, that some economists, for whom I have a great deal of respect, have suggested that the weakness was partly associated with monetary policy action taken in response to those shocks.<END>
I think we have reached a point where further policy actions to head off potential price pressures may come at the expense of tipping the scales in the direction of increasingly greater risk to economic activity.
<START>I admit that I’m not happy with the degree and speed of the decline in core inflation in the long-term projections included in the Bluebook.<END>
It has been frustrating for me to watch the headline inflation numbers keep moving up as a result of energy shocks and to see our timetable for moving core inflation lower get pushed further and further into the future.
<START>But if the Board staff’s estimate of the effects of May 10, 200685 of 120energy-price shocks on core PCE is reasonable, it suggests that there is room for some further improvement in core inflation once the energy shocks end, other things being equal of course.<END>
<START>One fundamental element of the outlook that might not be equal is the dragging of the inflation expectations anchor.<END>
<START>I know that, as prudent central bankers, we have to be constantly alert to the possibility that inflation expectations will take off.<END>
Our worst fear, most certainly, is that they will creep up covertly and catch us unawares.
So I applaud the diligence of the Bluebook authors in looking for these weapons of mass destruction, but I’m not convinced that the evidence that we’ve compiled should provoke us to attack just yet.
At the last meeting, I indicated that I was inclined to pause after this meeting.
That’s still my inclination.
But the last CPI report, coupled with little direct evidence that the pace of economic activity is slowing, has moved me closer to putting even odds on our appropriate choice at the June meeting.
I said in March that I would not like a statement that induced market participants to automatically expect a better than 50 percent chance for a rate hike in June.
It’s clear to me from our discussion today that some are leaning toward a rate increase in June and that they’re going to wait and see if the data will talk them out of it.
I also know that some people are thinking about a pause, and we’re going to wait and see if the data are going to talk us into it.
The most common theme I’m hearing is “wait and see,” and in my opinion the wisest course is to make the smallest possible number of changes in our statement and hope that the data will speak more convincingly over the next month and a half.
So my preference is to make as few changes as possible to the statement that we made last month.
I think alternative B does that.
I like adding the language.
The second half of passage 4 reinforces the message of last month’s minutes that were widely interpreted as “wait and see.” So that’s where I am:
I support alternative B. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Kohn.
May 10, 200686 of 120MR. KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I’d actually rather think about the metaphor of President Fisher
—full frontal nudity
—for our subcommittee than I would about the weapons of mass destruction and attack.
[Laughter] MR. FISHER.
I never used the word “nudity” now.
[Laughter] MR. KOHN.
Full frontal.
Okay.
[Laughter] MS. MINEHAN.
Take it out of the transcript.
[Laughter] MR. KOHN.
“Let’s move on to monetary policy,” he said blushing.
[Laughter] I think we do face an interesting and challenging situation here.
<START>I agree, as I said before, that the inflation risks are higher than they seemed a month or two ago and appear more palpable, more immediate, than they did.<END>
That has to be balanced against a forecast that things are in train that will end up containing those risks
—maybe not driving inflation down to where some people want it but at least keeping it from rising.
But we haven’t really seen a lot of evidence that those things in train to contain the risks are there yet.
I acknowledge
—President Hoenig made a very good point
—that there is some risk of overshooting.
I think in a situation like this, we have to be forward looking but we also need to make really sure on the inflation front.
So I’d rather risk overshooting than undershooting at this point in the game.
<START>We do need to strongly resist any tendency for inflation to rise, and the public needs to understand that that’s where our focus is.<END>
In my view, that requires ¼ point today and conveying a sense that we still see upside risks and are prepared to act if those upside risks to inflation materialize.
Like President Lacker, I’d like to see market rates at least at their current level.
I’d rather see us ending up with rates a little higher than they are now than otherwise.
Conveying this thought would probably leave rates intact and also leave market reactions to incoming data constructive.
If we say we’re worried about inflation and inflation comes in a little higher, markets will react very quickly.
I think the new May 10, 200687 of 120language of alternative B does this, and I support it.
I think the key part is in row 4:
<START>“The Committee judges that some further policy firming may be needed to address yet inflation risks.” That’s so close to last time that I think the markets will interpret it correctly.<END>
At the same time, we have to be open-minded about when any further increase will be required.
I always thought a sensible path for policy here would be to go up quickly and then kind of flatten out the trajectory.
We kind of got caught in an every-time escalator and never were able to flatten out that trajectory.
But we’re in a position where we can both be concerned about inflation and put the market on notice that the trajectory of any further rise will be a little flatter.
I think that’s constructive, and B does that, so I support that language.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Stern.
MR.
STERN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>Overall, I think policy is currently well positioned to maintain price stability over time, and a ¼ point increase today, which I favor, will on the margin enhance that position.<END>
As I noted earlier this morning, I do think the uncertainty about the inflation outlook has increased, and it may be that the risks are now tilted to the upside.
But on the other side of that particular observation is the well-known lag in monetary policy between our actions and their effects.
We have cumulatively moved a lot, and some of those moves have been recent, and so I don’t think all of the effects are currently evident.
In the past, I have emphasized with some frequency the underlying flexibility and resilience of the economy.
As a consequence of that, I’m not really worried that we might go too far or overshoot.
I think the economy absorbs these things pretty well, but our obligation is to try to get it right.
I’m not exactly sure where right is, and so as a consequence of that I want to make sure that we have some flexibility going forward and that we continue to emphasize the data-driven nature of our decisions.
I May 10, 200688 of 120think alternative B accomplishes all of that, so I’m in favor of both the action and the language associated with it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I favor the 25 basis point increase, and, generally, the language of alternative B. But I do have some specific suggestions on it that I’ll mention at the end of my comments.
<START>First, I want to say a few words about a topic that many of us have been speaking about publicly, which is our price stability goals and our comfort zones for inflation.<END>
This talk is getting a lot of attention, and my current thinking is that the zone is 1 percent to 2 percent on core PCE.
The more we use this language of a comfort zone or
—as I think, Mr. Chairman, you said in your comments
<START>—a zone of price stability, the more it frames the public’s interpretation of our inflation outlook and our policy moves.<END>
That’s not a bad thing, in general, but I am concerned that many analysts are interpreting this comfort zone as a range of acceptable outcomes so that it doesn’t matter where we are within that zone of indifference.
I don’t view it that way.
My preference is to see inflation moving toward the center of the zone, like the Bluebook alternative simulation that we talked about before.
<START>For me, having our inflation forecasts consistently run at or above the top end of my comfort zone is a problem.<END>
Market participants will ratchet up their views of the zone, and our credibility is then going to suffer.
I would hope that our policy actions would be aimed at having inflation heading more clearly for the interior of that range
—subject, of course, to the constraints of our dual mandate.
With regard to today’s decision, I certainly prefer that markets clearly understand that, if necessary, we’re ready to move to a rate above 5 percent.
I think the language in alternative B does that.
I suggest one major change to it, which I think people would consider major, and that is in number 3.
May 10, 200689 of 120Number 3 now is, as I understand, exactly the same as it was last time.
<START>The phrase in there that really concerns me is “and inflation expectations remain contained.” Bill Poole talked about the minutes reflecting accurately the meeting, and I don’t think that statement accurately reflects the discussion at this meeting.<END>
A lot of concern has been expressed here about inflation expectations
—different degrees of concern, but certainly the atmosphere is different from that in the last meeting in which we discussed it.
One way to deal with that is just to delete those five words and end the sentence with the word “check.” Another would be to go back to the language we had before.
I would go either way on that, but I don’t think we should put that language in the statement.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
First Vice President Stone.
MR.
STONE.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>Given that I see the risk to growth as reasonably balanced and the risk to inflation as slightly more to the upside, I support raising the funds rate 25 basis points.<END>
<START>With resource utilization at high levels and core inflation near the top of the range I consider consistent with price stability, any positive aggregate demand shock could result in inflation higher than we would like.<END>
So I think that we should take some action today to lean against this possibility, and I see that 25 basis points would do that.
I don’t sense right now that we’re behind the curve and that we need to do more.
<START>I think the funds rate is approaching the level that’s consistent with stable inflation and growth at potential, but I’m not sure whether today’s move will be the last or when the next move will be required.<END>
That will depend on what the incoming data tell us about where the economy is headed and our assessment of the risk to that forecast.
There has been a perception by some, and it’s been discussed around the table, that the FOMC often makes one or two moves too many.
At the last meeting, I said I would rather accept the risk of taking one or two moves too many than of coming up short.
The risk associated with this would be May 10, 200690 of 120magnified if it proved difficult for the FOMC to reverse itself, should it perceive ex post that rates have been raised too high.
We recently did a study to look at our past behavior, and the staff analysis shows that there have been numerous episodes in which the FOMC has paused and then continued along the policy path and even paused and reversed course.
So that gives me some comfort that we have the flexibility to take the appropriate actions based on incoming data.
Turning to the language, I had about three pages worth of material, most of which I can throw away.
I think alternative B comes very close to the language that I think appropriate.
<START>I have some sympathy with President Lacker’s and President Moskow’s comments that leaving the phrase about inflation expectations the way it was in the last meeting does not fairly represent the tenor of the discussion today.<END>
Balancing that a little is the change in the language in row 4, which now addresses the inflation issue more head-on and thus shows the change in the tenor of the discussion a bit.
But we certainly would not want the markets to perceive a lower policy path by reading that in the language, and maybe the inflation expectations phrase might do that.
That concludes my comments.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me see if I can be reasonably concise.
First of all, I don’t think we have any viable alternative except the 25 basis points of tightening today, so I support that.
We’ve probably had more consensus around the table this morning than I remember in a long time about the way we want to convey the risk that is clearly on the inflation side.
The changes that have been made in the alternative B language from the first version that we saw are clearly in the right direction.
The language is much crisper and cleaner and emphasizes the point.
I would associate myself most closely with President Lacker’s comments.
I want to repeat a comment that I made, though, in the pre-meeting comments, and I think it’s still applicable as we think about the way this statement evolves until the Kohn group’s work is finished.
I hope we’ll try to avoid May 10, 200691 of 120expanding the language and being tempted to add more words, more precision, and more careful forward-looking guidance until we have those fundamental strategic discussions that I think are going to come from Don’s work group.
<START>I’m glad we did not go through with the idea of including an employment forecast.<END>
We still have in row 2 what I consider to be a second-level detail on where the moderation is going to come from.
I think the list probably reflects the discussion, but until we deal with the Kohn subcommittee’s work, we ought to avoid the temptation to say more and explain more fully and give more guidance and more precision to our guidance.
I don’t think that serves us well.
As I said before, I think we’re close to where we need to be.
I think that’s what the group said this morning.
We do need some flexibility.
I’m not as concerned as some that that suggests some uncertainty on our part.
We can’t take uncertainty away from the markets.
So I hope that we’ll talk about the issue that Michael Moskow raised about whether we’re being too reassuring about inflation expectations.
I’m generally comfortable with the current construct of alternative B. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support alternative B. I favor raising the funds rate 25 basis points, not 50 basis points, today.
<START>The statement helps us get off the treadmill we’ve been on and enhances flexibility, but it doesn’t tie our hands into pausing in June if the data between now and then are so strong as to necessitate, in our view, a further move at that time.<END>
I think B does leave open the door to as much additional tightening as may be needed, whereas C actually suggests that we think the tightening is over.
Now, personally, I judge the additional amount of tightening needed to be modest, although I think a bit of additional restraint is probably desirable.
I think we are close to being done because I’m comfortable with the Greenbook forecast, and I also think our policy stance is roughly appropriate based May 10, 200692 of 120on a variety of rule-based metrics.
I do think a bit more tightening is needed because I’d prefer to see core inflation gradually head down toward the center of my comfort range rather than see it stabilize in the vicinity of 2 percent, as in the Greenbook forecast.
<START>I want to emphasize that only a bit is required, not a show of overwhelming force, because, as one example, the benchmark Taylor rule would suggest that a ½ percent reduction in the target inflation rate, say from 2 to 1½, the center of my comfort zone, calls for an additional increase of only 25 basis points in the funds rate, and various simulations using optimal policies as opposed to rules would similarly show a quite slow convergence toward the lower target rate.<END>
We’ve seen that in past Bluebooks.
I strongly favor a pause in our campaign in order to evaluate the effect of our policy actions to date, unless incoming data after this meeting contain large upside surprises.
Like President Hoenig, I do certainly understand the urge to continue raising rates at every meeting until we’re sure the economy is slowing.
<START>I still remember very well the 1994 tightening episode, and then, as now, there was a sense of great momentum in the economy, posing significant upside risks to inflation.<END>
In circumstances like that, the urge to continue tightening is natural.
It is instinctual.
Unfortunately, with policy lags such a strategy is a sure recipe for overshooting.
<START>If we’re lucky enough to stop at exactly the right point this time, as I believe we actually did in ’95, we can be sure that it will feel risky at the moment we stop and wise only in retrospect.<END>
<START>The risks for policy, in my view, are now two-sided, and this is especially true with the substantial run-up since our last meeting in longer-term interest rates.<END>
<START>Downside risks due to a possible policy overshooting are now balanced in my mind with the upside risk that we have not done enough, and I would consider a pause to evaluate where we stand as desirable and appropriate, unless of course there is new and surprising information.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Olson.
May 10, 200693 of 120MR. OLSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
<START>I suppose I could just support the comments that President Yellen made and shut up, but I won’t.<END>
[Laughter] I recall in previous meetings that I said that increases would be harder and harder to justify, and I certainly expected that by this time we would have paused, although I do believe that a ¼ point raise is appropriate this time.
Were we to accept alternative A, having conditioned the market to think that we would raise until we are done, it seems to me that we would send a signal that we were done if we did pause at 4¾ percent.
<START>On the other hand, the analysis that suggests that there will be a slowing of the economy has been a compelling argument made in the Greenbook, and therefore the description in sentence 2 seems to me to be accurate.<END>
Were we to raise 50 basis points, it would have to be on the basis of an analysis that is more a gut feeling than an analytical approach.
Therefore, I think that alternative B, the ¼ point, is appropriate.
We are at an inflection point.
As I have heard many of you say many times, the inflection point is the most difficult part of the cycle, when the most difficult decisions have to be made.
I think President Hoenig made that point earlier.
The wording that I think is going to attract the most attention is in part 4 when we say “the extent and timing.” By that wording we are conveying that we are at an inflection point and that we may move away from the every-meeting 25 basis point move, or at least that is how I interpret it.
So I am in favor of alternative B as written.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support a 25 basis point increase at this meeting, and I like the changes that have been made to alternative B because I wanted to make sure that we came out of this with a statement that left our options open at the next meeting.
While the recent inflation trends
—recent being the last six months or, in other words, from before the hurricanes to where we are now
—have give me a little more anxiety, I can visualize scenarios that will make us want to pause or stop at the next meeting.
That is why I, too, like the words “extent and timing” in May 10, 200694 of 120line 4 that Governor Olson just cited.
That wording allows us to stop or keep going and to choose the timing.
I think the wording there is excellent.
“Inflation expectations remain contained”:
I have no suggestions about how to change that line, but after listening to the dialogue around the table, I have to admit that it is the one line that gives me pause.
<START>The various measures of core inflation have been running in the upper 2 percent area in the past six months, and that is above my personal comfort zone.<END>
If other folks are looking at those measures, then that is perhaps partly why we’re getting some of these movements in long-term rates.
The wording does leave me uncomfortable.
At least “well” is gone;
<START>inflation expectations are now just “contained.” [Laughter] But they are contained at a level above what I would be comfortable with.<END>
How we change the wording I do not know, but I agree that that particular phrase in the statement does create some anxiety.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Kroszner.
MR.
KROSZNER.
I agree with the 25 basis point move at this time.
I think we have seen some beginnings of evidence of heightened inflation risk relative to six weeks ago, and I think it is also very important, as President Yellen mentioned, that looking back historically, we do not want to get too far out ahead and then have some regrets.
But we also have to be concerned about how our actions will be interpreted by the market and to think about the longer-run expectations.
<START>We have to convey that we do have some uncertainty about where the economy is going, and I think that is well reflected in our discussion here and in alternative B. But it is extremely important to keep our powder dry.<END>
<START>I really like the idea of saying that not only will we be looking at the data as we normally do in our due diligence but also we are going to be looking at things because there is uncertainty.<END>
<START>We do not have an ideological view that we must make sure that every last concern about inflation is stamped out, without concern about growth, or vice versa.<END>
May 10, 200695 of 120Also, as I said last time, it is hard to know exactly where we need to go to be at the right level.
At best, we can be within 25 basis points of where we would hope things would be, but obviously, it is quite literally a moving target since the underlying economy is moving.
That said, I think it is very important to emphasize in the statement what First Vice President Stone mentioned:
<START>If you look at what we say in line 4, we do specifically mention that some further policy firming may be needed to address yet inflation risks, which is not something that we had specifically singled out before and which I think helps offset the concern about the phrase “inflation expectations remain contained.” Although we have discussed that inflation expectations have moved up somewhat, I think that to say they are no longer contained is incorrect.<END>
<START>We have seen a bit of tick-up of actual inflation and a bit of tick-up of some, but not all, measures of inflation expectations.<END>
<START>As Vince mentioned, the most recent numbers coming from Blue Chip suggest that the professional forecasters are not saying that inflation expectations are moving up.<END>
I am concerned that, if we took out that phrase, which we have had for a while, we would be suggesting that we do think things are becoming unhinged and that might be a self-fulfilling prophecy moving in exactly the wrong direction.
<START>So I think the balance that we have now heightens our emphasis on inflation risk in number 4 but does not say that inflation expectations have moved too far beyond (and I do not think they have moved too far beyond) where they were before or that they have become unhinged.<END>
I like the balance that is there between the two.
I also like keeping in the red phrase in the second part of line 4;
but a small amendment to make it perhaps a bit easier to swallow and to make it seem not repetitive with the statement in number 5 is that, rather than saying “in any event,” we simply say, “The Committee thus will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to support the attainment of its objectives.” Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Governor Warsh.
May 10, 200696 of 120MR. WARSH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support alternative B and would like to echo Governor Kroszner with respect to the reference to inflation expectations remaining contained.
<START>In light of where the market’s expectations are, for better or for worse going into today and June, the omission of that language would be a very loud omission.<END>
I think that alternative likely would not be expected or generate the kind of balanced reaction that we are trying to achieve.
The other emphasis that we have in section 4 addresses what I think is the balance of the discussion that we had today.
I also like in alternative B the reference to the current state of the economy in the first line of part 2, where we say that it has been quite strong so far this year.
This wording provides some credibility to some of the data that the markets are perhaps not as focused on as they should be.
So on balance, I do support alternative B as written and would make only a couple of points.
As we approach our last move, or potentially our last move, with respect to this tightening cycle, it does strike me that the burden of persuasion, if not the burden of proof, rests with us to change course.
I do not think that there is any evidence to this point that we ought to stop or even suggest to the market that a pause is in some way imminent.
We have all largely agreed that the risks of policy error here have increased, and that is why a lot of consistency between the alternative B language and our March FOMC language is perfectly appropriate.
<START>As the Vice Chairman referenced in the earlier round, we are trying to express to the markets our view of uncertainty so that they do not take what we say as a guarantee of future results but look at the data in real time as we look at the data rather than look directly just at us.<END>
The balance that has been struck in section 4 does that very well.
Should we get to a pause at some point over the course of the next several meetings, it needs to be preceded by vigilance, which I do see reflected in section 4.
<START>I would conclude only that it is better to leave interest rate expectations higher at this moment until we see some real signs of inflation falling more into that zone of comfort, which President Yellen and others referenced.<END>
Thank you.
May 10, 200697 of 120CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Thank you.
My sense is that we probably have a bit more to do, and it would be helpful to signal that.
Of course, we cannot be sure we have more to do, and we certainly cannot be sure how much more, if anything, we have to do.
We have sort of debated two views on the optimal path going forward at various times.
One option is that we move until we are confident that after the move we can leave policy expectations flat.
Another option is to say we move until just short of that and pause at a point that leaves some positive slope to the path going forward.
I guess I am a little more comfortable with the latter strategy than with the former.
Even if we knew with confidence what was clearly optimal, we really would not know at this point when that pause should come.
<START>We always face some uncertainty about the band that defines the appropriate policy path, but I think we still want to err on being at the upper edge of that band, wherever it is.<END>
<START>We probably want to stop tightening before inflation peaks, given the lags with which policy operates, but we probably do not want to signal that we are going to stop when expectations at long horizons are still moving up a bit.<END>
A few final points:
I think inflation expectations require a difficult balance.
We don’t want to look as though we are spooked by the rise in inflation expectations, nor do we want to look as though we are indifferent to them.
I can see lots of ways we can strike that balance.
A rhetorical preference:
We all like to use the simplifying rhetorical device of saying that we are going to be more “data dependent” going forward.
I prefer that we say that we are going to be more “outlook dependent” or “forecast dependent” so that we do not look as though we are going to be a little too volatile in responding to near-term changes in the data.
<START>I am broadly comfortable with the language in B, and I think we should obviously move 25 basis points today.<END>
May 10, 200698 of 120CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
Let me just talk a bit about the policy option and the statement.
I think we are facing two goals that are difficult to achieve at the same time.
The first one is to respond to some increase in inflation risk and what might be a bit of an inflation scare in the bond markets.
<START>In order to respond to that, we would have to signal that we are willing and able to continue to respond to inflation as it rears its ugly head.<END>
<START>If you like, inflation is the nail, and monetary policy is the hammer.<END>
We do not have to strike the nail, but we have to show that we are not putting down the hammer.
We have to keep it in our hand.
[Laughter] In that respect, I think it is important that we not signal that there is a definite pause.
I am also disturbed by the response of inflation compensation to those signals.
We need to keep the option open to respond once or even more than once if the inflation data and the economic outlook dictate that response.
I do think that the use of the further policy firming language in part 4, which repeats the March statement, will be viewed as hawkish and will probably have some upward effect on yields.
Our second objective is to maximize our flexibility, given the degree of uncertainty that we now face in the economy.
I agree with Vice Chairman Geithner that an optimal policy can well include pauses for two reasons
—perhaps more than two, but here are two.
The first is that we gather information over time;
to the extent that we gather useful information and uncertainty is resolved, we can make a better decision.
Between now and June we are going to see two CPI reports, two rounds of housing sales and starts and permits, two retail sales figures, and two industrial production figures, just to note some of the data that we will be seeing between now and the next meeting.
<START>So I think it is useful for us to indicate that we will be responding to changes in the outlook and to leave ourselves the flexibility to respond in June according to how the outlook evolves.<END>
I am very sensitive to the issue of overshooting.
At least in principle, the correct response is that we look at the outlook, not at the current data.
To the extent that our forecasts incorporate the lagged effects of May 10, 200699 of 120interest rates, we should, in principle at least, be trying to accommodate that issue.
So I recommend a 25 basis point increase today.
I recommend alternative B. I have a couple of questions for the group.
I gather that most people have acceded to that statement, but let me just ask a couple of questions about the language.
The first is, Could we drop number five?
It does reemphasize the broad principle that we respond to changes in economic prospects, but it is a bit redundant given the previous statement.
So that is the first question I am going to ask you.
The second question has to do with inflation expectations.
I think it would be a big mistake to somehow indicate that we thought they were not contained.
First of all, it is not factually correct, as Vincent’s demonstration showed.
<START>Second, it would convey a concern about the state of expectations that is greater than the one we actually have.<END>
What we could do
—and I am a little reluctant, but I am open to the suggestion
—would be to say in that sentence, “Inflation expectations have risen slightly but remain contained” or something like that.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Instead of saying “remain,” you could just say “are.” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Or “are contained.” MS. MINEHAN.
“And inflation expectations are contained.” CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Well, I would say “remain” because, remember, it is even after the change.
They were contained before, and now they remain contained, despite the increase.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Yes, but “remain” seems to me to say that they are at the same level as they were before, whereas “are” says they are in the container.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
No, it just says they are still contained.
President Moskow.
MR.
MOSKOW.
Mr. Chairman, I like the change you suggest.
The important point is for the outside world to be aware that we recognize there has been a change in inflation expectations.
I mean, if we May 10, 2006100 of 120keep it exactly as we had it before, we look as though we are not aware of what is happening in the marketplace.
So I think your change is a very good one.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Is there anyone who has an opposite view?
MR.
KROSZNER.
I think as you said, Mr. Chairman, putting in number 4 that we are singling out one of the two objectives
—addressing inflation
—is going to be perceived as a hawkish move relative to what we had before.
Therefore, I do not think making the additional change is necessary because I think that has largely been conveyed.
Given the relatively small changes in inflation expectations, to even acknowledge that there are small changes
—although saying so is factually correct
—goes further than is necessary.
<START>But I share your concern about wanting to make sure that we are very clear that we are concerned about inflation and inflation expectations.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Hoenig.
MR.
HOENIG.
I would not change the language.
I would leave it as it is because inflation expectations are contained, and we want to make sure they stay contained.
That is what the two sentences independent of one another do.
I think it is a good balance.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
I agree with President Hoenig and Governor Kroszner.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
First Vice President Stone.
MR.
STONE.
Even though I said I certainly would think about it, I am satisfied from what I have heard around the table about the balance between part 4 and part 3.
<START>The probability is of doing more harm than good with changing that, and so even modest changes in the wording are probably not worth making.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Fisher.
MR.
FISHER.
Mr. Chairman, in the subsequent sentence we have “the potential to add to inflation pressures,” and then in the first sentence in paragraph 4 we say that “further policy firming may be needed May 10, 2006101 of 120to address inflation risks.” So you want to be careful you do not have overkill here, even though I am very worried about inflation.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you for these comments.
<START>If it is all right with you, President Moskow, I would like to hold off on this until the evidence is a little clearer that inflation expectations have moved up.<END>
Other comments?
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Mr. Chairman, in number 5, I always felt it was redundant when we had clearly communicated we were on this long trajectory.
<START>But when we are near a turning point or a pausing point, it is probably more important to remind the market that things can happen that we do not expect, that it is not a precise forecast, and I find that this sentence is more useful at turns than it is when we are on a long-run trajectory.<END>
<START>So I just do not feel good about taking it out now when we have had it when it was really redundant.<END>
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Lacker.
MR.
LACKER.
<START>I can see that taking out “remain contained” would signal a change in our container size that would probably confuse the markets, but I am broadly sympathetic to Michael’s point, and as inflation expectations evolve further, I am going to be more sympathetic to that.<END>
With regard to five, taking it out strikes me as likely to cause markets to view what is read in alternative B, part 4, as the rewording of what is part 5 in the March statement, and so I do not think they are going to view it as a withdrawal of substantive indication of the extent to which we are going to be outlook dependent.
So I would be in favor of taking it out.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Minehan.
MS.
MINEHAN.
I am in favor of taking it out unless someone can tell me what different thing it says other than what is said in the last part of sentence 4.
<START>Maybe I am missing something, but I think sentence or row 4, whatever we call it, says that we are going to firm, to address inflation risks, but we May 10, 2006102 of 120emphasize that the extent and timing will depend importantly on the evolution of the economic outlook as implied by incoming information.<END>
How is that different from what we are saying in row 5?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
The slight difference is that it refers specifically to firming whereas the last paragraph says that as a broad general principle.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Do we think that the last sentence gives us the ability then to reduce rates in the context?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
If necessary.
MS.
MINEHAN.
Because there are ways you could change the language in row 4 to deal with that.
But if that is what you think, if you feel that that gives us a little more flexibility, I guess I do not have a problem with it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
<START>I support leaving row 5 in, and I support it because the old row 5 referred to the dual objectives of price stability and sustainable growth, which came in row 4.<END>
The new row 4 does not refer to sustainable growth at all.
<START>This is vague, but if challenged, we could at least say that we have not forgotten about our dual objectives.<END>
If we omit any even indirect reference to the dual objectives, it does not describe our reaction function and would not be the right thing to do.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
I would append to Governor Kohn’s remark and just say that for that reason, President Minehan, it does have the benefit of adding to flexibility.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
I strongly support what Governor Kohn said.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
All right.
President Fisher.
May 10, 2006103 of 120MR. FISHER.
<START>This is slight heresy, but after the word “information” in row 4, I would just put “in support of the attainment of our objectives” or “its objectives.” Take out the black stuff.<END>
It is a slight change.
That achieves what Cathy wants.
MS.
MINEHAN.
There are easy ways to modify row 4 to make it do the same thing.
MR.
FISHER.
That is what I mean.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
At this point, having heard the discussion, I would like to propose to the group that we keep line 5 where it is.
Line 4 talks specifically about this firming proposal and the possibility of a pause.
Line 5 responds to both of our objectives and re-emphasizes the fact that we do have, of course, symmetric employment/inflation objectives.
I think I have heard around the table a few times in previous contexts that any change has implications that we may or may not be able to predict very well.
Any other comments on this statement?
Yes, President Poole.
MR.
POOLE.
I would like to ask Vince if he would give us a judgment about how the language of alternative B is likely to affect the market’s probability of action in June.
MR.
REINHART.
Oh, I thought that question was directed to Dino.
[Laughter] MR. POOLE.
I would be happy to have you both address it.
MR.
REINHART.
In yesterday’s quotes, the July fed funds contract was at 5.07;
so that is basically a 7-out-of-25 chance that the Committee would act.
In the design of B, we thought that the probability would move it up into the 50-50 to 60-40 range.
<START>I think it is probably a little tougher than what is in the Bluebook, so I am a little more confident it would be above 50-50.<END>
MR.
KOS.
It would raise it.
MR.
POOLE.
I will tell you my instinct is that the part that is in red will be viewed as actually producing a presumption that the first part will not be carried through.
As it says, “policy firming may yet be needed.” But then the part in red, it seems to me, tempers that very, very substantially, and it is not clear May 10, 2006104 of 120to me at all that this language is likely to increase the market’s odds on a further increase in June.
That is my own feeling.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
The test I would apply would be what the odds are as of October.
There is the possibility that there might be some shifting in timing between, say, June and August, for example.
MR.
POOLE.
Obviously this is something that is very hard to gather any evidence on in advance.
I am just telling you my gut feeling for what’s going to happen is that this will reduce the market’s expectation about action in June, and I would be surprised if that were just simply switched out later in the year.
MR.
REINHART.
Well, President Poole, the most unsatisfying paragraphs in the Bluebook meeting after meeting are the ones that try to divine what the market reactions to alternative statements will be.
We do not have a scientific way of doing it.
MR.
POOLE.
The reason I raise the question is that I agree very much with Jeff that we do not want language that reduces the market expectation of another action in June, unless the data between now and then change the outlook sufficiently.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
There are two parts, though.
Part is the effect today.
<START>My guess is that it will be hawkish on net, but there is a lot of uncertainty, and so you may be right.<END>
The other part of this is the indication of responsiveness to data.
So if the intermeeting data
—and I noted how many different things we are going to be seeing
<START>—are suggestive of greater inflation pressures, I imagine that when we sit down here in June we will have a much better idea of what is expected and what we are likely to do at that point.<END>
Dino.
MR.
KOS.
Again, the three words that the market would be looking for are “further policy firming.” Those are the three that they will be looking for and that will be taken as the signal of likely May 10, 2006105 of 120action in June.
Now, what follows actually creates a bit more uncertainty because it is not as direct as some previous statements have been.
So I think the probability goes up, but maybe not to 100 percent or to 80 or 90 percent.
So I think Vince is in the right ballpark in his judgment.
MR.
REINHART.
One last point is that the second part of the sentence in row 4 is partly already in markets because it is a repetition of what was in the Joint Economic Committee testimony.
So in that sense, I agree with Dino that they will be looking at the earlier words.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Are there any other comments?
Yes.
MR.
MOSKOW.
I just had a question.
It is a slight, minor change, but would it make any difference if you took out the two words “emphasizes that” from number 4?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
I think it would make a difference because it would focus the market very much on the first part of the sentence, which basically is saying that we are going to move again in June.
What we want to do is retain the flexibility to move or not move, depending on the flow of data between now and then.
MR.
MOSKOW.
So it is intentional that those two words are in there.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Yes.
Any other comments?
MS.
DANKER.
I will be reading the directive from page 29 of the Bluebook.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 5 percent.” And the risk assessment from the press release that’s being handed around:<END>
<START>“The Committee judges that some further policy firming may be needed to address yet inflation risks but emphasizes that the extent and timing of any such firming will depend importantly on the May 10, 2006106 of 120evolution of the economic outlook as implied by incoming information.<END>
In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to support the attainment of its objectives.” Chairman Bernanke Yes Vice Chairman Geithner Yes Governor Bies Yes President Guynn Yes Governor Kohn Yes Governor Kroszner Yes President Lacker Yes Governor Olson Yes President Pianalto Yes Governor Warsh Yes President Yellen Yes CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
The Governors need to join me.
[Recess] CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you, everyone.
There are a couple of other quick items.
First, I would like to ask Governor Kohn to give a brief report on his subcommittee on communications.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Presidents Stern and Yellen have agreed to serve with me on this subcommittee, the full-frontal subcommittee, I guess.
[Laughter] We see our mission as helping the Committee
—bringing issues to the Committee, helping frame the discussion, trying to figure out the topics and the logical order in which they should be addressed, and reaching out to Committee members.
We do not see our mission as coming up with hard and fast recommendations to the FOMC but as just helping the discussion along.
If we do see some consensus developing as we talk to you, we will certainly let you know.
The Chairman has made it very clear to me that everything is on the table in terms of communication between the Committee members and the outside world.
We will think about goals and how best to meet them, how we can accomplish this.
Our objective for the coming intermeeting period is to put an agenda together, to figure out the topics that we collectively should be talking about and some order May 10, 2006107 of 120in which to approach this.
So we will be talking to you between now and the June meeting to get your views on what should be on the table and how we should approach some of these issues.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
Thank you.
We have now had experience with both a two-day and a one-day meeting.
I hope that maybe in June we will be able to make some kind of decision about how to schedule meetings going forward.
I am going to ask Vincent to poll everyone during the intermeeting period about preferences as to meeting structure, scheduling, and the like.
If anyone would like to make a comment at this point about today’s meeting or this general issue, this would be the time.
I hear none.
You will be hearing from Vincent, and we will put this on the agenda for discussion next meeting.
The final formal action is just to note that the next meeting will be a two-day meeting on June 28 and 29.
Thank you.
We are adjourned.
END OF MEETING May 10, 2006108 of 120
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 134
