Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 18, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., on Tuesday, November 18, 1980, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Baughman, and Eastburn, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Altmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryPetersen, General CounselOltman, Deputy General CounselMannion, Assistant General CounselAxilrod, EconomistHolmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ettin, Henry,Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System OpenMarket AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market Account11/18/80Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Prell and Siegman, Associate Directors, Divisionsof Research and Statistics, and International Finance,respectively, Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Boardof GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Boykin, Doyle, and McIntosh, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Chicago, and Boston,respectivelyMessrs. Boehne, Brandt, Danforth, Keran, Parthemos, andScheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Philadelphia, Atlanta, Minneapolis, San Francisco,Richmond, and Chicago, respectivelyMr. Kubarych and Mrs. Nichols, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of New York, and Chicago, respectivelyMr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, Federal ReserveBank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 18, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to act on the minutes.MR. PARTEE. So moved.MR. SCHULTZ. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Pardee.MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Should we ratify the transactions before Iforget?MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are ratified. Isthere any discussion?MR. WALLICH. Scott, you made a number of very interestingobservations. I just want to check on how to interpret them. One,you said we bought as many marks as we possibly could. Was therereally in some sense a restraint on how much we could do? Whycouldn't we have done more?MR. PARDEE. It's an interesting exercise in how we achieve acertain objective. In order to maximize our purchase of marks, wehave to have a rising dollar market. So each time the dollar wouldrise, we would be in the market either in New York or in Frankfurtthrough the Bundesbank. But we would do small amounts. And to theextent that we would be perceived as operating we would [then want to]be perceived as backing away. It's quite different from an operationin which we're trying to stop a movement in the rate. The idea was toallow the rate to continue to move and thereby we would continue toamass marks. Once the exchange market comes to a stable point, it'svery difficult to dig many marks out of it.MR. WALLICH. My second question: You said the dollar mighthave been driven to levels that would have been perceived asunsustainable without this intervention. Do you have any thoughts asto what these levels might have been?MR. PARDEE. It's very possible that it could have gone over2 marks to the dollar, but with a much more volatile market, muchgreater pressure on our foreign central bank counterparts to dosomething in response to the decline in their currencies, and muchgreater pressure on the EMS snake relationship.MR. WALLICH. I also noted that you said we helped othercountries hold their interest rates down. I believe that is right andI believe intervention can have that function. And it's an importanteffect. I just want to argue that one can't trade off interventionfor interest rates very far, though there is some such effect.11/18/80MR. PARDEE. I tried to phase it artfully. I don't see thatnecessarily as an objective of policy. No one has told me that it'san objective of policy. I'd say it's more a result of the policy.MR. WALLICH. And finally, were you satisfied with the amountof foreign support you got and their maintenance of orderly marketsonce the dollar dropped sharply and then recovered sharply?MR. PARDEE. Well, the only instance of foreign support wasfrom the Bundesbank on that Tuesday morning. Since we are operatingthrough them to buy marks, there is the possibility that we wouldcomplete the circle and ask them also to sell marks for us. The riskis that once we start intervening through the Bundesbank really insupport of the dollar, then we will take over all of the operations onboth sides of the Atlantic, which could be very expensive. So on thatmorning, I talked to my friend from the Bundesbank who said he had noparticular interest in buying dollars that morning, but he did noticesome conditions that he considered to be disorderly--that iswidespread, sharply moving rates--in the market. So he did step inand buy dollars even though as far as his broader interests wereconcerned there was no need to step in at that time. But we did havegood cooperation. I hope our operations now are buying a good bit ofcooperation for the next sequence of difficulties for the dollar.MS. TEETERS. What do you mean by that? Do you think thedollar is going to drop?MR. PARDEE. Exchange markets are very volatile. We haveperiods in which the dollar rises and we have periods in which itdrops. And as I indicated, to the extent that interest rates leveloff or drop back, we may have a decline in the dollar. And to theextent that the markets tend to overreact then, I am sure we will beback in the market on the other side. This has been the way of lifesince 1973.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Scott, would you say that our trading partnersare estimating our current account improvement at close to the samemagnitude as the staff estimates?MR. PARDEE. You might know more about that than I do, [Ted].MR. TRUMAN. I am not sure about our trading partners per se.The market in general tends to have a somewhat smaller [estimate ofour] current account surplus in 1981 than we do. The OECD has aforecast for our current account surplus for 1981 in the $12 billionrange as compared with the staff's $18 billion. Now, I would considerthose in the same ball park, but we tend to be a little higher thanthe consensus that I am aware of.MR. BLACK. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I guess I don't understand the operating rulesthat we use for intervention any more, Scott. I thought we intervenedonly in disorderly markets. We have had a market that has been moving11/18/80up; it was not particularly disorderly. You said we bought as manymarks as we possibly could. I didn't understand that to be whatpeople did when they intervened. And my impression is that we boughtfar more marks than the Germans did. That is, we are doing thesupporting of the mark, not the Germans. And you gave as a reason forit that it helps hold down interest rates abroad, which I think is avery strange reason indeed because it seems to me that if we want tohold down interest rates, we ought to hold them down here not abroad.So I just don't understand what is happening. You also said that wewere doing this to match the Treasury's [foreign currency] debt. Butwe have matched the Treasury's debt. We have gone $100 million overthe Treasury's debt and you were still buying like mad early thisweek. So I think it's time for a discussion of the terms on which weintervene and what our strategy is other than that we just buy as manymarks as we can every time the dollar goes up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how prolonged a discussion wecan have, but I would state it somewhat differently.MR. PARDEE. I am open to discussion, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about buying all that we can.That's a matter of interpretation.MR. PARTEE. Well, we bought $250 million [worth of marks] orsomething like that on Monday. How much did the Germans do?MR. PARDEE. The Germans have had ahave taken up a great deal of their time. So what we've had interms of economizing time, is that the Bundesbank officials--MR. PARTEE. If we do the buying?MR. PARDEE. They've been worrying about the mark/Frenchfranc relationship and we have been worrying the mark/dollarrelationship. We have been providing them with orders, which would beroughly the type of operations they would have in line with ourobjectives and in line with the kinds of operations they haveconducted in the past as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the Germans have a mixed mindabout this whole thing. They don't like the mark depreciating, butthey at least have an argument as to whether intervention is effectiveas a means of preventing it from appreciating. There's one school ofthought that says: Let it go up so it will go down further and themarket will learn a lesson. And I think that school of thought hasbeen prevalent. But we have been in a position of rather eagerlybuying in large part because the Treasury was extremely anxious tocover its losses. They are also anxious--I think it's a reasonablepoint and this is a combined operation--to have some surplus over thecoverage of their [foreign currency denominated] bonds in case thedollar goes in the other direction. They want a cushion so we willhave some margin of protection without making them short. And Isuppose from our standpoint, a cushion seems reasonable too.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know why that is.11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a small cushion now; we haven'tdebated precisely how big the cushion might be.MS. TEETERS. But isn't that really the question? What arewe going to do now? We've covered the Treasury's debt.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's only part of the story. The otherpart is that, with the dollar rising against the mark, a normalleaning against the wind does relieve pressures on both us and theEuropeans to do something different in domestic policy than we reallywant to do. So the two things have to some degree coincided, to theextent the latter is important. I wouldn't put a lot of weight onthat in terms of affecting interest rate policy. But to the extent itaffects that, it goes in [the right] direction. So both of thosereasons coincide in suggesting that when the mark is weakeningappreciably some intervention seems desirable.MR. PARTEE. As I look at the experience of other countriesover the last couple of years, Paul, I observe that the countries withthe smallest inflation rate have been the ones with a rising currency.There's some circularity in that, of course, but it is certainly true,other things equal, that a rising currency reduces the observedinflation rate for a country. We have as a major objective of policyreducing inflation. I should think, therefore, that we would like tohave a rising currency.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mind having a rising currency tosome extent, and it has been rising. I think it's clear from whatScott said that we have not been intervening in a way to prevent anyrise in the dollar.MR. PARDEE. In fact, to the extent that we backed away--MR. PARTEE. When we buy $250 million in a day, we certainlyhave prevented some rise in the dollar that day.MR. PARDEE. To the extent that you back away, you leave animpression in the market that you're not holding the rate or, in fact,that your operations are not effective in holding the rate where itis. So you are helping the rate to move along that way.MR. WALLICH. Well, with respect to the dollar, I think wehave to aim at a happy mean. We want a strong dollar because it helpson inflation. We don't want it to get so strong that we're notcompetitive. We've had considerable appreciation in real terms. Andas far as the accumulation of reserves is concerned, in the long run Ithink we have to become like other countries and rely on ownedreserves, not on the swaps that others can deny us the use of. And weought to be building up some reserves gradually.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I second that very strongly. Chuck,it's a different kind of world in the last few years and will beincreasingly so. First of all, I would hope that we are not going tobe living permanently in a world where our interest rates are soridiculously high compared to those of other industrialized countries.I hope we will find ourselves in an improved domestic economicsituation. Under those circumstances, once that artificial stimulus[in interest rate differentials] is removed--to have a spread of 911/18/80percentage points between Eurodollar and Euro deutschmark rates isincredible--the dollar is going to go down very, very sharply.MR. PARTEE. The dollar will go down because inflationsubsides. Is that what you are saying? After all, inflation is thereason that interest rates are high.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but what I am assuming is thatthere will be some moderation, but only partial, of inflation. Therewill be a much larger drop in interest rates at periods of timebecause of the way we've seen history [work] on this.MR. MORRIS. Perhaps in the next quarter.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe next quarter. Nobody can besure of these things, but I suspect we will see disproportionatelylarge reverse movements in the dollar. I think we have to have a verysubstantial volume of our own foreign exchange resources to cope withsuch a situation. If we are always drawing on swap lines every timewe have to move in, the other countries can call the tune on us muchmore easily. Having our own resources will make us a little moremasters of our own policy. I am not sure I see why you are concernedabout this. I would not place the emphasis on intervention being agood thing because of the interest rate policy moves one can thereforeavoid to some degree. Your concern relates to intervention toaccumulate foreign exchange resources more than--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure what the facts are on this,Scott, but my impression is that at times in the past the U.S.government has had substantially more net foreign exchange resourceswhen the dollar has been strong. I don't mean huge, but our net[holdings] are only at about $200 million plus now, right?MR. PARDEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have been substantially higher thanthat in the past at times of--MR. PARDEE. Well, before the Carter notes on a couple ofoccasions we held $300 or $400 million worth of marks. It was in thatrange, but not substantially more.SPEAKER(?). We hold quite a lot of yen.MR. TRUMAN. We have yen and Swiss francs, too, at themoment.MR. PARDEE. Yes.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, may I raise a technical question?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. RICE. Do we have to sell securities in order to financeour purchases of foreign currencies?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, yes.11/18/80MR. RICE. Have we tied specific sales of securities to aspecific volume of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In effect, it is washed out as anotheroperating factor. You can't identify a sale of a security for aforeign--MR. RICE. How do we know we need funds for financing ourforeign exchange purchases?MR. PARTEE. It is a factor affecting the reserves.MR. RICE. Our foreign currency purchases?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just goes into all the other factorsdraining or providing reserves. So there is somewhat of a one-to-onerelationship.MR. RICE. So when we sell securities, we raise interestrates in the United States, do we not?MR. PARTEE. Well, that was one comment that I was going torespond to. One thing I disagree with on our policy here is that weare not buying government securities. Instead, we are buying Germanmarks, and that does have a market impact in the United States.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well,--MR. PARTEE. Secondly, we are taking an exchange risk that Idon't think is warranted for the central bank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait a minute. We are not buying Treasurysecurities; instead we buy marks in the very short run. But you haveto ask what those people would do who want to get into dollarsotherwise, and presumably those people are getting into dollars andbuying some securities. They may not be Treasury securities, but inthe larger scheme of things it is a wash in our domestic market. Weare getting a capital inflow which we would not otherwise get.MR. PARTEE. They are going to do that anyhow, aren't theythough?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, because otherwise the exchange ratewould go up and presumably we would get an equilibrium in the marketand they would not buy the securities. Sure, the analysis is that inthe immediate sense we are just selling Treasury securities; butsomebody is on the other side of that [transaction], buying somethingcoming into dollars.MR. RICE. Are you saying that the net effect on interestrates in the United States is neutral?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The net is probably zero in that sense,yes.MR. PARTEE. But it is downward on the markets[unintelligible] interest rate. Wouldn't the same thing apply in thecase of marks? [More holders will] be able to sell out of marks?11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am discussing now a mechanicalrelationship. How it affects policy, whether the Bundesbank wants toraise their interest rates or lower their interest rates because of[movement] in the exchange rates is a different matter.MR. TRUMAN. We wouldn't get the capital inflow without theintervention. I agree with your point, but the capital inflow isfacilitated by--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we wouldn't have the capital inflow.MR. TRUMAN. That's because the official intervention is theoutflow counterpart to the private inflow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is precisely my point. You don't getthe capital inflow without the intervention.MR. ROOS. To further confuse the issue, look on page 10 ofthe Bluebook. I was always under the impression that strong interestrates domestically tend to attract foreign money into our economy andbolster the value of the dollar. But on the bottom of page 10 it says"Continued intervention by the United States to slow the appreciationof the foreign exchange value of the dollar could generate additionalpressure in Treasury yields, as the Fed offers securities to themarket to finance foreign currency purchases." It looks as though, ifI understand this, we are totally chasing our tail because we areselling [Treasury securities] in order to seek [less] appreciation inthe value of the dollar in foreign exchange markets, and in theprocess we are doing something that could generate additional downwardpressure on Treasury yields. I thought that upward pressure onTreasury yields is what bolsters the value of the dollar. Or do Ihave it totally backwards?MR. SCHULTZ. That is what it does; it pushes it up not down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This gets into rather--MR. PARTEE. Except, Paul, they wouldn't have any--MR. ROOS. Except for what? It certainly doesn't do--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the immediate sense, it requires moreselling of Treasury securities. There is no question. That isbecause Treasury securities is all we operate in. The other side ofthe transaction is not identifiable and it may well not [involve]Treasury securities. Now, if that makes a difference to you, it canbe of some significance. But in terms of the general supply anddemand in the money market as a whole, it is probably a wash. But ina very direct sense we sell Treasury securities to the extent we buymarks.MS. TEETERS. But isn't the real question before us: Whatare we going to do from here on out?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if you want to have aprolonged discussion today; we can do it next time, if desirable. Thegeneral issue, as I understand it, is concern about how much [weshould accumulate]. What should be the guidelines and all the rest11/18/80and what should be our net positive position in foreign currencies?There are really two questions. There is that question plus underwhat conditions does it make sense to intervene. Now, we have justbeen basically leaning against the wind for a variety of reasons thathave been mentioned. We now have--looking at the government as awhole, and I think it is relevant in this particular case because theTreasury has been looking at our balances as a hedge against theCarter bonds at the moment--a $200 million positive position. Ifthere's real concern about that positive position and about thatgetting to the considerably bigger magnitudes that we are talkingabout and if interest rates stay high, then we have an immediateproblem. I frankly do not feel that concern. I think it would be areasonable precaution to hold amounts within the ranges we are nowtalking anyway--by which I mean in the hundreds of millions area. Ihave no real problem with that; I not only have no real problem, Ithink it is desirable for the reasons that have been suggested.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. May I comment on Chuck's secondpoint, the exchange risks? Of course, we have the same exchange riskswhen we borrow on the swap lines to support the dollar. I wouldargue, Chuck, based on my experiences at Treasury, that the exchangerisk is much smaller if we have substantial resources of our own. Weare almost sure to make money on our present operations. We arebuying the mark at a time that it is weak.MR. PARTEE. Well, you think it is weak.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I know it is weak.MR. PARTEE. You cannot foresee the future, Tony.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, one can't see it completely.There could be a Middle Eastern war, which would upset the situation.But if--MR. PARTEE. That is a very reasonable possibility, isn't it?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But if you extract frommilitary [conflict and other] extreme assumptions, in economic termswith inflation in Germany now running 3-1/2 to 4 percent and with themiserable [inflation] record we have, when our interest rates comedown--which they will to some degree though I am not saying they willcome down a helluva lot--we are going to see some major reverse flows.I think you will find that we are in a better position to minimize ourexchange risk and maximize our gains if we have a stock of resourcesthan if we are forced to start borrowing. It's just a longer-run planbasically. And it is a more comfortable situation for the people whoare actually managing this. There is no mathematical proof of this,but I feel that most people in the Treasury and in the foreignexchange area in New York would agree with me that this is the way tooperate in practice. We have not done badly at all in the last fewmonths on this whole question of exchange risks and profits and loss.And one can be a better manager when one has--MR. PARTEE. Well, certainly, if one assumes that 180 is theright rate for the mark, we ought to buy all we can at more than 180because when--11/18/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think 193 is not sustainable.MR. PARTEE. I don't know.MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Chairman, could we get a staff analysis ofour own reserves and those of other countries and some analysis ofthis particular question? Then maybe we could discuss it at the nextmeeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that is probably what we ought to do.But I would point out, just in terms of this general problem, that wehave an example currently of a country that is taking the extremeopposite view, which is the United Kingdom, and even they haveaccumulated some reserves. They have had a very high inflation rate,high interest rates, and a prolonged and very sizable appreciation ofsterling. Whether that is good or bad is the question. But that isan example of a country that is taking a different view. They havenot taken it so extremely that they haven't acquired any foreigncurrencies; they have. But they haven't acquired very many.MR. WALLICH. That is for monetary policy reasons not becausethey made decisions about reserves. I think we ought to bear in mindfirst Tony's point that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it has anything to do withtheir fears about gains or losses on foreign exchange transactions.Whether it's for, as you say, monetary policy reasons or economicpolicy reasons, they are willing to take a strongly appreciated poundto put pressure on their inflation rate.MR. WALLICH. I think gains and losses in the exchange markethave to be evaluated including the interest that one earns. On oneside if we have D-marks, as Tony says, the chances are that in thelong run the D-mark will be stronger than the dollar, but we will havelower interest earnings on that. On the other hand, if we oweD-marks, having drawn on the swap, say, that is an adverse positionbecause the D-mark may appreciate. If we pay interest in D-markterms, we would be benefitting from that. So the interest to someextent counteracts the risk factor insofar as the risk factor is basedon purchasing power parity considerations, which will not work outexactly in the long run. Also, I would like to remind you that othercountries have enormous reserves. The Germans still have, I think,$40 billion; they had $50 billion plus. The Japanese have $20billion. They all take a great risk because these reserves are mostlyin dollars, which from their perspective have depreciated, giving themlosses. We have a very large gold stock. Every time the gold pricemoves, we are becoming richer or poorer. We [never] pay any attentionto that, and rightly so. But let us not say that we are withoutexchange risks from the movement [in the value] of our financialassets.MS. TEETERS. But I am afraid we are making policy bydefault. By not giving any guidance at this point, we are saying tothe international Desk in New York to go ahead and do what it has donefor the past month. That could lead us not to $$100 million but toanother $2 billion in marks. And that seems to me a rather majordecision. Do we want the Desk as the mark rises to buy marks as11/18/80rapidly as they can and to accumulate a war chest? Is that what weare telling them to do?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is a bit of an exaggeration tosay they bought as many as they could, but that is a market judgment.MR. PARDEE. This is what I am telling the Treasury anyway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Institutionally we have to face the factthat the Treasury is extremely eager to acquire marks and build up anest egg. They will build it up if we don't. It is very awkward forthem to--MS. TEETERS. They've done it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but they're still short [oftheir objective] by about a billion dollars.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is in fact very awkward for them tohold [marks]. I don't have any disagreement with the Treasury policy.MR. GRAMLEY. I think Governor Partee's and Governor Teeter'spoint is well taken. What Governor Partee is really asking is: Whatunderlies our intervention policy? What are our objectives? Shouldwe be using intervention policy to impede progress on the inflationfront by [not] letting the dollar appreciate? What are we doing? So,I think some more analysis of the broader context would be helpful.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I accept the notion that people think thatis true. And I have no reluctance to do it. I do not myself feel theleast bit confused about what we are doing, which apparently we havenot articulated correctly. We are leaning somewhat against theappreciation of the mark and we are willing to accumulate somebalances for all the precautionary reasons that have been suggested.That's apart from mostly in the past being in the position of justgetting back into balance as the United States and that phase at themoment is over. It changed very rapidly a week ago when we suddenlygot into a minus position after being in a positive position for a fewdays. But having reached that arithmetic point, I had presumed thatwe were willing to acquire some additional foreign currenciesconsistent with our general philosophy of being willing to leanagainst the wind, anyway. Now, if that is wrong, we ought to changeit; but I don't think it is wrong.MR. PARTEE. To avoid disorderly conditions?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well,--MR. PARTEE. I believe those are the terms of the directiveof the Committee.MR. GUFFEY. The Committee does have rules with respect towhat the Desk can hold.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right. The [informal limit] nowis $1-1/2 billion. [Secretary's note: The $1-1/2 billion informallimit is for all foreign currencies excluding yen. There is aseparate limit of $1 billion for holdings of yen.]-10-11/18/80MS. TEETERS. And we can change it by notation vote betweenmeetings.MR. GUFFEY. Well, there is an intermeeting limit as well asa maximum we can hold in any one currency. Aren't we getting at ornear that limit? If it is not changed--MR. PARDEE. We might be. As I said, in marks we now have$1.1 billion against [an informal limit of] $1.5 billion. The maximumfor the total open position was left at $8 billion from an earliersiege; that we have not changed.SPEAKER(?). In all currencies?MR. PARDEE. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. So in the period ahead, we are talking aboutaccumulating a maximum of $400 million in marks unless we have anotation vote to change the limit during the intermeeting interval.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As things now stand, that is correct.MR. GUFFEY. That seems reasonable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can schedule a longer discussionof this--MR. PARDEE. Technically under the directive we have tworeasons for intervening. One is to counter disorderly conditions.The other is to change balances in light of future needs. There is avery weak need [currently] for piling up lots of marks, but in lightof future needs it's something we clearly have in mind. Also [thedirective requires that] we have close and continuous consultationwith the Treasury. And right now the Treasury is in a mood to have usbuy as many marks as we can.MR. PARTEE. Of course, this is run by a steering committeeof the FOMC, [the Foreign Currency Subcommittee]. But thatsubcommittee has to observe the rules that the Committee has laiddown. I just think the subcommittee ought to read those rules anddecide whether it is authorizing transactions in keeping with them ornot. And I would like to have a review of the subject.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can review the subject. We will reviewthe subject.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask Scott aquestion. I would be interested, Scott, in your views on thedivergent trend between the spot and the forward rates last month.The dollar rose by an average of 1.1 percent against six majorcountries on a trade-weighted basis. But the forward rate for oneyear went down by about .3 percent. And the longer-term forward ratewent down about 1 percent. What do you make of that divergent trend?MR. PARDEE. Well, we've had substantial movements ininterest rates.-11-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless the market is in disequilibrium, itis an interest rate arbitrage.MR. PARDEE. There are wider and wider differences betweendollar rates and foreign rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The market is in equilibrium isn't it?The forward differential changes every time interest ratedifferentials change.MR. PARDEE. I don't know of anything other than [that].MR. TRUMAN. If you believe--and some people do and somepeople don't--that the forward interest rate is the expected futurespot rate and has something to do with purchasing power parity, asGovernor Wallich mentioned, and things like the longer-term outlookfor a country's current account and so forth, then the fact that theforward rate has moved over this period could be interpreted assuggesting that expectations of inflation in the United States[relative to abroad] have moved up over this period. That would beone story. I am not sure, personally, whether one would want to put alot of weight on that particular story. But that is a possible andplausible interpretation of why there was an increase in thedivergence between the spot and [forward rates].MR. WALLICH. I would like to add to what Scott said aboutthe purposes of intervention. There are those two reasons hementioned. One is countering disorder, not maintaining order; wesometimes say it is countering disorder. Disorder this time seems tobe mostly on the way up whereas in the past it usually was encounteredon the way down. There is also accumulating for future needs. And Iwould say that forming a reserve is provided for in that. But themain qualification is that it has to conform with article IV,paragraph something, of the IMF articles of agreement. And that givesa fairly wide degree of latitude for intervention in conditions offloating [exchange rates]. It specifies mostly what one is notprepared to do, such as driving the exchange rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It speaks of erratic--MR. WALLICH. Erratic fluctuations, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will have a more orderly reviewof this at the next meeting. Do you have a recommendation withrespect to operations?MR. PARDEE. Yes, the swap lines are cleared. But betweennow and the end of the year all of our swap lines with 14 foreigncentral banks and the BIS come up for renewal for a further 12 months.As in the past, I am recommending that the Committee approve therenewals at this meeting, so there will be ample time for the formalexchange of cables with our partner central banks who must also gothrough their formal approval processes. This year the negotiationsare somewhat more complicated in view of the Committee's decision toeliminate the risk-sharing provisions on our drawings and to switch toour paying of interest rates based on what one would pay on thecurrencies we borrow rather than on the U.S. Treasury bill rate. Wehave had no problem with substance with the other central banks which-12-11/18/80are most affected by this decision. They agree that this is a logicalapproach. Indeed, I found out that the Bundesbank had been ratherquiet about pushing the issue because they made some furthercalculations and found that it might be to their advantage to keepthings the way they were, given the interest differentials. But theyhaven't complained that we are moving this way. For most we arewaiting for each of the central banks to indicate which specificinstrument in their market, a Treasury bill or whatever, correspondsmost closely to our Treasury bill. In most cases there should belittle difficulty. But in two important instances, with theBundesbank and with the Bank of Japan, the corresponding instrumentsto our Treasury bill are not obvious. We must be careful not to linkour swap drawings to a higher cost instrument than a Treasury billmight be. For swap arrangements on which we are not likely to draw, Isee no need to negotiate a specific instrument on their side.Nevertheless, we could come down to the wire on some of thesenegotiations, so I would like to recommend that the Committee approvethe renewal of swap arrangements now subject to a final review anddetermination by the FOMC subcommittee when these negotiations havebeen completed that the terms and conditions are acceptable. So itinvolves agreeing generally now that we can proceed with thenegotiations and then a review by the subcommittee that the terms onthe elimination of the sharing of risk and on the particularinstruments that we will be using are acceptable to the Committee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My recollection is that the Committeehasn't formally approved these [agreements at this stage] but that youare authorized to proceed and undertake these negotiations. We willhave to approve them formally at some stage. There has been somelimited consultation with the Congress by the Treasury. So far asthey are concerned, it is okay, but I am not absolutely clear in mymind that there will be no objections.MR. TRUMAN. There hasn't been any objection on the Houseside to date. There was just one question.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a consultation on the House side?MR. TRUMAN. Yes. The Treasury staff talked to people on theHouse side and they have not stirred up any objection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks as if it's proceeding on course,subject to these technical [details].MR. PARDEE. But they are important elements of thenegotiation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand.MR. PARDEE. We want to know what interest rate we are goingto be paying on the marks we borrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand. You don't need any specificaction now today, do you?MR. PARDEE. Well, approval of the renewal of the [swaps].-13-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are they going to be done before the nextmeeting?MR. PARDEE. Yes, December 4th is the first maturity for anumber of them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Do we have a motion on that?MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.MR. BLACK. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections? That is approved. Now,there is this one question of the Swedish swap, I take it, as to howbig that will be.MR. PARDEE. Right. They haven't said anything, so we havelet sleeping dogs lie. We have a sentence in the cable that will goout indicating that we are reconfirming the increase to $500 millionthrough May, which is the date set [for the expiration of thetemporary increase]. We will make reference to the agreement of lastMay in this cable. They might come back to us.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the case where we temporarilyincreased the line through next May, and you are suggesting that therenewal would be consistent with maintaining the increase but onlyuntil next May.MR. PARDEE. Right. I assume that at some point they willcome back to us and ask us to make the increase permanent. But sincethey haven't made it an issue, as I say, I have let sleeping dogs lie.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So that doesn't require any action then.MR. PARDEE. No separate action for today.MS. TEETERS. Why did they want an increase in the swap?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They were in trouble.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They wanted the increase becauseGovernor [Wohlin] felt that they might have to draw on the swap line.The $200 million line was extremely small, so we felt it would be agesture of cooperation to increase it to $500 million and it wouldgive him a little more clout, so to speak, in talking with the Swedishgovernment about what he felt were certain inflationary policies thatwere putting the Swedish currency under pressure. And this was a wayof reinforcing his position. He felt that there might be a need forit. The last time I saw him at the BIS last week heCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This was arranged last April I believe.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. It is not a burning issue, butit seemed like a useful gesture of cooperation at that time.-14-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was discussed with the Committee,though.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, yes. We approved it.MR. PARDEE. I am sure it will come up again because theywill probably ask for a continuation; but at the moment they haven't.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we are not doing anything on that. Ourearlier decision stands. All right, Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, could we have the most recentmoney supply numbers?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M-1B startled me. I don't know how therecame to be such a difference between M-1A and M-1B, $700 million forM-1A and $1.4 billion for M-1B, as Peter said. I was just looking atthese data and M-1B is only $100 million higher than it was four weeksago while M-1A is $500 million lower than it was four weeks ago. Now,the figure four weeks ago had a little spike, but we haven't had a bigincrease since the [October meeting]. We have had two weeks ofdecline and then this week of increase which has about balanced off[the declines]. I might say on those money supply figures that theydon't reflect complete reporting; they reflect reporting for all themember banks and the sample of nonmember banks that we used before.When we complete the tabulation of the nonmember banks that we havenot been getting, there may be a need for a benchmark revision, whichwould be exactly analogous to the benchmark revisions we have beenmaking every quarter anyway. We indicated in the announcement thatthat might become necessary. There is no reason to think that thebenchmark revisions will be any bigger than those we have made in thepast, but it is going to take several more weeks, I take it, to getthe flow of data from the new reporters before we integrate it. Wewill do that all at one time and then if it comes out different from[the estimates based on] the sample, we will announce a benchmarkrevision.MR. ROOS. Will we get back on the Friday cycle this week?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not positive of that. Mr Axilrod isa little skeptical, I guess. We expect to do it on Monday if we don'tdo it on Friday. But we are not certain yet we can do it on Friday.I might say that as I understand it, the whole process went quitesmoothly. People seemed to be reasonably satisfied with the data wehave, though we don't have all the new reporters. Tell me, Mr. Beck,if I am not reflecting your views and other's views accurately. We donot yet have the data from the new reporters but the data from the oldreporters seem to be in pretty good shape, and we got the numberstogether with a relatively short lag. I think that's quite a tributeto the efforts throughout the System to get this done in an orderlyway. And it does seem to have gone quite smoothly. I know itinvolved a lot of hard work around the System generally.MR. BLACK. When we publish these figures, are we going tobreak down the reserve figures for the old members and then the newreporters separately?-15-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we are going to do?MR. AXILROD. If you are talking about publishing the reservefigures, I don't think so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, there is a problem here which you maybe referring to but I can't recite it all exactly. Steve, you cancorrect me, but I think the main problem we are running into is thatwe have a huge amount of excess reserves now with the new system.MR. BLACK. That is what I was thinking about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is all this vault cash. So, what weare going to do is to put an additional line on the statement thatsays "excess vault cash" or something like that. For analyticalpurposes people presumably will subtract out the vault cash that isjust sitting there from the total of excess reserves to get an excessreserve figure that seems functionally [equivalent to] the old excessreserve figure.MR. AXILROD. We are going to publish two forms of totalreserves. One will be the total including all the vault cash of allnonmember institutions, which would imply very sizable so-calledexcess reserves. But then we are also going to publish a totalreserve figure which will include the reserve [deposits] held at theFed of all depository institutions, vault cash of those institutionsthat hold required reserves at the Fed, plus the vault cash for thosewho do not hold required reserves at the Fed up to [the amount] equalto their required reserves. The sum of those figures [less requiredreserves] would be excess reserve balances at the Fed, but not excessvault cash since we are not putting in the [surplus vault cash of]nonmember institutions. And that's the item we propose to run on;that will have in it an implicit excess reserve figure that is verylittle different from the excess reserves that we've had recently.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In effect, it's excess reserves of boundbanks, bound banks meaning those that have a reserve requirementhigher than the vault cash they ordinarily hold.MR. BLACK. I was just thinking about the problem ofinterpreting these for people on the outside.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a real problem, but I--MR. AXILROD. We will explain that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We think this should satisfy them, butit's a problem for us too.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, only half in jest, I would like tosuggest that this would be a good excuse to stop publishing weeklyfigures at all and to publish them about once a month. I am moreconvinced that these weekly numbers create more mischief than they dogood. Is that doable at all under the Freedom of Information Act?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've [looked at] that, I think.-16-11/18/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It is doable in one way, because Ihave looked into it. If we publish the weekly seasonally unadjustedfigures and only make our seasonal adjustment calculation once a monthwhen we publish the seasonally adjusted figures for the month, then weare okay under the Freedom of Information Act. But if we don'tpublish the seasonal adjustment and still prepare it internally, thenwe could be subject, although with a time lag, to a Freedom ofInformation request.MR. PARTEE. People in the market would do their ownseasonals.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but there would be all differentkinds of seasonals; [they would be] all over the lot.MR. PARTEE. A Sindlinger seasonal and so forth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know, but my own instinct is thatwe would not get by with that. I have had some casual conversations[about whether] we would be subject to Freedom of Information Actsuits if we didn't straighten out these reserve figures somehow toshow them on some basis that made sense and was comparable with thepast figures, which is what we are trying to do by the way Stevedescribed it. [I was told that] people were about to bring suits todemand that we make such calculations so that they're not fouled up.I cite that as the sensitivity in this business.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, one can make a persuasiveargument that the weekly seasonal adjustment is so unreliable that itshouldn't even be prepared internally, and we could prepare it on amonthly basis [only]. Therefore, I don't see that anybody would haveto face this issue. My lawyers tell me that--MR. BALLES. That would appear to me to be a viable way outof this trap, Tony.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It boggles my imagination to think that wewould really operate for a whole month without attempting toseasonally adjust the figure.MR. PARTEE. Well, we would have to get successive estimatesof the month we are in based on weekly information, using the monthlyseasonal adjustment factors. I think it could be done. But I don'tthink it would be constructive to have ten different seasonals of theweekly numbers floating out there in market; that in itself would be asource of great confusion.MR. SCHULTZ. Legal questions aside, we are already gettingenormous criticism that we are not doing a very good job of explainingwhat we are doing right now. And if we attempted to do that, I thinkwe would get inundated with criticism. And I suspect certain membersof the Congress would rise in wrath.MR. WALLICH. I think the basic objection is that we would bethrowing away information, even if it's not very good information. Wecan always filter that. There's a great deal of research on whetherone should throw away information just because it's not very good.The answer is to filter it and give it little weight. We may be-17-11/18/80giving too much weight to the weekly data, but to throw them awaytotally just reduces the accuracy of the steering mechanism.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may be too Polyannaish, but when Iobserved the market recently, I thought there was a change in thatthey have kept these weekly figures in some reasonable perspective.They haven't jumped all that much just on the basis of one week'sdata. Occasionally, we get a jump because they say, in effect: Wewere hoping it would come down and now we have lost hope. And that'spretty much the way that we have looked at it, too. If we have thesetargets, we really can't blame them for observing [the trend] over aperiod of time.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's true, Paul. PeterSternlight also feels that the market is reacting to the weeklynumbers in a more moderate way. Even so, it is interesting that threemore public-minded and important market participants in New York intelephone calls to me over the last couple of months basically madethe same suggestion that John Balles has made. They believe that theweekly figures are inadvisable and are causing much more volatility inthe market.MR. BALLES. That's what I am concerned about. Surely, therecan't be anything that says we have to publish bad numbers. We havebeen faced with enormous changes, such as social security changes andgovernment pay increases and so forth, that have created realsuspicion about the meaning of the numbers we are churning out,despite the best job that the staff can do. I am sure that the staffis doing their best on these weekly seasonals, but they have to be thewildest, most unreliable things that we--MR. GRAMLEY. But if we publish seasonally unadjustednumbers, they will be even more erratic. And it's true that therewill be a lot of seasonal adjustment factors floating around themarket. But the official numbers put out by the Fed will be even moreerratic than what we put out now. It doesn't seem to me that we canever correct the problem that is bothering the market except by notreacting to the weekly numbers the way we do. We are [now] causing aproblem by reacting to them.MR. BALLES. It's the market that is reacting to them,though, not us.MR. GRAMLEY. Those numbers were around there for a long,long time, John, before we got onto the policy that generated theseerratic movements in interest rates. It is not the market's fault.It is our fault. If we want more stability in rates, we know how toget it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I am willing to re-examine thisissue. I don't know how to do it analytically. My own instinct, asexpressed by Fred Schultz, is that even if 90 percent of the people inthe market agreed with us, the other 10 percent are going to raise aruckus and there's going to be a big brouhaha. We can look at theissues; I don't know how to look at them systematically, but we cantry.-18-11/18/80MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we have done various kinds ofresearch, which we could make available to the Committee, to try todetermine if the market has behaved "rationally" or not. My memory isthat the results are that mainly they have behaved rationally. Thatis, they have moved when they view the change in the money supply as agood predictor of the change in the federal funds rate and have notmoved otherwise for the most part. So from that point of view, theredoesn't seem to have been all that much irrationality in marketreactions. But we can update that research and present it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, we would lose something [bychanging] this. On some occasions, obviously, it is extremelyannoying to publish these weekly numbers which may be erratic. Onother occasions, like today, when the market is thinking that themoney supply is even stronger than it probably is, it is nice to getthe numbers out and show them it is not quite as wild as they think itis.MR. BLACK. Let's just publish them when they're good!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I could edit the figures--MR. WALLICH. I can't see how one can believe in markets andthen try to avoid supplying information, however [questionable it is].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we have a little paperwritten on the pros and cons of this.MR. FORD. Paul, if we do that, which I strongly [favor]--Isupport the notion that we should look at the pros and cons of all ofthe issues that have been raised--we ought to consider one other basicquestion, which we are assuming can't be raised. And that is just notgenerating the numbers so often. I heard you say that we couldn'toperate for a month or even two weeks without going through thisexercise. But [I wonder about that] when I look at the commitment ofresources that we are making to this--the overtime, the blood, sweat,and tears of the staff. One can discount that very heavily in termsof a need for information. But there are other countries in theworld, it seems to me, that operate their monetary policy withoutgoing through this tremendous expenditure of resources and all theproblems of revising and re-revising and interpreting and re-interpreting the data.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, if you raise that question, youhave to raise the question of how we keep reserve requirements,because basically these figures are generated in the first place sothe banks know what their reserve requirement is. [Unintelligible]monthly reserve requirements.MR. GRAMLEY. We could take the incoming deposit reports,which are on a micro basis, and calculate reserve requirements whichare not based on the same concept of deposits that goes into the moneysupply. Then we could if we wished, as we used to do many years ago,just calculate the money supply on the last day of the month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can theoretically; it is not going tosave much work.-19-11/18/80MR. PARTEE. The problem of [using just] that day is that itmight be high and it might be low. Then it would be like--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we do a paper raising all theseissues.MR. AXILROD. We wrote it 3 or 4 years ago.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I would hope that if you do a paper ofthat kind there would be an added dimension to it. And that is thatgiven the environment we are living in today, communication has becomean integral part of monetary policy to a degree that it never has beenbefore. What people are thinking about in regard to what is going onand our credibility are of considerable importance to the policyitself. So I would say to you that there may be an added dimension interms of communications that wasn't an issue 2 or 3 years ago, whichshould be addressed in such a paper.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In this general connection, let me make apoint about something I have looked at recently in preparing sometestimony. I don't know if it will provide you with any reassuranceor not, but if you think our M1 has been unstable, look at any foreigncountry's M1 figure. If you look at the data over a period of years,the standard deviation in the United States is about half of that inother countries on a monthly basis, as I recall the numbers. Even theannual numbers don't look any better; they look worse. Isn't thecharacteristic of all these series that M1 is much more unstable thanM2 and M3?MR. ROOS. In this connection, could someone just reportbriefly on the progress of Steve's effort to restudy how we are doing?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's try to do it later. I don'tknow what it is myself. But let's get on with our work here.MR. BALLES. One final point, if I may, Mr. Chairman. I havebeen impressed with the ingenuity of the Board's legal staff infinding ways around the date in the Monetary Control Act on whichreserve requirements would have to be put into effect. I hope theywill exercise that same ingenuity with respect to our purportedresponsibility under the Freedom of Information Act to put out weeklymoney supply figures. I hope that issue can be examined in depth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will produce a memorandum. Did youhave a comment that you wanted to make earlier, Bob?MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we have gotten right far off [thetopic]. My comment was related to a technique on monetary policy. Idon't know whether you feel we have time for anything more on that ornot. I can ask at a later time. It's an important point, but we havespent right much time, so I'll wait.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did we ratify your transactions, Mr.Sternlight?MR. EASTBURN. Could I ask Peter a question? Peter, wouldyou elaborate just a little on the techniques of the Desk in view of-20-11/18/80the uncertainties in these numbers? Are you operating pretty much asbefore or what?MR. STERNLIGHT. I was apprehensive a month ago about thekind of flow of information we might have as we came up to theNovember 13 date. I was gratified that we did not seem to be gettingas much confusion and uncertainty [as I expected], at least, as thatweek began. Things seemed to be settling down in a reasonablepattern. Now, I have to allow that I was thrown off by the demandsfor reserves that we experienced yesterday. I just don't have anexplanation of that. I am not sure whether it had more to do with thechanges coming out of the Monetary Control Act or whether it was justsome unsettlement in the immediate wake of the new discount rate andpenalty rates. Until I can see more on the behavior in terms ofdesired holdings of excess reserves and so on, I just don't have agood answer. But at least up until now, we have not felt a need for asignificant departure from what had been our mode of operation.MR. CORRIGAN. May I ask just one quick question, Steve?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It better be quick.MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of what you mean to publish, I thinkyou said that the reserve numbers will include the required reservesassociated with the new reporters. The money supply numbers and totalbenchmark when done will not? Is that correct?MR. AXILROD. That's right, but it will include the samesample.MR. CORRIGAN. The sample of nonmember banks?MR. AXILROD. That's right, but that might be for only a veryfew weeks.MR. PARTEE. It's the sample that is used to estimate theuniverse, Jerry.MR. CORRIGAN. I appreciate that. Do we now have a firm fixon how many nonmembers will actually have to post reserves and whatthe level of total reserves associated with the nonmembers is?MR. AXILROD. No, not at this moment. We don't even have thetotal required reserves for members for this week as of this verymoment. That may be part of the source of Mr. Sternlight's problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. SCHULTZ. Jim, do you have the preliminary survey onbuilding permits for last month?MR. KICHLINE. We have it for the first half of the month,which was down 14 percent from the level in September.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you go ahead, Steve, and thenwe'll have a general discussion.-21-11/18/80MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we now want general comments onthe economic situation and strategy. Let me make only two preliminarypoints. First of all, the story isn't in yet but I will anticipatethe story. I don't know what is going to happen to long-term rates.I take it they are higher now, or not much changed anyway, than beforewe changed the discount rate.MR. STERNLIGHT. Not much changed but somewhat higher, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It appears that the discount rate changehas had an impact on short-term rates. I'd just point out once againthat thoughts that a discount rate change is a "freebie" in adjustingto the market are not warranted in the particular situation that weare now in, when banks are borrowing very heavily. The use of thesurcharge is an attempt to moderate that reaction, but just how muchit will moderate it or whether it will moderate it at all is nottotally clear. That's the general point on the paths. Looking ahead,let me say that I would find too intense a discussion on preciselywhere the target is in the short run sterile--not only sterile, butpossibly misleading--because it doesn't have much to do with where weset the path. As I indicated last month, we've had repeatedindications in the past few months when the figures were coming inhigh that it made very little difference where the target was set. Itmade a lot of difference as to how we reacted to the deviation fromthe target, right or wrong. And that's precisely what the discussionought to center on more profitably--whether one looks at it in termsof what the borrowing adjustments in particular should be or, as somepeople may, in terms of what kind of interest rate changes one iswilling to tolerate or permit. Those are the variables. And theyhave very little to do with whether "A," "B," or "C" is chosen becausethe actual events are likely to [vary] over a much wider range, up ordown, than is indicated [by those alternatives]. The results areunpredictable, and as Steve just said, probably not much affected bywhat we do between now and the end of the year because we simply don'thave that much time to affect the aggregates. So we have to look atit with a view that what we are doing today may affect developmentsafter the end of the year. I don't see how one can avoid it. So,with those preliminary comments--MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, could I just repeat my question toSteve on the technical study of how we go about achieving our targets?Is that progressing well?MR. AXILROD. Well, President Roos, we are going to have all-day staff meetings tomorrow and Thursday on the first drafts of thepapers and I would be in a much better position to comment after thatthan before. But so far as I can tell, people are right on schedulein the production of the documentation and I expect to have a veryfruitful meeting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to ask a question also. AmI correct in assuming that when when you talked about being in thelower half [of the ranges] in the coming year that that would be basedon the actual fourth quarter of 1980 and would not attempt to correctfor any overshooting?-22-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That has been the practice and I wouldpresume that that is what it will be, yes.MR. PARTEE. I would think we'd adjust our targets in thelight of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Consistent with past practices, ifwe wanted to adjust, in effect, we would put the target lower andexplain that as the reason why the target was lower. I don't knowthat that's written in concrete, but that is the implication of whatwe've done before anyway. It is what the Congress is used to and it'swhat we are used to. So in a sense we still have a sliding base on anannual basis. We no longer have it on a quarterly basis if wecontinue that procedure. We could debate that, but that has been thepresumption, anyway.MR. WALLICH. Well, that gives excessive weight to theachievement of the target for the rest of the year. I think it wouldbe much better just to adjust the path for the next year rather than[to try] to reach a particularly low base in order to avoid basedrift.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I see no reason [why we couldn't] doit that way--to say we're still targeting with an older base--if theCommittee wanted. We'd have some confusion, I think, in explainingourselves. But if that's what we wanted to do in substance, it isconceivable.MR. PARTEE. There are other questions involved, too. Therealways were [unintelligible] questions about justifying the floatingquarterly base and they certainly would be stronger if we weretargeting on a floating annual base.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I am not recommending that because itwould seem to complicate things even more if we were to change thepractice. How are we going to adjust for the NOW accounts [in theeffort] to understand all these changes? But I was just wondering ifyou think we will be under political pressure or internal pressure toin some way absorb the overshoot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. I haven't thought aboutthat question particularly. I certainly haven't thought about achange in procedures. [Unintelligible] there is something to say ifit changed the procedure despite all the very valid objections youhave. If it was thought terribly important to try to make up for anovershoot, instead of just having a target that sounded terribly lownext year, we might get the same result but it would look a littledifferent. I literally had not thought of doing it that way. I thinkthere would be a horrendous problem in explaining precisely what wewere doing, but it may have some merit.MR. WALLICH. Different aggregates have overshot or notovershot in different degrees.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have to change the relationshipamong them. I am sure of that. Well, I think we ought to begin ageneral discussion. Governor Wallich.-23-11/18/80MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that the picture we are facingis one in which the economy has been a great deal stronger than weexpected. But we also now face the prospect of a greater degree ofweakness hereafter resulting from this strength. In other words, itputs somewhat of a ceiling on the development of the economy if itbecomes really strong temporarily and that raises interest rates tolevels that will push the economy down again. I would not try tocounteract the prospective dip in the economy, if that is what mighthappen in the first quarter. I think we ought to look further aheadinto the future, both with regard to the real sector and the monetaryaggregates. Now, I think the chances of a repetition of the secondquarter of 1980 are very slight, even if interest rates don't go downas sharply as they did then. I doubt that the economy will sufferanything like that. But the chances of a severe drop in interestrates are there again. And if we [allow] that a second time--ifinterest rates go up and then go down again in a yo-yo fashion--wewill be accused, reasonably, of destabilizing interest rates beyondwhat is necessary. Our new techniques do imply that interest rateswill be more volatile, and that's the way the economy is kept on trackunder these conditions. But we shouldn't yield to that tendency ofthe system very much.So far as the aggregates are concerned, my inclination wouldbe to try to get back on track in the first quarter of 1981 but not inthe present quarter, even if that were possible by a drastic wrench.But at the same time, I'd try to limit the interest rate implicationsof that. The interest rate implications of just saying we are goingto get back on track in early 1981 might be to allow interest rates todrop quite far if the economy is weak. I would say we should aim at arelatively reasonable growth path from here on out; something between"A" and "B" might do it if we want to be back on track with M-1B inthe first quarter, but not with the interest rates specifications of"A" or "B." The interest rate specifications of "C" give us a chance,if interest rates tend to go down sharply, at least to review thesituation and not to accept the slide willy-nilly as we did in thesecond quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in the interest of clarification,Governor, I understand why you like the lower limit of alternative Cfrom what you've said. But I might have thought, knowing you, thatyou might not like the upper [limit] implication because of the swingin interest rates and the emphasis you put on--MR. WALLICH. I don't feel very strongly about the 19 percent[upper limit for the funds range]. It just seems to me that we shouldnot make the range too narrow.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're mainly concerned about the lowerlimit.MR. WALLICH. I have a concern about the lower limit. And 18percent [for the upper limit] would be just as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. To step back a little on the economic picture,Paul, I am concerned about two things. One is the energy situation.While at the moment we are faced with a glut of storage space for oil-24-11/18/80in this country and temporarily have a big supply hanging over themarket, trying to get a fix on what is happening in the Middle East isextremely difficult. I came back from there with reports of from 3 to10 years to put things back together. In this country we are talkingabout 3 to 10 months. I don't know what the truth of the matter is,but I think we are more heavily exposed to energy problems than wehave been in the past. If [those problems materialize], the priceimplications are very scary for agriculture and [many other sectors]because of the energy situation. Things are happening, and we havehad an interruption of supply. And not to try to get a better fix onthat is a serious mistake.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that we can get abetter fix on it. I strongly underscore what you have to say: Thatthis is a major uncertainty. It is very much analogous to thesituation at the end of last year when we were humming along in somesense and thought we might make a little progress on inflationarysentiment and other things, and along comes a 50 percent increase inthe oil price. That has a certain implication for psychology,behavior, money pressures, and everything else. The way thatsituation is developing, we surely can't exclude another shock of thatkind in the relatively near future.MR. WINN. They are talking about big increases in pricesthis time, and that really scares me. My second observation--and thisis perhaps a sample of one--is that I can't help but be impressed bythe amount of military supplies that are being moved to the MiddleEast. And that makes me think that defense expenditures in real termsare going to be much larger than anything we see in the budget figurestoday. I realize that the expenditures have gone up but it seems tome that the assumption built into the models needs to be questionedseriously. And this could alter the budget figures, resulting eitherin offsetting [cuts] in other areas or again an uncertainty in thepicture that hasn't been completely built into the forecast for nextyear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After citing all these uncertainties, doyou care to express a judgment as to what you think is going to happenor the nature of the problems we face?MR. WINN. I am afraid we are going to get both [higher]energy costs and a big increase in defense expenditures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that make you want to be tighter oreasier in terms of the money supply?MR. WINN. Tighter, sir.MR. PARTEE. Tighter in terms of the money supply?MR. WINN. Yes, I came back very much depressed about theinflation picture over there and the complacency with which they faceit--the efforts to index it and then to juggle the index, the wholeproblem of what it is doing to the economy, the brain drain that hasset in and the implications of that. I think it's a complacency thatwe just can't buy in this country.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What country are you talking about?-25-11/18/80MR. WINN. Israel and Egypt.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we have all beensurprised by the resiliency of the economy since July and we areconcerned about the dip that the staff is projecting in the firstquarter. We'd all like to be able to produce a smooth 2 percent realgrowth rate for the next couple of years but I don't think that'scompatible with our attempts to decelerate the rate of monetary growthgradually. It seems to me that the rather small undulations ineconomic activity that are probably ahead of us, as much as we maydislike them, can't be avoided. We have probably produced a greatdeal by our actions in the past months that is not yet reflected inthe economic statistics or in the monetary growth rates. Nonetheless,I like the alternative B growth rates for the aggregates simplybecause I don't think we can continue to raise our objectives for thequarter month after month in response to unexpectedly high increasesin the aggregates. We did it last month. But I don't think we canmaintain our credibility if we respond to bulges in the aggregates byraising their targets. So I would stay with the growth path for theaggregates that the Committee voted for last month. I would set a 13to 17 percent funds rate range because I have a feeling that we canaccomplish our objective within that. If we find that we can't, thenwe can reassess it later.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you may have answered my question inyour last comment, but I say this for everyone's benefit: The wholequestion, whichever one of these targets we pick numerically, is goingto be how hard we work to get to those targets and at what expense interms of borrowings or interest rates. And I think you have expressedthe dimension of your interest rate feeling anyway.MR. MORRIS. Well, I think we have to give the Manager up to17 percent on the funds rate, which is roughly 2 percentage pointsabove what we have already done. But I don't see the necessity ofpushing the top of the range to 18 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't want to do it prematurely,but I'd like to get to some [views on the] borrowing assumption beforewe finish. Mr. Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I find myself in the unusualposition of being sympathetic with some, though not all, of theremarks of Governor Wallich. I haven't been with him since lastspring, so--MR. SCHULTZ. I was with him right up to the very last.MR. GRAMLEY. I was, too. I don't think we ought to try toprevent a decline in economic activity in the first quarter. It's toolate for that. I think the staff is right that it is in the cards.But I believe the staff may be underestimating the severity of thedecline that could occur early next year for two reasons. One is thatwhen the staff put its forecast together last week, it was able towrite: "Our forecast assumes a further rise in interest rates." Thatno longer is true. The rise in interest rates which the staff assumedis already here; it has happened. So interest rates are going to have-26-11/18/80to decline somewhat from present levels if the staff's forecast isgoing to hold. The second reason is that the staff has built into itsforecast for next year, and has continuously done so since early 1980,an assumption that the money demand function is going to shift down.That assumed shift, when they first put it in, was a year away. Butnow it is right ahead; it is six weeks ahead. If that shift doesn'thappen, then interest rates not only are not going to stay at currentlevels or go down a bit, but as the staff indicates, they will have togo up 3-1/2 percentage points further in the first quarter. If we getbill rates in the 16 to 17 percent range and the prime rate in therange of 19 to 20 percent for the quarter as a whole, then peak rateswill probably exceed their levels of last spring. And then I am notat all sure that we would not be in for a decline in economic activityevery bit as severe as the one we had in the second quarter of 1980.Now, we are facing a very difficult long-run inflationproblem. I don't see any reason for thinking that any improvement hasoccurred at all yet. But it would be extremely counterproductive tofollow a course of policy which pushed the economy over the cliff oncemore. I think interest rates are high enough now. I don't want tosee them decline much; on that I agree with Governor Wallich entirely.I think they should stay about where they are but not come down muchfrom here. We have recently seen performance in the money measuresalong the lines that we wanted. We're starting to see the slowdown wehave been trying to get. In the past four weeks, as you indicated,the M1 numbers show rough stability if we balance off M-1A and M-1B.I could go with either of Steve's suggestions: Either narrowing thefederal funds range or setting some upper limit to the growth rate ofthe monetary aggregates and accepting a shortfall, provided thenumbers come out right. If I were going to select the federal fundsrange that suited my predilections, it would be something like 12 to15 percent. Or if I wanted to go in the other direction, I would takethe specs of "A" and accept any shortfall in money growth from that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, as far as the economy isconcerned, I think the staff projections and estimates are as good asthey can be. I agree entirely with Mr. Winn's comments about theuncertainties associated with oil and I agree that the whole fiscaleconomic policy area is one where what does or does not come out ofthe hopper could have an enormous impact on expectations if nothingelse.In looking at policy, I am driven by two conflictingthoughts. One is the desire to come as close to the 1980 targets aswe can, or at least in line with Mr. Morris's comments not to adjustthe targets for the current quarter upward at this point. But at thesame time I'd like to enter 1981 on a growth trajectory that isroughly compatible with what our targets for 1981 might be. There isa bit of a paradox in that I think the first criteria would bring onesquarely to "B" and the second in some sense might bring one to "A" interms of the growth rates for the aggregates. I would reconcile thatparadox by accepting aggregate growth numbers somewhere around "B" ormaybe a bit higher. But in line with one of Steve's suggestions, I'dtreat those numbers as maximums, with the explicit understanding thatif we were hitting or exceeding those maximums we would adjust thenonborrowed growth targets to offset any growth over the maximum. I-27-11/18/80recognize that that in itself would probably mean that we'd end upabove the maximum for the period anyway because of the time it takesto know we are above them and then to respond. But I, too, am a bitencouraged by these more recent money supply numbers. And if therewere some maximum, I think it is possible that such a maximum could becompatible with a funds rate band of maybe 13 to 16 or 13 to 17percent. On borrowing, I'm just having a heck of a time figuring outwhat might be [appropriate], given all of these number problems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we are too encouraged by theaggregates in the past four weeks--and I'd love to be encouraged, too--I remind you that these things have come in lumps and if we go backone more week, we had a $5 billion increase.MR. CORRIGAN. That's why I like the idea of trying to use amaximum as more of a guide than perhaps we have in the past.MR. SCHULTZ. Furthermore, the very preliminary figures wouldindicate another increase for next week, so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regard to theeconomy, the staff's projection seems reasonable. I would just notethat they consistently have underestimated the strength of theeconomy. And if that continues through the remainder of this quarter,we could have some of the additional pressures that Steve spoke of oninterest rates. On the other hand, if I understand the Bluebookcorrectly, for the first time in several months the staff has notbuilt into any of the alternatives any further downward shift indemand for money over this remaining two-month period. So it wouldgive me some comfort that we may come closer to hitting those numbersbetween now and the end of the year than we have in the last couple ofmonths when we experienced overshoots from the staff's projections atthe time of the Committee meeting. Coming down to policyconsiderations, it seems to me there are a couple of things. TheFederal Reserve has a credibility problem. It has been talked aboutaround this table. Last month we chose to adopt ranges for theaggregates for the quarter that insured that we would be outside the[annual] range for at least two of the three targets--M-1B and M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interrupt. I don't thinkour adoption of those targets insured a darn thing. We didn't knowwhat the money supply was going to be.MR. GUFFEY. No, but we understood that if we hit thosetargets it would take M-1B outside for the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we hit those targets. But there isnothing in our experience that says we are going to hit the targetsover that kind of a time period.MR. GUFFEY. I would agree with that. And unfortunately, themisses have always been on the high side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is certainly correct recently.-28-11/18/80MR. GUFFEY. And that brings in the credibility question,which I'd like to address.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the issue; the actuals have beengoing higher.MR. GUFFEY. And the revisions have all gone one way,unfortunately.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.MR. GUFFEY. As to the credibility problem, of course, wewill be in a new era after the change of Administration and the changeof Congress. And the Federal Reserve is going to be looked at interms of how we plan to perform. It seems important to me that we notadopt aggregate targets at this meeting that would suggest we aretaking another step, as Frank Morris pointed out, toward insuring thatwe will miss the aggregate target for 1980 to an even greater extent.It seems to me that "B" is consistent with what we set last month;thus I would opt for the B alternative with a funds rate range of 13to 17 percent, having in mind that if we have underestimated thestrength of the economy for the remainder of this year, we may beusing that 17 percent. I am really suggesting that a cap of 17percent might be appropriate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Well, some of what I say will be a repetition ofwhat Roger said. If one goes back to the fundamentals of what we aretrying to do, I don't think there's any question that if anythingemerged from the November 4 experience, it was a recognition that thepeople of this country--and we are serving them--are primarily andindelibly concerned with something being done about inflation. Ithink the second fundamental that we have to address is the erodingcredibility of our ability to perform effectively in what we'veannounced we're trying to do. If we continue to operate as we haveall year--I'm talking about our operating procedures--I would agreewith the Chairman that the choice we make today in terms of thealternatives will probably have very little effect on anything because[the results for the year] probably won't be a reflection of thechoice we make. However, if the Bluebook is correct, it's too latereally to accomplish our annual objective in terms of the targets forthe aggregates. But whatever action we take today will have a veryreal effect on our credibility. Recognizing that the world knows thatwe're above the upper limit of our M-1B target, for example, if wedon't choose an alternative that at least appears to attempt tocorrect for that overshoot, I think we will see a further erosion ofour credibility.Secondly, another factor that is currently affecting ourcredibility is the increasing suspicions on the part of the publicthat we are indeed moving back toward what I at least consider to be afailed policy of attempting to stabilize interest rates. Therefore,our fed funds range should not be narrower than the width we'veadhered to most of this year. I would opt for alternative C. Underany circumstances, the danger that I would perceive in the futurewould be permitting interest rates to drop significantly. And I would-29-11/18/80not like to see us set a lower limit of the funds range at less than14 percent.Finally, I would hope desperately that by February, when wego into [our deliberations for our targets] next year, Steve's studywill have been conducted and will be taken seriously. And I hope itwill be conducted, as I know it will be, with an open mind to seewhether we can't come up with a better operating procedure that wouldreduce the potential margin of error between the actions we take atthese meetings or the alternatives we choose and how the aggregatesactually [turn out].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to make your comments a littlemore operational, Mr. Roos. In choosing "C" are you saying that weshould immediately decrease the nonborrowed reserve targetsubstantially and therefore increase the level of borrowing?MR. ROOS. No, sir. First of all, I feel that the techniqueof operating with the nonborrowed and borrowed reserve paths is notworking. I can't answer your question because we place more emphasison total reserves in our view than on borrowed and nonborrowedreserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just interpret that. I canunderstand that, but the only way we can affect the total is byaffecting nonborrowed.MR. ROOS. Well, I think we could control the total, couldn'twe? Again, that's what Steve's people are studying and I hope they'llget data on that. But I can't translate "C" specifically tononborrowed and borrowed reserve paths because I haven't asked ourpeople to develop that. I am not prepared to respond to that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I know we often say that we'refacing a period of unusual uncertainty. But this time I really meanit. We obviously face uncertainty in the fiscal outlook resultingfrom recent political developments. Also, as you and Mr. Winnmentioned, there is uncertainty in the energy price picture. Also,with possible changes in the discount rate and the surcharge, we don'tknow what bank attitudes will be toward borrowing. So the picture isvery cloudy. Despite that, there seems to be an unusual amount ofagreement as to the direction in which we should move. I would saythat in light of all these uncertainties, the staff forecast is aboutas reasonable as one could expect, and I see no reason to disagreewith that forecast. I feel that if we were to take any action thatwould result in a significant raising of the targets, that wouldcertainly be open to an erroneous interpretation, or perhaps even theright interpretation but certainly one that we would not like to see.And it would definitely run the risk of adding to inflationaryexpectations. So, I would not opt for alternative A. On the otherhand, it seems to me that any further move toward restrictivenesswould have the very undesirable effect of making the projected declinein economic activity in the early part of the year sharper than wewould like to see or sharper than might prove to be the case if wefollowed a more moderate course. Therefore, I would supportalternative B. And I agree with Governor Gramley that interest rates-30-11/18/80are now about as high as they need to be. So I would combine mysupport of alternative B with a federal funds range of 12 to 16percent. Now, the growth that we get, of course, may be inconsistentwith this federal funds rate range. If it is, I would be prepared tosee the funds rate somewhat higher--maybe one percentage point higher.But I would not like to see that occur without the advantage ofadditional information.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I think the talk about the targets for 1980 isirrelevant. We're done. At most we have four weeks in which tooperate and the reserves will be set with lagged reserve requirements.So it seems to me what we're really talking about is how high we'regoing to let interest rate go between now and the end of the year, andthat's it. I am also strongly of the opinion that rates are alreadytoo high. We have already killed the housing market. We aredepressing the automobile market. We have continued pressure onbusiness fixed investment, and it's to a point where I think it willstall out. I would like to point out to you that the last time we hada federal funds range approximately like this was in February of lastyear and we had a 9-1/2 percent drop in real GNP in the secondquarter. I think the changes in interest rates have influenced agreat deal the pattern [of GNP growth] we got this year. And I don'tthink the staff has done a bad job. I went back and looked at theirfourth quarter-over-fourth quarter projection of February of last yearand they had a decline for the year of about 2 percent. And if theyhave the fourth quarter right now, it's going to be a decline of about1-1/2 percent this year. The pattern was different; the pattern ofinterest rates was not the one anticipated. I think these risinginterest rates have an extraordinarily damping effect on the economyand if we let them go any higher, we're inviting disaster again. Inaddition, we'd be [inviting] a rerun of the great interest rate cycleof 1980 on an economy that is not where it was last February. LastFebruary we were at 85 percent capacity utilization and at 6 percentunemployment. A lot of things were different than they are now. Wehave a relatively severely depressed economy that would be put throughthe wringer again and I think that would be a mistake.Some of you say you're going to take "B" because it's nodifferent from what we did last time. There's a 4 percentage pointincrease in the federal funds rate range associated with "B." It was9 to 15 percent [last month] and the staff is saying "B" is [now]compatible with 13 to 18 percent. I think 18 percent is outrageouslyhigh. On account of the growth in the money supply, we immediatelyrun everything up to the top of the range, usually within a week afterthe Open Market Committee meeting. Consequently, I don't care whatyou do with -the money supply. I do care what you do with the interestrate range. I would put the maximum at 15 percent with maybe a bottomof 11 percent. The borrowing assumption is funny because we determinethe borrowing from the nonborrowed reserve path. By doing anonborrowed reserve path, at least for the next two weeks, wedetermine what the borrowings are going to be. There's a Catch-22game going on here.MR. WALLICH. We determine the funds rate; that determinesthe borrowing, and that determines the nonborrowed, I think.-31-11/18/80MS. TEETERS. You have worked it backwards, I think, Henry.MR. WALLICH. That's the unspoken sequence.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we have a wide funds rate range,then it's the borrowing assumption that determines the nonborrowedreserve path, not the reverse.MR. PARTEE and MS. TEETERS. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. We seem to be all over the lot today. I don'tthink it's so much that the situation is uncertain, Emmett. In myview, it has been uncertain for some time. Now I find it threatening.That's the tone; my feelings echo Willis Winn's, only I haven't beento the Middle East. It seems to me that the odds are now getting tobe rather high that there's going to be an oil price increase of size.I don't know that it will be 50 percent, but I wouldn't be surprisedat a $10 a barrel increase. And that's going to have a considerableimpact on inflation. I must say my view has always been that when anexternal event like this occurs it's not the right response to cutmoney growth targets because no other price is going to give. If wecut money growth targets, all it does is compound the effect of theoil price rise on real activity by forcing it lower than it otherwisewould be. And activity would already tend to go lower because of theoil price rise. Nevertheless, it will be adding to the inflationnumbers and so will food prices. Thus, it occurs to me that what wemight get is considerable strength in the demand for money associatedwith a nominal GNP that holds up [but incorporates] a decline in realactivity and an acceleration in inflation, which could keep a lot ofpressure on the money numbers. In that kind of environment, I thinkinterest rates could go to 25 percent. And that's something that wehave to be thinking about--what it means for the economy to have ratesabove 20 percent--because that may occur.The second thing that troubles me is that we will be havingfiscal restraint in the immediate future; that is, there's a taxincrease in six weeks. On the other hand, the new Administrationpromises tax reductions, a series of them, which would certainly addto pressures in markets over that period of time as the governmentdeficit is increased. I also agree that defense spending is going upand is going to go up sharply. The new orders figures already showit. The whole thrust of current thinking is that we will have to havea larger defense establishment--and I would almost say "much larger"defense establishment the way the talk is going. So without a war,which is possible, we have all these things working against the[successful] execution of policy.I am very nervous about limiting the [governing factor]--thatis, the perceived rate of growth that will be appropriate in monetaryaggregates--by interest rate constraints because if we do that, we maylose sight of what is really happening. But I guess I am prepared tolimit the governing factor of monetary expansion because of theseuncertainties. I rather agree that with prospects for increases indefense, taxes, and oil prices we don't want rates to go downsignificantly because we're going to have an almost semi-war economyin the period to come. I also think interest rates are getting pretty-32-11/18/80high. We are shutting off the building industry. We have the thriftsback into a lot of trouble. That 6-month bill rate means that they'llbe paying over 14 percent for money this week, and they can't affordover 14 percent. Neither can a lot of small banks. So we'rebeginning to threaten the institutional structures of the economyagain, as we did early this year.So I feel that we ought to constrain interest rate movements,at least for a time, Paul. I have a fairly wide view of that, though.My funds rate range would be 13 to 17 percent, centered on 15 percentwhich is where we are now. I know it's nice to say that we have aposture that we don't want monetary growth to go up and, therefore,regardless of what is happening, we're going to hold the target rightwhere it was. But it's very unrealistic to do that. If we takealternative B--assuming these November numbers are still more or lessholding, though I don't know what that $700 million increase means forthe projected number for November--it means that to hit our target, wehave to have a 5-1/2 percent rate of decline in the money supply inDecember. A 5-1/2 percent drop is a rapid rate of decline in themoney supply. If we want to go to alternative C the way Larry does,and [the projection for] November is right, we have to have a 9percent rate of decrease. That would be the second largest rate ofdecrease we've ever seen in the money supply in the month of December.And I just don't think it's responsible to have a target that seems towant such declines to occur. They might occur, but to want them tooccur seems to me inappropriate.Therefore, I think we are forced to alternative A as thetarget for the 2-month pattern, which is an M-1A of 2 percent, an M-1Bof 4-1/2 percent and an M2 of 7-3/4 percent. Well, the latter couldbe 7-1/2 percent; we wouldn't have to have the quarter. So that'swhat I would recommend. Alternatively, we can even specify it interms of the quarterly growth rates, which I believe the draftdirective suggests. Those are not high numbers: 4-1/2, 6-1/4, and8-1/4 percent. I'd specify it in those terms and take a 13 to 17percent funds rate range and be prepared to see those aggregates comein markedly lower than the target if indeed that is what develops.But I am beginning to doubt that that will develop in the periodimmediately to come. On borrowings, I don't know. It's a funny thingand I hate to mess with it. I think we ought to have them right aboutwhere they are because it's awfully hard to assess what our [rateincreases] last Friday will do to tensions in that borrowing market,with the 2 point surcharge. So I would take a neutral stance andbegin where we are on borrowing and see how things develop as theperiod goes on.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Where we are is $2 billion.MR. PARTEE. Well, I know. But we had--MR. AXILROD. The implication of what we were targeting onwas that $1.6 billion in borrowing would emerge out of the week.MR. PARTEE. That's what I mean. It came in high for theweek, but we thought we were on a target of $1.6 billion, and that'swhere I would [start] it. If the aggregates are strong, it will go upfrom there. If they are weak, it will stay about there. That's whatI would do--not have an even-handed monetary target, but aim to hit-33-11/18/80those numbers that I mentioned and if growth of the aggregates fallsshort, let the shortfall occur.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're running awfully late. I don't knowwhether people want to go out and drink some coffee before we finishthis. Let's do that. Then we'll come back and complete thisdiscussion.[Coffee break][Secretary's note: When the meeting resumed after the coffee break, afew comments were missed.]MR. BLACK. It seems that way. The first question is: Howmuch confidence can we have in the relationship between the rates ofgrowth in the aggregates and the federal funds range as specified bythe alternatives? Everybody realizes that [estimating thisrelationship] is a very risky business at best and that we probablyask the staff to accomplish the impossible there. The second questionis: What are the risks involved if we miss the paths specified in thealternative we choose, whatever that happens to be? I would considera further miss on the up side to be pretty significant--much more so,of course, if we go with "A," less so if we go with "B," and maybe notso significant if we go with "C." But perhaps the most importantissue of all is the likely effects on inflationary expectations ofwhatever policy option we select. They would be clearly worse under"A." That would involve raising the path for M-1A for the fourthstraight month in the face of overshoots. I looked back and foundthat we had raised the December target figure for M-lA by a total of$5.7 billion over the last three meetings. If we do more of that, itcertainly would not augur well for inflationary psychology.Alternative B would involve not adjusting the target in the face ofsome overshoots and would, of course, be less detrimental toinflationary psychology. I think "C" would work positively [in thatregard], and although I don't think there is any earthly way we couldhit the target as specified by the end of the year, we couldconceivably be within the range for M-1B.In any event, I think it would be better if we were perceivedas working toward a range even if we miss it, as I suspect wenecessarily will. Finally, there is the question of what this impliesfor the 1981 targeting problems, which we've talked about. All ofthese options are going to involve some upward base drift, a problemwith which we have contended for many years. Presumably "C" wouldinvolve less upward drift, although I doubt there is going to be agreat deal of difference. So, I would come out for "C." I wouldn'tobject to widening the federal funds range; I have never objected tothat. I don't like a range anyway, so to cover both "B" and "C" 13 to19 percent would seem good to me. So far as the borrowing figure isconcerned, I would start off where we are now on borrowing. But thenif borrowing deviates from the figure we select initially, I think weought to adjust the nonborrowed reserve target in the oppositedirection by that full amount. In looking at the reasons for missesin the past, I think part of the blame lies with the Committee in nothaving selected the proper range, but in retrospect I believe we havenot been sufficiently active in adjusting our nonborrowed reservestarget to compensate for misses in the borrowing figure.-34-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. I can be very brief because I agree withGovernor Wallich's and Governor Gramley's arguments and I come outpretty much where Governor Partee is. I think the economy is going toease off considerably; I think inflation is extremely intractable; andI think volatility in interest rates is going to give us a realproblem, so I would not like to see rates go up very much because Idon't want to see them come down very much in the first quarter. Weare going to have a great deal of trouble with this yo-yo effect. Ilike the technique we are using because it has a tendency to getinterest rates to go more rapidly where they appear to need to go inan inflationary environment. But we must use judgment rather thanadhere slavishly to some of these targets or we are going to getourselves in deep trouble. I think we ought to look at the aggregatesthe way Governor Wallich has [suggested] we look at them--through thefirst quarter. So to me something between "A" and "B" makes sense foraggregates targets, but that's not the crucial question; at this pointborrowings and the funds rate are. I would put borrowings at about$1.6 billion and the fed funds range at 13 to 17 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, after listening to this dialogue,I wish we had the option of saying none of the above relative to "A,""B," and "C," because there doesn't seem to be a good answer. Broadlyspeaking, the dilemma that we've been faced with for some months hasgotten worse. In a sense, we are still the only game in town in termsof an anti-inflation policy. Despite the election, if one looks atbond yields, inflation expectations haven't gone down. The fact thatthe forward rate on the dollar has actually gone down may indicatethat inflation expectations in the view of foreigners have gottenworse. And while I continue to hope month by month, as does Steve,that these higher interest rates will result in some downward shift inthe demand for money, I see a contrary trend going on. I think we aregoing to experience more of it because the cost of long-term money isso darn high that there is immense incentive on the part of businessesto borrow short--that is, in the commercial paper market or throughbanks--and that drives deposits up. So I expect this recent surge inbusiness loans to continue.As I see it, the really damaging thing to the economy is theheight of long-term interest rates, and I don't see how we are goingto get them down until inflation expectations come down and until thebudget of the new Administration gets sorted out, which is going to bea source of uncertainty. Meanwhile, we have to worry about whetherour monetary growth rates themselves are becoming a source ofinflation expectations, as some of my directors and a good many of theprofessors at our recent academic conference think is the case. Inview of all of this, I think it is too late in the year to aim for"C," which is a meat ax tactic; so the next less damaging [posture]would be to stay pretty much with "B" as Messrs. Morris, Guffey, andsome others have said. I wouldn't want to increase further the rangesthat we are shooting for. Furthermore, I would not be inclined tonarrow the federal funds range, as some people have [suggested]. Ithink 13 to 18 percent is a viable range to stay with, given all theuncertainties that we face.-35-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. The only comment I would like to make aboutthe economy is that I think the Board staff's forecast is inevitablywrong in projecting a flat line beyond the first quarter, but we allrealize that that reflects the uncertainty that we face beyond that.The first-quarter projection may be right, although I must say I amimpressed by how strong the economy has consistently been and howwrong we have consistently been about that strength. What that doesto me is to tend to shorten my sights and make me less concerned aboutwhat may be happening in 1981 and more concerned about looking to theshort term. And even though we can no longer achieve our targets forthe year, I think we ought to stick pretty much with what we had. Sothat brings me to "B." I would not narrow the funds range. We havebeen criticized and will be criticized for erratic interest rates butwe are equally criticized for erratic money growth. And I think thelimitations on the funds rate have had some effect in permitting moneygrowth to exceed our targets. So I would stick with the range that wealready have, do what we can to get within the limits of the targetsfor this year, and start off as low as possible for 1981. I don'tknow what the borrowing figure ought to be. I have written down arange of something like $1 to $1-1/2 billion; I think somewhere inthat area is probably [appropriate].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I am a rather pessimistic guythese days and I couldn't get cheered up any with the discussion herethis morning. I think there is much to what Mr. Partee has said aboutprices and wages, even given fairly strong monetary and fiscalpressures and whatever pressures [come from] substantial unusedresources in the economy. And that means to me that about allmonetary policy can do is to avoid fueling additional inflation. Eventhough we have had what we thought was a fairly tight policy for thelast couple of years it has nevertheless accommodated additionalinflation, so we must be pretty careful to try to avoid that situationcontinuing in 1981. I am not impressed with the idea that we canslowly and gradually wring inflation out of the economy using monetaryand fiscal policy. I see inflation strengthening and I see more andmore people apparently making a very good living out of marketinginflation protection gadgetry and developing what seems to me to bevery high risk loans or uses of credit for that purpose. I read thatas indicating that inflation momentum or expectations are stillstrengthening rather than weakening.On monetary policy, I would think that the surcharge willpretty effectively discourage borrowing by the large banks, so I wouldnot expect high levels of borrowing in the weeks immediately ahead.With respect to the monetary targets and the federal funds rate,alternative B seems to me about as good as one can do in the currentcircumstances. I believe it would be appropriate to hitch on to the"B" aggregate figures the suggestion that they serve as ceilingsrather than midpoints. And I am sorry to share the view that we dohave a fairly near-term end to this recovery that has gotten started,given what needs to be done in terms of monetary and fiscal [policy].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle, we're glad to have you with ustoday.-36-11/18/80MR. DOYLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There have been twoprominent themes in the discussion so far, and I certainly wouldemphasize that there is some inherent conflict between what to doabout the uncertainties on the one hand and what to do about thecredibility issue on the other. The uncertainties question, asGovernor Partee and others have already pointed out, may be changingfrom that status to something closer to [a real threat] in terms ofthe energy situation. I believe the reaction to movement in eitherdirection on that is difficult to determine. That is, if a changedoes occur or is suggested in either direction, it's hard to say justhow the market or anybody else would react in terms of dealing withthese uncertainties that I don't believe are perceived by the marketsgenerally at the present time. On the credibility side, I mightsuggest that the issue may not be that we have a credibility problembut that we don't have one. In fact, I think the public and marketperception of the Federal Reserve, as someone else has just suggested,is that we are the only game in town and that we are doing the jobright. Therefore, I would not like to see any further slippage fromthe targets that were [adopted] last month. I believe it would have asevere credibility [impact] and would produce some negative reactions.Therefore, I would support alternative B with some slight narrowing ofthe funds range, perhaps to 13 to 17 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. I'm disheartened, as everyone is, about thealternatives in front of us. On the inflation front, Paul, everythingwe have discussed and everything we see is disheartening except thepossible outside chance of house prices weakening due to a disaster inthe housing market. That's clearly shaping up in front of us. I feelstrongly that it's too late to try to salvage the year-to-year growthrates in the monetary aggregates because it would require a very sharpadjustment that would be extremely difficult to achieve. So I wouldcome out, for essentially the same reasons Mr. Balles mentioned, infavor of alternative B with the proviso that the aggregate growthtargets be viewed as a maximum. I would not be inclined to narrow therange on the fed funds rate. With regard to what Governor Parteesaid--he threw in something about how we communicate this to the otherregulators--I do think we are headed into a period of very difficulttimes for the thrift institutions. In talking to Jerry Corrigan andother people in different parts of the country, we are now starting tosee some really sharp deterioration in the balance sheets of thriftsall around the country. I am afraid that in the next few months weare going to see [the need for] some fast mergers in that area thatare going to be rather difficult, and I don't know what this Committeecan do about that. That's just another inevitable side effect of thisperiod we are entering. Should we get a crisis in the Middle East,based on the OPEC meetings and consultations around this time, I thinkwe would have to consider reconvening this Committee to restudy ourentire program in light of the experience back in '74 when we wentthrough [an oil crisis] the last time. Overall I come out in favor of"B" as it stands.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would prefer a $1.6 billionborrowing assumption and the specifications of "A." My first instinctwould be a fed funds range of only 13 to 17 percent, but I am worried-37-11/18/80that if things don't go as expected, we might find that the 17 percentupper limit would force the supplying of very large amounts ofreserves, more than the Committee would want. So my instinct would benot to lock ourselves into the 17 percent but make it 13 to 18 percentwith some flexibility in judgment regarding that 17 to 18 percentarea. It seems to me that we ought to try to stay within the 17percent, but if in consultation with the Manager it looks to you asthough that will require supplying more reserves than is advisable,there ought to be sufficient flexibility in the directive for you tomake the judgment to go up to 18 percent.MR. PARTEE. That's consistent, though, with having 13 to 17percent and then providing, as we've done previously, for consultationof the Committee if the 17 percent proves not to be reasonable.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean by telephone?MR. PARTEE. Yes. The directive has that structure. Iwasn't criticizing [your suggestion]; I was just making a point thatwhat you said is consistent with choosing 13 to 17 percent andemphasizing the possible need for consultation, which also goes withwhat Bill said, I think.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is also some advantage, Chuck,to leaving it at 13 to 18 percent with the Chairman understanding thatthe Committee hoped it would not go beyond 17 percent, simply becausewhen the directive is published the market may overinterpret in anegative way the fact that we narrowed the range. So, strictly forthe directive, I still would favor 13 to 18 percent but with anunderstanding that, if possible, not to go beyond 17 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's see whether we can reach adecision. There is a fair amount of difference of views on some ofthe specifics but some recognition on practically everybody's part ofsome common concerns, too. On approaches, I would just make twogeneral points. I think what we are seeing now in general terms isthe famous collision between the recovery and monetary targets thatare in some sense too restrictive to permit recovery unless themomentum of inflation declines. I didn't expect to reach [this stage]this early, but here it is. A number of people have commented thatthese targets, just to put it very quickly, lower the limit on theability of the economy to expand. They are going to continue to dothat, I suspect, given all the uncertainties, with targets of the typethat we have until inflation declines. And that's a veryunsatisfactory picture from any perspective, other than sole-mindedconcern about hitting the targets. That's where we are and that'swhere we may be.Somewhat related to that, which has already been mentioned,is that we still have some concern as to how much fluctuation we aregenerating in the money supply figures and interest rates by notrecognizing some natural instability in these data. It's purely amatter of judgment and it's totally unsatisfactory in terms ofreaching specific decisions because, to exaggerate a bit, we areguessing. Let me simply put it that if we bend over backwards to hita target in the short run and find ourselves not making it, we end upwith exactly the opposite problem in a very limited period of time interms of the targets and with some real effects on the economy as time-38-11/18/80passes. And we have unnecessary fluctuations; we may be stuck withthem to a degree but they are not a happy circumstance in which tooperate. But that doesn't give us precise guidance on how to balancethose considerations.As for hitting the growth targets or not hitting the growthtargets--and I can only give you a personal view--I am not asconcerned about that as some people are because I don't think, as I'vesaid before, that these targets are written in heaven. There is a lotof uncertainty in these relationships. I do think we have todemonstrate, and I am satisfied that we have, that we take themseriously. That is important. Whether being precisely in the rangesor slightly outside of them is terribly significant to credibility ornot I think depends in part upon our own attitudes, how we portray it,and how we describe the problems. [To the extent that] there is arecognition of the very real problems that we have, that credibilityproblem is diminished. If we attach what I personally think is undueimportance to absolute precision, obviously the public is also goingto attach more importance to absolute precision than they otherwisewould. In that connection, I would only remind you that most foreigncountries use a range. I believe they all do now. Is there one thatdoesn't, Mr. Truman? I don't know. There used to be.MR. TRUMAN. The Swiss don't have a range and the Frenchdon't have a range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The French have been pretty good on theirtargets. The Swiss have varied between growth in M1 of 23 percent oneyear to minus 3 percent the next year to plus 4 percent the followingyear, I think.MR. TRUMAN. There was a year in between when they didn't tryat all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But they have not lost their reputationfor prudence and concern in the process.MR. PARTEE. They couldn't have a range--MR. WALLICH. It's a small open economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, and that's part of the reason. AllI am saying is that in part the public's attitude toward these thingsdepends upon our general behavior, not the precise arithmeticprecision with which we reach the range. Well, that's a philosophicalcomment. We have to reach a decision here.So far as the money supply targets are concerned, I sensethat we are dealing with two somewhat conflicting concerns. One,which I certainly recognize, is that we are in the middle of thequarter. If we were on the schedule that we talked about before, thiswould be the middle-of-the-quarter meeting. We would already have seta quarterly growth target and the inclination would be not to changethat unless there was something very persuasive going on. But wewould consider whether to change it and how to alter our operations.Certainly we have been forced to raise that target repeatedly inrecent months, and one can argue that for purely presentationalpurposes it would be nice to avoid a further change in the target. I-39-11/18/80think there is a lot to be said for that view. The consideration onthe other side was described by Governor Partee: Is that beingrealistic? Is anybody here really proposing the strength of actionand the kind of interest rates that might be necessary in our bestjudgment to reach alternative C--certainly "C" but even "B"--whichimplies from now on [unintelligible]. Is it realistic to think [wecould achieve the target]? I don't doubt that it could happen, butgiven all the uncertainty about the normal relationships that thestaff gives us, which in fact are very erratic but are all we have togo on--MR. MORRIS. But given the run-up in interest rates we havealready had in the last few months, it seems to me entirely possible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it may be. You can reconcileyourself to that view and that's all right. I don't think the staffwould say that that would be their best judgment.MR. MORRIS. I think it's possible.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know. Anything is possible here!I agree it is possible.MR. ROOS. I think some of us looked at it as a very short-range [step] that would avoid our having to jam on the brakes nextyear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you could argue that. All I amsaying is that if we took the staff's median judgment and reflectedthe distillation of assembled wisdom, recognizing that there is a hugerange of uncertainty around it, I think one would have to say [itmeans]: Let's really bang it now. One could argue that that's a goodidea because it's going to save us a lot of problems in the future.On the other hand, a lot of concern was expressed that really bangingit now is just going to complicate our problem in the very short run.I think that kind of consideration would lead one in substance towardalternative A. If I take seriously what I think I am hearing incomments we have had about the interest rate range and the borrowingassumptions and all the rest--that people don't want to go out thereand really bang it--that leaves me in something of a dilemma because Ithink the Committee is in something of a dilemma. It doesn't excludethe possibility that we could hit the targets because we just don'tknow these relationships well enough. And there is the argument thatit's better not to change things and mislead anybody as to our realintentions. I am not sure, but I believe the Committee members aremostly between "A" and "B." I haven't counted and I am not sure theyall said precisely [what their preference was]. But that pretty welldescribes the considerations. We are somewhat artificiallyconstrained because we are talking about a period that only has sixweeks more to run. If we were not right at the end of the year--if wehad looked at it from the perspective of the next four months insteadof the next six weeks--and were somewhat worried about how this looksin terms of the targets for the year, I don't know whether peoplewould say something like "A" is reasonable.MR. WINN. But don't we have to consider the trajectoryeffect on 1981? To take the end of the year as the horizon withregard to where we want to be I think is the wrong [approach].-40-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I am suggesting in part.I would guess that people might say "A" would be all right if we werelooking through the whole first quarter of next year. I don't knowwhether that's true or not, but I--MR. PARTEE. Abstracting from that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what you mean by yourcomment. I think what a lot of people are worried about, Willis, isthat by banging it really hard now, we're going to look foolishly lowinstead of foolishly high in the beginning of the first quarter oreven in December. Now, one may think the economy is very strong--andI think it may have a little [more] momentum right at the moment thanthe staff implies, but I don't doubt that all the risks are for adecline in the time perspective of now through the end of the firstquarter. But we may find the fourth quarter numbers are a littlehigher than the staff is suggesting, which further complicates thisdilemma. We'll see just where you want to go, but I also detectedsome concern about the interest rate level expressed by a good manypeople. Consistent with what we're doing, I wouldn't like to getdeliberately in an area where we have to work against an interest rateconstraint because that changes the tone of our actions, but theborrowings have implications for that. A $1.6 billion level ofborrowings or thereabouts has been mentioned by a few people. That'slower than it has been, inadvertently or not, most recently. Thatseems not inappropriate to me, if we don't want to put a lot ofadditional pressure on the market because we just had a discount ratechange. And in a sense, by moving the initial borrowing assumptiondown slightly, it probably will not have much of an easing effect onthe market. But it prevents the discount rate move from beingamplified and reverberating through the market excessively.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I mentioned that number becausethat was implied in the week's figure. But we tried to be clear tothe Committee that in thinking this through we had assumed in theBluebook, for whatever constellation of pressures you are consideringon bank reserves, that with this discount rate move you'd have tolower borrowing relative to what it had been. So in some sense that$1.6 billion was before the discount rate action; a level of borrowingconsistent with that $1.6 billion after the discount rate action wouldbe somewhat lower. We'd put in a notional $1.5 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To be consistent with "A," in effect.MR. AXILROD. That's right. But even you just said youwanted to start at the recent level of borrowing. If you factored inthe discount rate action, that would have to be a bit lower. That'sjust a technical [comment].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If your conceptual level of borrowingbefore the discount rate action was $1.6 billion, it should be lowernow.MR. AXILROD. That's right.MR. GRAMLEY. How much lower?-41-11/18/80MR. GUFFEY. The fact of the matter is that borrowing hasbeen higher than $1.6 billion. Over the 4-week period it has beenabout $1-3/4 billion; it has only been $1.6 billion for the week thatwe're in now. So what we're really looking at in terms of the recentborrowing level is somewhat higher than that $1.6 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has been running somewhat higherthan $1.6 billion. What has the market done after your operationsthis morning, Peter? Where is the federal funds rate?MR. STERNLIGHT. It pretty well held those opening gainsafter the money supply numbers.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did the federal funds rate do?MR. STERNLIGHT. Funds trading opened at about 17 percent andwent up to 17-1/2 percent--this was shortly after 11 a.m.--and we wentin and have offered some overnight repurchase agreements.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you don't know what has happened sincethen?MR. STERNLIGHT. I know that after we went in to do the RPs,the market strengthened very slightly further, but not enough to benoticeable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you're suggesting,Steve, that consistent with what I and other people were trying to sayin concept--I lighted on $1.6 billion as a few people did--we shouldreally be saying $1.5 billion.MR. AXILROD. Well, we had suggested $1.5 billion for "A" and$1-3/4 billion for "B."MR. PARTEE. Well, $1.6 billion is right in between.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a sense, what a lot of people seem tobe talking about is that they want to keep "B" for the reasonsuggested--that they don't want to show a further change in what we'reaiming at. But we were talking more about the specifications of "A"with a higher federal funds rate on the low side of its range anyway.Let me just get reactions to this proposal: The "B" specificationsand, taking account of Steve's comment, $1.5 billion or thereabouts onborrowing, and 13 to 17 percent for the funds rate, which a number ofpeople mentioned for that, and a hope that they are consistent despitean analysis that they might not be.Steve has also suggested the idea--it sounds awfullycomplicated but it just is complicated at this stage of the game--ofwriting something into the directive that we are looking toward thefirst quarter, in effect. We could certainly write it into the policyrecord, anyway. We're thinking of "B" here on how we set the reservepath and would repeat the targets that we had last time, which arethose in "B." And we'd put in some phrase that we recognize thatthere isn't much time between now and the end of the year to get on aspecific path. But we would in a way reverse what we've said [in thepast] if we adopted "A;" we'd say the Committee thought that a smallovershoot would be tolerable, provided that growth in the aggregates-42-11/18/80was at a pace consistent with more moderate growth next year. I don'tknow whether that language--MR. PARTEE. We could say "in the early months of next year,"or something like that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The early months of next year, yes. Now,what that leaves out is that some overshoot from the specifications of"B" or any of these alternatives, if it developed, would be tolerablein the short run without our aggressively moving against it. I don'tknow how much you would work that language in, Steve.MR. ROOS. Didn't several proponents of "B," Mr. Chairman,also suggest that the aggregate figures in "B" be viewed as the toplimits and that we should not tolerate an overshoot?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a conceptual difficultythere. I am sure that you are right, but sometimes those same peoplesaid we should not set out now to bang up the borrowing level and bangup interest rates. That's the inconsistency with which we aredealing. Verbally they may have said "Don't tolerate an overshoot,"but they didn't seem to be supporting the strength of action thatwould be needed to insure against an overshoot.MR. ROOS. In considering these figures, which are for thenext six weeks--and I recognize that short-term fluctuations in moneyprobably don't have a very real effect on output and the economy--arewe overlooking the fact that the first six weeks of this quarter camein quite high? You speak of jamming the brakes on too hard with "C;"wouldn't that really be counterbalancing an almost run-away situationover the first six weeks?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question, growth in theaggregates was very high in the first six weeks; so are interestrates.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, what would happen under thesespecifications if, in fact, we came out from now to the end of theyear with what I would consider to be a very fine performance of themonetary aggregates, i.e., no change in M-1A. If M-1A were completelyflat and let us suppose that in fact $1.5 billion in borrowing wereconsistent with the specs of "B," then what we would end up doing Ithink--if I'm wrong, maybe Steve or Peter could enlighten me--would betaking actions deliberately to push interest rates up further. Andinstead of a federal funds rate of 15 percent we would end up with 17percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve can correct me, but my sense of itis that if we started out at the borrowing level that we're talkingabout and there were no change in the money supply from now on, weekby week, we would come out very close to "B," wouldn't we, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Actually M-1A would come out at "A." That is,the average for the week of the 5th and what we expect for the 12thcomes out to a level for M-1A of $387.9 billion, and that's theDecember level that's built into "A." To achieve the specs of "B"would require a drop in M-1A from here on in.-43-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You only get a $.3 billion drop inDecember with no increase in the weekly figures from here on out?Aren't you assuming some increase [in those weekly figures] in that"A" [alternative]?MR. AXILROD. I was giving you the December average level forM-1A; it would be $387.9 billion. That's virtually no change from theNovember average level, and the first two weeks of [December] areroughly at the November average level. So there would be no change,in effect.MR. ROOS. Does anyone view M-1A as a serious aggregate?MR. PARTEE. I do. I still think it's the most important.MR. ROOS. Even though the change has occurred toward abroadening--MR. PARTEE. Sure, because I can't read M-1B with all thoseNOW accounts being created.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is, Larry, that they're bothwrong. You should average the two. It gives you a rougher "rightanswer," as a matter of fact.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, on this matter of whether or notto have some maximum: If we took something like "B" or a littlehigher or something between "B" and "A" for the aggregates paths andtreated them as a max--if for no other reason than having that be ourconsultation point rather than perhaps the federal funds rate--I don'tthink those things have to be incompatible. It comes down to ajudgment as to how much of an impact the things we already have donewill have. I think it might be possible to structure something likethat, which would just put somewhat greater weight [on theaggregates], even if merely for consultation purposes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're having a consultation right now.Out best estimate is that we are above "B." If you want to choose"B," we are consulting.MR. CORRIGAN. I'm saying in terms of this maximum, [use] "B"or something a little higher than "B."MR. PARTEE. We could say "A" is what we project and "A"would be what we plot. It means essentially zero for the rest of theyear. And we'd accept any shortfall; but if it rose up above that, wewould react strongly against it.MR. CORRIGAN. In a sense I think that's the key because ifit turns out that we get a couple more strong weeks, then all of asudden we're in a position that we're not even realistically lookingat [an outcome close to] "A" and then we're really in the soup.MR. PARTEE. That's right. And that's a real possibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are realistically looking at "A" now.That is the projection. Now, it's an extremely uncertain projection,and I don't attach a lot of weight to it, but the experts say that's-44-11/18/80where we are. The range of uncertainty around it is very wide. Thesense of what I have proposed, just distilling some of your comments,is that for visual reasons, which are not unimportant, we will stickwith "B" [for the ranges] and hope growth comes out at "B," but actsomewhat like "A" at the moment. That leaves us with the question ofhow strongly we react if "A" gets confirmed or, worse yet, if growthgoes higher than the specifications of "A." That's the sense of it ifwe adopt these specifications; and it's reflected in part in thefederal funds range. Obviously, we have to consult if we hit [thelimit on] that.MR. WALLICH. You said earlier that we ought to think moreabout the deviations from the targets and the response to that thanabout the absolute targets, and I thought that very persuasive. So animportant ingredient of this decision seems to be where do we go withthe funds rate if [monetary growth] falls below or goes above. Now,one way of not capping but flooring the rate on the down side would beto set a rather high [level for the lower] limit, and I suggested 14percent. Another might be to say accept a shortfall in theaggregates. I am not quite sure what that implies in terms of thefunds rate, really.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure what it implies in terms of[that rate but] there is a relationship. What it implies is thatwe're pretty slow about changing the nonborrowed path to make up forany decline in borrowing. That's what it specifically implies, whichin turn slows down any decline in the funds rate.MR. PARTEE. It might bring down the funds rate a little.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would come down some if we had a reallybig shortfall, but--MS. TEETERS. I strongly object to pegging that rate at 14percent. We have let it run up way above what we expected a monthago; and if you're going to play that game, Henry, you have to be ableto play it on the down side, too. A rate of 14 percent is justridiculous in this economy.MR. WALLICH. After taxes fourteen is negative in real termsfor those people who pay taxes. I am being told that there are manypeople who don't pay taxes and take the standard deduction or have noprofits, so one has to take both things into account. I think therates are almost there but not quite.MS. TEETERS. Oh, baloney. Why shouldn't the securityholders have a decline in real income, too? Everybody else has.MR. PARTEE. We've had this discussion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's clear that people in generalterms are willing to [tolerate] some shortfall from whatever target weadopt, without moving very aggressively [on the funds rate]. I don'twant to pin that rate at 14 percent at this point, but I would be slowto react on that side under our normal operating procedures. If themarket really thought the money supply was coming in low, we would geta big psychological effect in the market that would move interestrates. But we would drag in changing our paths. I think what is at-45-11/18/80issue is how much we drag on the up side. If we set these kinds ofspecifications, I would sense--without counting the people who did nottalk too specifically, and many people did not--that there is noeagerness to whack it too hard if growth comes in above the ranges.We're going to get some reaction.MR. MORRIS. Would you define "whack it too hard"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a technical term! Let me say, justin round numbers, that we start at $1.5 billion [in borrowings]. Youknow, precisely what has happened after we argued interminably in thelast two meetings about whether the target should be one percentagepoint more or less, is that within a week, or literally a few days,the next money supply figure that came in was over anything we weretalking about. So we moderately whacked it, I would say. We raisedthe net borrowed reserves, we lowered the reserve path by $100 millionor so, which was enough, and we probably overshot the reduction alittle. It was enough to have a very noticeable effect on the market.Growth in the next week came in pretty high, I think perhaps bycoincidence. If it came in high [in the week ahead], let's say, butmore moderately high than those numbers, maybe we wouldn't do anythingfor a week to see whether it was confirmed the next week. If it camein very high, we'd probably react but more mildly than we did theprevious two times.MR. PARTEE. That is, we would end up not adjusting thenonborrowed reserve path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it came in only slightly or moderatelyabove the path.MR. PARTEE. Yes, we might begin to get some tightening inthe market.MR. ROOS. Are you saying that we bias it to tolerate anovershoot more than an undershoot?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think we're saying the opposite ofthat. We're very tolerant of an undershoot. What I am trying to pindown is how tolerant we are of an overshoot. I think the generalsentiment is that we're going to be less tolerant of an overshoot thanwe are of undershoots. But should we be tolerant at all of anovershoot is the question or do we react very quickly? My dilemma isthat if we're really not tolerant at all of an overshoot, we ought tobe whacking it right now, which is not what people said. So on howtolerant we are of an overshoot, I suppose what we're saying is thatwe'd be fairly tolerant right at the moment [up to the specificationsof] alternative A. If it got above alternative A, we'd beprogressively less tolerant.MR. SCHULTZ. I'd rather consult if the funds rate got over17 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whether the funds rate gets over 17percent or not depends upon how tolerant we are.MS. TEETERS. It's already at 17 percent.-46-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.SPEAKER(?). Well, that's the point I was trying to express.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure we can escape this problem bysaying we're going to consult next week. I'm trying to consult rightnow.MR. FORD. Tony Solomon addressed that. What's wrong withSolomon's approach?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Solomon's approach is fine, let's take it.Let us proceed. The funds rate is already in his area for consulting.I am consulting.MR. PARTEE. Well, what do you want to do?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you want to do? That's preciselythe--MR. SCHULTZ. That's the problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's not put it off until next week.Here we are.MR. SCHULTZ. I don't know. Chuck, what do you want to do?MR. WALLICH. I think we ought to go slowly. I differentiatebetween 14 and 17 percent, and I would hesitate to go above that.Let's look toward next quarter and try to get on a [path] that willget us back on track. Then we will [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me repeat: We put forward the "B"specifications; we put down a funds range of 13 to 17 percent; we putdown a borrowing number of $1.5 billion at the moment; we don't doanything except just what we're saying here at the moment.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then we'll miss "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we'll miss "B" ornot. There is a lot of uncertainty. The staff tells us we're likelyto miss "B." We understand that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what I mean. Taking thestaff's view, we'll miss "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We understand that. We're misspecified inthat sense. We're hoping that if the money supply comes in highagainst their current projections in the next week or two, we're goingto increase that borrowing level. I can't be perfectly specific abouthow much we're going to increase it; we haven't got a formula forrelating the borrowing level precisely to a new estimate of the moneysupply. I am saying that if it comes in significantly higher thanthat, we'd probably move it by $100 million, but we wouldn't move itby more than that unless [the money supply] was enormously higher.MR. AXILROD. Borrowing would rise in any event.-47-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, borrowing would rise in anyevent. We're talking about whether we reduce the nonborrowedreserves.MR. ROOS. What is the objective of that nuance? I'm alittle lost. I'm not asking that in a critical way. Why are we nottaking straight "B"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to get a sense from the Committee.I'm not talking in numbers that will turn out to be somewhatmeaningless if we get new figures. I want to know how hard theCommittee is willing to [resist an overshoot]. We're talking about a20 percent federal funds rate if these numbers really come in high. Itake it you're not--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but that's not your proposal.This is for 20 percent; yours is for 17 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now. And 17 percent is barely marginalnow. The presumption is that if we have a $1.5 billion borrowinglevel immediately, it will come down from 17 percent. But almost anyovershoot from what we now expect is going to force the consultationyou're all talking about a couple of weeks down the road.MR. CORRIGAN. If we had a $2 billion increase in the moneysupply next week, all of these numbers presumably would be out thewindow.MR. FORD. Yes, but if we put a 17 percent cap on the fedfunds rate, that almost guarantees--I mean it could be happeningbefore we get out of this room.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am assuming that the present situationis tolerable. We'll wait a week or so to see whether it comes down.If it doesn't, we will have to consult again in a week or two.MR. ROOS. That means that for a week we'll supply money tooquickly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether it's too quickly ornot. All I'm saying is that we only know that ex post, Larry. We'llknow whether it was too quickly or too little along about next March.MR. ROOS. I was all set in the spirit of Thanksgiving andgenerosity to move from "C" to "B," but this whacky proposal bothersme.MR. FORD. It's not whacky; it's semi-whacky.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.MR. PARTEE. Well, I couldn't vote for "B" as it stands. Iwould vote for "B" as you suggested it--that is, if we don't reallymean the specs of "B."MR. GRAMLEY. Should we instruct the staff to calculate thenonborrowed reserve path accordingly?-48-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [From what] I observed, a good many peoplecame right to that conclusion. But there is enough difference so thatI'm not sure I can see a majority anyplace.MR. WALLICH. I'd be willing to go to 17 percent [for theupper limit of the funds rate range] provided the 13 goes to 14. Myconcern is more with the lower limit than the upper limit.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it isn't going to happen. You have noworries, Henry, between now and the middle of December on how lowinterest rates are going to go. The worry is in the first or secondquarter of next year. And I think the higher we put interest ratesnow, the greater the danger is that by the second quarter economicactivity is going to be in a nice steep decline and interest rates aregoing to be falling like a stone. We're going to be chasing the moneysupply. The way to keep out of this is, as the Chairman says, to notwhack it too much now, to let things settle down. We've gone a longway. And we have gone a long, long way just since October. We'veincreased short-term interest rates by something like 2-1/2 to 3percentage points in a month. In a month! We've increased long-terminterest rates by a percentage point or so, a bit less for mortgagerates. Those are enormous increases by historical standards. We arereally resisting money growth. I think the Chairman is quite right inthat. We're showing our determination. And we have let interestrates move through swings since the summer, since recovery began, thatare just totally unprecedented. Let's wait and see what happens.MR. ROOS. Lyle, have we resisted money growth, though, to anextent that would have a beneficial effect on reducing inflation?MR. GRAMLEY. [Unintelligible.]MR. SCHULTZ. Over the long run it will. That's a long time,Mr. Roos.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me see if people think we can reachsome kind of consensus around stating "B" and in some sense adoptingthe specifications of "A" because of a feeling that they may proveconsistent over time and that we shouldn't anticipate theirinconsistency. I suppose that is the analysis that--MR. MORRIS. But the reserve path is going to be drawn on"B." Is that what you're saying?MR. SCHULTZ. Well, the reserve path is drawn on borrowing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The path is in a sense drawn on "B" butwith a starting point on borrowing which the staff tells us in theirbest judgment is more consistent with "A." But we're overriding [thestaff's judgment on] that in a sense. The changes from then on wouldbe consistent with "B." Let me just finish this. Again, let me tryto get some degree of consensus for 13 to 17 percent. I think Lyle isprobably right that we're not going to hit the 13 in the next month.I recognize that we're at the 17 right now. Implicitly by citing thatkind of target, we are accepting the current level of market rates.We'd accept it fluctuating even slightly higher for a few days in thethought that the specification for the borrowing will probably bringit at least slightly lower. If it doesn't, we will have to consult-49-11/18/80because [our specifications] will be inconsistent. But we'll let thatgo for a week or so. We will react quite sluggishly to shortfalls.We will react less sluggishly to overruns, but without enormousaggressiveness. We don't have a formula for--MR. BLACK. That's whacking it lightly.MR. MORRIS. I don't think 17 percent is whacking it lightly,though.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're right there now.MR. MORRIS. Yes, but we've only been there for a couple ofdays.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.MR. STERNLIGHT. What I might say about the 17 or 17-1/2percent that we are getting today is that I don't see our approach asaccepting it. We are putting in reserves. I regard that very highrate of yesterday and today as something of an aberration. I wouldthink, given what we're aiming for, that it ought to be getting downmore than--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what we're assuming now. Butyou're basically operating on the reserve path, as I understand it.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, but there are enough uncertainties inthat reserve path that we feel this is one of those occasions that wejust have to use a little discretion around that.MR. WINN. What do you consider to be the normal rate at thistime?MR. STERNLIGHT. I would expect it to be more like 15percent, given the borrowing level of $1.6 billion that we've beenaiming at this week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could talk about mild [adjustments in]quantifications or whatever. Does that general pattern represent alegitimate consensus? Can I have a show of hands on that?MR. PARTEE. How many would accept it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I'm asking whether it's essentially[acceptable], without getting into every last refinement: Is thisacceptable, with the explanation.MR. ALTMANN. Seven.MR. SCHULTZ. That's better than you usually get on the firsttry. [Now] it's eight or nine.MR. ALTMANN. Eight.MR. ROOS. Instead of starving us into submission, you'vewhacked us into submission!-50-11/18/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It appears that I am as reasonably closeas I can get to a consensus. I don't know if there is any refinementthat will conceivably increase this number. Henry is worried about 14percent on the lower end. I am not sure whether that's operationallysignificant or not.MR. SCHULTZ. I think you did very well. You lost Henry andNancy. And that's about as good as you can--MR. WALLICH. Why not do it my way?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll tell you. Part of the reason,Henry, to put it baldly, is that it upsets a lot of people's doctrinalviews to have [the range] that narrow.MR. SCHULTZ. You better vote before you lose somebody.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's vote.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich YesPresident Winn NoIt's 10 for--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "10-4" means the meeting is over!Let me say for all its difficulty, I think we were concentrating moreon the right variables today. And it was helpful to me. We have someunderlying problems that aren't going to go away. A number of peoplemade comments, which I think are understandable, about whether thewhole process of gradualism makes sense. I just don't think that's anissue that we can decide at this meeting. Nor, indeed, is it an issuethat is up to the Federal Reserve itself because we're not going todeviate successfully from what has been termed gradualism without aneffort by the government right across the board, of which we wouldhave to be part.When I speak of collisions next year, I think you ought to beaware, and I'm sure you are, of the potential for the Federal Reserveto be left out there hanging alone in extremely unsatisfactoryeconomic circumstances with expectations, deliberately [encouraged] ornot, of what we can do about inflation through monetary policy alonemuch overdrawn. And when policies are not a success, there will be aninclination for people to say that somehow inflation would havedisappeared if we'd been 1/2 percentage point within the targetinstead of 1/2 percentage point outside the target or if we hadn't hada big fluctuation downward in the first quarter and upward in thesecond quarter or whatever. That is a conclusion that I don't think-51-11/18/80bears much relationship to reality. Nonetheless, we're going to beextremely vulnerable, particularly if we feed that impressionourselves that somehow we're going to do it all alone.MR. BAUGHMAN. I would think, Mr. Chairman--and I presumethis is going on or will go on--that it would be desirable to get thenew President to commit his credibility as early as possible toattacking inflation for the purpose of trying to erode somewhat thepossibility that we will be standing out there alone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The danger that I see, and I put it verycrudely, is that everybody will be committed to an attack on inflationbut it's entirely up to the Federal Reserve to perform.MR. PARTEE. That won't hurt. We've already been there.MR. BALLES. I have a hunch that our Horatio at the bridgeact isn't really going to change unless or until the size of thatbudget deficit comes down, however it may be done. Until then, we'reunder awful pressure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is one major element. There are alot of other elements in the inflationary picture. Don't forget,there are people out there who are approaching this from one point ofview, which at the extreme--Mr. Corrigan ran into this the other day--is that the budgetary deficit doesn't make the least bit ofdifference. And other policies don't make the least bit ofdifference. Inflation is purely a monetary phenomenon. And if theFederal Reserve would only get its act straightened out, it wouldpretty much disappear in 12 months.MR. BAUGHMAN. But I think that's a pretty small group.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're very vocal, Ernie.MR. BAUGHMAN. I know it's a very vocal group but I thinkit's pretty small.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in one sense, it's a small group.I'm not sure it's an uninfluential group. And when things don't gowell, there is a certain irresistible political temptation to say thatthat small group was right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.MR. CORRIGAN. But another thing, too, is that the FederalReserve in its own way has done a marvelously effective job ofconvincing people that the growth of money matters, to the point whereeven for nonmembers of that small group it is very easy to latch onto[monetary policy] as the scapegoat. Even the nondoctrinaire peoplewho don't even understand it--MR. BAUGHMAN. I assume we're not prepared to disavow that.MR. ROOS. Is that small group currently being subjected to achastising?MR. BALLES. You're getting whacked, Mr. Roos!-52-11/18/80MR. SCHULTZ. What is even more disturbing is that I'mconvinced that the vast majority of people in this country thinkcontrol of the money supply has no connection to interest rates. Thatis really disturbing. They say: You know, interest rates wouldn't beso high if you people would just control the money supply. That putsus politically in a very difficult position.MR. BAUGHMAN. Very often [the interpretation is] evennarrower. It's if you wouldn't print so much money.MR. SCHULTZ. That's right. That's what they're talkingabout.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I bring to your attention that the nextmeeting is a bit off schedule to get us in line with our new schedule.So it's on a Friday because that's the time when we could fit it in.It would not be surprising if we have to have some consultation beforethat time. I hope some food is out there.MR. ALTMANN. I am told that it is.MR. PARTEE. It's only four weeks away.MR. BALLES. Paul, are we meeting here for the planningsession?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes we are.END OF MEETING-53-