Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 26, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Wednesday,November 26, 1980, at 12:20 p.m., at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was atelephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C.,except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of thoseparticipating.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. Wallich(New York)(Kansas City)(Boston)Messrs. Baughman (Dallas), and Eastburn (Philadelphia),Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black (Richmond), Corrigan (New York), and Ford(Atlanta), Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banksof Richmond, Minneapolis, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Altmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryPetersen, General CounselOltman (New York), Deputy General CounselAxilrod, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis (New York), T. Davis (Kansas City),Eisenmenger (Boston), Ettin, Henry, Keir,Kichline, and Truman, Associate EconomistsMr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for DomesticOperations, System Open Market Account- 2 -Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Boehne (Philadelphia), Brandt (Atlanta), Burns(Dallas), Fousek (New York), and Parthemos (Richmond),Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofPhiladelphia, Atlanta, Dallas, New York, andRichmond, respectivelyTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofNovember 26, 1980[Secretary's note: At the beginning of the meeting theSecretary called on each Reserve Bank in order to verify attendance.]MR. ALTMANN. Thank you. If you will all stand by, we arealmost ready to go. We expect to have all members of the Board andthe usual members of the staff. Let me give you the phone number touse if you should become disconnected from the network. Call us onanother instrument at 202-452-3317 and we will try to get you back onthe network promptly. If you will bear with us for just anotherminute or two, I hope we can get started.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everybody's on and we're all here?SEVERAL. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, gentlemen--or rather, lady andgentlemen--I think we ought to have a little review of the situation.We may want to make a decision. Let me just say in a preliminary waythat there is not much we can do about it right at the moment butthese money supply figures have been plaguing us in terms ofrevisions. We have known this for some time and it has just gottenworse. It's absolutely clear, in my judgment, that there is asystematic bias in these numbers. When they go down, all theestimates are successively revised down. And when they go up, all theestimates are successively revised up. This [pattern] has cumulatedover a period of time [and] has become quite serious in my judgment.Now, I don't know what theoretical reason there can be forthis. I don't think there can be a theoretical reason. The [errors]should be random unless we are getting bad reporting. The onlyplausible explanation I can see is that early reporters are notreporting the right numbers in some cases. I don't know, perhaps theyreport last week's number or something, so when they are in an uptrend it is always low and when they are in a down trend it is alwayshigh. But I will have some people here, as soon as they get out fromunder, organize some way to look at this. I suspect it's going tohave to be done by looking very carefully at the individual bank levelto see whether there is any systematic bias in reporting by some ofthe banks. I don't know any other way to go about it, but we arelooking into it. Did you know a characteristic is [that we have hadbig revisions shortly after our meeting]? Maybe we shouldn't have anymore Federal Open Market Committee meetings so we can't have an eye onmoney supply numbers that we discussed at a meeting! That's a part ofthis general upward revision syndrome. We have had some upwardrevisions since the meeting, so why don't I ask Steve to describewhere we are.MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, as you suggested,immediately following the meeting we had a considerable upwardrevision in the money supply data, measured by M-1A. For the week of[November] 5th we published a level that was $1.2 billion higher thanwhat was implied by the growth path adopted by the Committee, and forthe week of the 12th we had a level $1.8 billion higher. So themarkets [saw] an increase for the 5th--the final number--of $2.9billion and a further increase of $1.8 billion for the 12th. The11/26/80preliminary data we had for the 19th had suggested no change from thelevel of the 12th. The data we have as of about an hour ago, withoutnonmember banks available, suggest a downward revision. [The numbers]suggest that we may show a drop of $1-1/2 billion from the week of the12th for M-1A and a drop of similar magnitude for M-1B. Even withthese latest revisions, money growth will be running above the totalreserve path adopted by the Committee. As of yesterday, it wasrunning about $400 million above on a weekly average basis, and thisincreased demand for total reserves was pulling [up] the demand forborrowing. The amount of borrowing was up from the $1.5 billioninitially assumed to $1.9 billion. We have not made any downwardrevision in the nonborrowed reserve path to take account of theincrease in total reserves at this point, as we normally do not dothat this early in a period. In any event, as I say, we now have hadthe first sign of a downward revision in the money supply. Whether itwill hold up, Mr. Chairman--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll believe that when I see it.MR. AXILROD. Only time will tell. With borrowing runningrecently around $1.9 to $2 billion, the federal funds rate has movedup. After the discount rate was raised on Friday, the funds ratemoved up to around 16-1/4 percent on Monday. It had been running ataround 16-1/4 to 17 percent and now, most recently, it has beenrunning between 17 and 18 percent. The average for the week to dateis 17 percent. Yesterday it was 17.28 percent and it was running veryhigh today, on Wednesday, the last day of the statement week--17-1/2to 18 percent--and then moved above that later. Mr. Chairman, I thinkthat very briefly updates the Committee on the aggregates and relatedreserve and money market conditions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you want to addanything to that Peter.MR. STERNLIGHT. I have nothing very interesting. In somevery light trading, [the funds rate was] somewhere around 18 percentand [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The general problem, as I see it, is afairly simple if awkward one: The money supply is runningsignificantly higher than was assumed at the meeting. The kind ofborrowing assumptions we were using convert, without any discretionarychanges, into something like $1.9 or $2.0 billion. The question of adiscretionary change is at issue certainly. But even without that, ifwe stick to the minimal "holding steady" on the nonborrowed reservepath, we have a level of borrowing that obviously puts into jeopardythe 17 percent funds rate ceiling. I would just propose, as a holdingaction at the moment anyway, that we move that to 18 percent, subjectto review next week if we have to do it.MR. EASTBURN. Paul, this is very different. May I ask Stevea question? Are you revising the December [projections] for theaggregates?MR. AXILROD. We were in the middle [of those estimates]before we got this very recent data. Our estimate for M-1A growth forNovember was on the order of 9 percent or a little higher, and forDecember it had been around 1-1/2 percent. Our estimate for M-1B was11/26/80around 12 percent for November and close to 3-1/2 to 4 percent forDecember. Whether these latest data will cause any further downwardrevision to that depends on the week of the 26th, for which I justdon't have any data. If they prove to be somewhat weaker also, Isuspect the December number will revise down, because the latest datain November will be lower and that will tend to carry through somewhatand lower the December average level. But that's highly tentative,President Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm afraid those projections have hadvirtually no informational content in the past 4 or 5 months.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, this is Tony Solomon. Can youhear me?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the recommendation is a wiseone; I think we should go to 18 percent. The market view is that weare already in a 17 to 18 percent range, and it seems to me that wereally have no alternative.MR. GUFFEY. Paul, this is Roger Guffey. I have just acouple of questions. When you were talking about an 18 percent cap,[does] that conflict [with] no increase to the nonborrowed path?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that might depend upon how this nextmoney supply figure comes in. I think it is hard to defer [the issue]if it comes in high. If it comes in low, maybe we could defer thequestion. The preliminary indication is a little on the low side. Ifwe didn't have that, I would be very hard pressed to say we shouldn'tchange [the nonborrowed path] a bit.MR. GUFFEY. The other question--perhaps Steve could respondto it--is [whether with] an 18 percent rate, [which we have] in fact,we're still looking at about $2 billion in borrowing?MR. AXILROD. Yes, the implied borrowing literally called forin the path is $1.9 billion. And given the way the federal funds ratehas been running, [a funds rate of] 17 to 18 percent ought to begenerally consistent with that. But if the borrowing were to risesignificantly higher--if the money supply came in stronger--then ofcourse there would be a question about the 18 percent itself. I mightalso add that last week we had an unusually large amount of borrowingfrom banks over $3 billion in size. Virtually half of the borrowingwas from them, and they are the banks more prone to try to avoid thewindow because of the surcharge. So it may be that we are gettingmore pressure from the surcharge than we might have expected. Thatmay abate but, again, I'm not certain.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I'm with you and Tony Solomon insupporting the proposal.11/26/80MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, could we get Jim Kichline tointerpret for us those [new orders] figures for durable goods? Whatdo you make of those?MR. KICHLINE. The new orders figures in total were up alittle, following an exceptionally large rise in September. Fornondefense capital goods, they were down a little, but that wasdragged [down] by aircraft; if we strip that out, they were unchanged.The October level of nondefense capital goods orders is littledifferent in nominal terms from the average in the third quarter, sowe don't perceive that a great deal is happening that differs from ourearlier expectations on new orders. I might say that the shipments ofdurable goods were very large and were higher than we had assumed inour GNP projection. So, on average, we don't believe there's muchdifferent in the figures, except that there is some near-term strengthmeasured by the information available for shipments in October.MS. TEETERS. Have you changed your GNP projection at allsince last week?MR. KICHLINE. No, we have not. We have received additionalinformation on housing starts, which were higher than we had assumed.We have the second 10 days of auto sales for November, and they wereat a 7.1 million unit annual rate. On average, that's about what wehad assumed. So we think growth in the area of 2 to 2-1/2 percent inreal terms is still a reasonable forecast for the current quarter.MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. I would go alongwith your 18 percent, but only very reluctantly. I think that we havehit a level right now that [is inducing tightening] into the economyand that we probably are going to produce results in demand or marketsbeyond [unintelligible]. The rise in this kind of business alwaysleaves us [unintelligible]. After that it's no longer necessary but,as I say, reluctantly I will go along with the 18 percent.MR. CORRIGAN. This is Jerry Corrigan. I would tend to lineup with the remarks of Frank Morris. I do think we have to go to 18percent, but I myself am reasonably uncomfortable without theimplications that we have great [unintelligible] of that. That is mycomment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shall I go down the list? I have analphabetical list, it so happens. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I would associate myself with Frank's remarksand Jerry's and Tony's too. I don't think there is much that we cando, given the fact that the funds rate is already up at 17 percent orover. If we try to push it back down again, in light of these moneystock numbers [that would] look rather strange. But I do think wehave interest rates as high as we need to have them. I'm going tobelieve the [weaker] figures [for the week of the] 19th will [show]up, and I'm going to pray between now and then.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Mr. Partee.]MR. PARTEE. I'll go along with 18. I guess I do it lesshesitantly than the others have suggested because I really don't knowwhat is happening in the economy. I don't know why bank credit demand-4-11/26/80is so very strong and why we have repeatedly been unable to predictthe level of rates that would be consistent with the growth inaggregates that we wish. So, I would say that we should certainly goto 18 percent, and I would be prepared to go further if in fact Lyleisn't right and the performance of the numbers does not show someimprovement.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I would be prepared to go to 18. I don't see anyrealistic alternative, although I am uncomfortable with the presentlevel of interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. I don't think we have any choice on the 18percent. What I find disturbing is the increasing evidence thatpeople in this country seem to be learning to live with higherinterest rates all the time. And that may become a greater problem astime goes on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon we have [heard from].Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, I am sufficiently uncomfortable that Iwon't go along with 18 percent. We already have the rates too high.It seems to me that you are playing with dynamite. We are [fosteringanother] cycle like last time. So I would dissent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, I was prepared to go to 19 percent lasttime, so I certainly would be willing to go to 18 percent. It seemsto me that we are not getting the pressures on the financialinstitutions or markets that we got last time around [when rates]approached these heights. I think Governor Schultz is very right thatpeople are learning to live with these rates because they are notreally [biting after tax]. We have waited long enough for the[unintelligible] effects, and they may still come. But as I say, Ithink we do have to move now at the minimum to 18 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman, who is alternate for Mr.Roos.MR. BAUGHMAN. I have substantial uncertainty, but noreluctance. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether any of the [non-voting Presidents] want to make comments. Mr. Black, Mr. Eastburn,Mr. Ford?MR. FORD. Paul, this is Bill Ford. I just have one questionI would like to [ask]. Are you thinking about the tolerance[unintelligible] level of the discount rate might have other[unintelligible]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't quite hear you, Bill.11/26/80MR. FORD. The [unintelligible] also happens fairly quicklyon the discount [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll just give you a brief answer,and then I think you ought to make up your own mind basically. Ifthese figures don't come down, inevitably that question arises. Butit arises against a background--not a conviction--that if we do it, weshould not expect it to have any impact on market rates.MR. EASTBURN. Paul, this is Dave Eastburn. I would goalong, but I am [unintelligible]. My [guess] is we will findourselves putting in a lot of reserves in if we don't. I wouldcertainly favor another [unintelligible]. One thing that we areguessing is that the surcharge [unintelligible]. It's not having thesame impact as the surcharge [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Paul, we did a lot of the small [unintelligible].We project that correspondents might be tightening in that direction;it depends on where the borrowing really is. But I agree in that Ithink we ought to go 18; I hope we don't have to go higher.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, [this is how] we are goingto play this in the short run or for the moment. We have a decisionon the reserve path and we will have another consultation next week.This may be a very interim decision. Just in terms of this generalexperience--apart from statistical and estimating and other problems--it seems clear to me that the real operating question here is what wedo with the discount window. And there's nothing we can decide onthat in the short run. But in that connection, how many of you haveput any administrative pressure on any banks at all?MR. EASTBURN. We have in Philadelphia.MR. MORRIS. We have in Boston.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have. Interesting.MR. FORD. Paul, this is Bill Ford. In Atlanta five of thelargest banks in our District are right on the edge of being subjectto the frequency rules. So we anticipate that it's likely to be[unintelligible]. We have not been putting undue pressure of any kindbefore--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I tell you, it's a bit of a mystery to mehow those rules are interpreted. We don't want any undue pressure butI don't think we want to lean over backwards the other way either.Any other comments?MR. GUFFEY. We've had no problems in Kansas City and areputting no pressure on the banks.MR. BAUGHMAN. In the Dallas District we haven't felt thatthe borrowing is at that level.MR. CORRIGAN. Same for Minneapolis.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we just have two or three Districtsthat have been doing something, right?11/26/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, we are seeing a rise in theoverall level coming from the [unintelligible]--not significantly,just one or two Districts. Are you getting the pressure that we are?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not aware of any particularconcentration by District, but I am just not aware. Do you have anycomment, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. I don't think there is any particularconcentration by District. As I say, the only thing we noticed,particularly last week, was that very large banks borrowed a littlemore than usual, but borrowing by the smaller banks continued veryheavy. I might say that over the past four weeks, Mr. Chairman, [onestatistic we monitor]--the average number of weeks borrowed in thepast 13 weeks--has been creeping up. It's one indicator. It's up to4.2 weeks; and if we do [the calculation] by size of bank, it looks asif the large banks are very close to the sort of national guidelinethat had been put out, which would indicate that some will be subjectto pressure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Personally, I am not at all sure that ourrules are appropriate for today's banking system. We don't have asituation where a particular bank gets in trouble and has to borrowrepeatedly for weeks. All they do is pass the pea around amongthemselves; they know what the rules are. So one bank borrows oneweek, and it says I am not going to borrow for a few weeks, we'll letsomebody else borrow. So we get no real pressure on any particularbank because it's just a question of whether they buy more federalfunds this week or less. We just don't have the situation thatexisted 20 years ago where a bank got into trouble in some sense andmore or less had no alternative to borrowing other than to makeportfolio adjustments. The last thing any of them do now is to make aportfolio adjustment.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, to answer your thoughts,another [dimension] of the changing nature of the window that Iforesee is that the multi-bank holding company fringe has developed inrecent years, especially in our District and a few others with a lotof very large multi-bank holding companies. They see a little less ofthe money and avoid the surcharges relative to [what is] implied [bytheir liquidity needs]. In fact, Citibank in New York may not[unintelligible] holding companies. We have a lot of [unintelligible]themselves in December.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are a lot of questions toconsider in this area. But my overall impression is that we don't getmuch [restraint]. Banks all have their business rate, so they neverhave to restrain [lending]. They just change interest rates.SPEAKER(?). I think it may be important to observe, [thatif] we start putting pressure at the discount window [what we are]doing is increasing the upward pressure on the funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right, among other things. Okay,we may be back in touch, but for the moment, that's where we are.Thank you. Happy Thanksgiving.END OF SESSION