Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeApril 22, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 22, 1980, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMr. SolomonMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Baughman, Eastburn, Mayo, and Willes,Alternative Members of the Federal OpenMarket CommitteeMessrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of San Franciscoand Richmond, respectivelyAltmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryPetersen, General CounselOltman, Deputy General CounselMannion, Assistant General CounselAxilrod, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T.Davis,Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline,Truman, and Zeisel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account4/22/80Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Boehne, Brandt, Burns, Corrigan, Keran,and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,Dallas, New York, San Francisco, and Chicago,respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus and Danforth, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofApril 22, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can we come to order, ladies andgentlemen? I am delighted to say that our Vice Chairman, Mr. Solomon,who was duly elected in absentia last time, is with us today. Welcometo your first meeting. I am sure you'll find out about the wonderfulways of the Open Market Committee very quickly. First, we have theminutes.MR. GUFFEY. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will approve theminutes. Mr. Pardee.MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions?MR. BLACK. Scott, how would you rate the relative importanceof the declining rates and prospective declines in rates vis-a-vis theIranian situation, so far as weakness in the dollar is concerned?MR. PARDEE. Much more important are the interest rates. Onthe Iranian situation, when you talk to different people they'll giveyou different interpretations even on the same day. For the momentinterest rates are the dominant factor in peoples' minds in theexchange markets.MR. BLACK. But if we kept the aggregates under controlsuccessfully for the next several months, would interest rates andprospective interest rate movements mean as much as they do now?MR. PARDEE. In a couple of months the exchange traders mightbe thinking about something else. The [focus of their] attentiontends to shift from time to time. Currently, given that there is afeeling that we're in a period where interest rates are topping offand people are uncertain as to how far interest rates are likely to godown or whether they will stabilize, rates are the dominant factor.The exchange market people look a little at the aggregates. I was abit surprised and rather pleased that the decline in the aggregatesreported on Friday did not lead to a sharp sell-off of the dollar,given the sensitivity the market is showing toward monetary questionsin the United States at this point. But they look mainly at interestrates and less at the aggregates.MR. BLACK. Has that mix changed any? I know that has beentrue for a long time.MR. PARDEE. It depends in some banks on whether they havemonetarist economists that they have to listen to; but they work withinterest rates. And I'm afraid, with this 1.4 [number released] thismorning, that we're hearing again from the market that there has notbeen any improvement on inflation in terms of the CPI.MR. WALLICH. Following up President Black's question: Themarket knows the projections are for falling interest rates. Theseforecasts are also derivable from Treasury bill futures and the like.4/22/80Do you think the exchange rate discounts these future declines ininterest rates so that if they materialized there would be no furtherexchange rate effect?MR. PARDEE. It's a question of [timing]. We surveyedcorporate treasurers yesterday to find out what they were thinking atthis moment. Several of them related practically the same view: Theyexpect that sooner or later interest rates may decline in the UnitedStates--that it's necessary--as we move into a recession. But as Iindicated in my report, if interest rates come down faster--beforethere is a demonstrable improvement on inflation and internationallyon the trade [and] current account balances--then we're heading fortrouble. So there is some expectation that interest rates may recede,and certainly plenty of hope that they will at some point, from thisparticular group of people. But the traders and corporate treasurersare telling us that it's a matter of timing in terms of when theinterest rates come down and when these other things start improving.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The consumer price index isn't going tocome down for three months.MS. TEETERS. What are the price indexes doing in othercountries?MR. PARDEE. They are beginning to level off, I'm afraid,certainly in Germany and Switzerland where they are running around 6percent or 5 percent. Wholesale and producer price indexes are stillvery high in many of these countries. Japan is still reporting veryhigh increases, but they are beginning to level off, too, as the oilshock gets filtered into their price mechanism. But the consumerprice indexes are behaving better in some of these countries.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are German interest rates doing? Arethey off their peak or not?MR. PARDEE. Today they're off a little. The Euro-mark isabout 9-1/4 percent and the three-month rate on interbank [loans] isdown below 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What were they at the peak?MR. PARDEE. Euro-marks as against Eurodollars were around 17percent as against 9 percent. We're still at a differential of about7 to 8 percentage points, depending on which measure we use.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's close to the peak.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not appreciably off the peak.MR. PARDEE. Well, it was at about 10 percentage pointsbefore, close to 10-1/2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions?MR. EASTBURN. A question, I guess to Ted Truman: In thesummary of the Greenbook, the staff concluded with a paragraph aboutthe outlook for the dollar, which as nearly as I can remember has saidabout the same thing for the last year or two, whereas the dollar has4/22/80had some ups and downs. I wonder if this is because that is the bestyou can do or [Laughter]--MR. TRUMAN. Well, the dollar has had some ups and downs.However, for the last 18 months, or in fact since shortly after theNovember 1st program, the dollar on average has not moved. It hasmoved in a band of about 5 percentage points on average and ourprojections have been more or less within that same range. As far asyour second question is concerned, about whether that's the best wecan do, my feeling and the staff's feeling is that there are a numberof conflicting forces at the moment. On the one hand, we have theprospect of interest rates coming down; that's something that themarket looks at very closely, in part because that's the cost ofmoney. That's a different phenomenon than the monetary aggregatetargets, which are a function of what is going to happen to inflationand the economy over a longer term. I would differ with Scott in thatI think the market believes and has appreciated the fact that ourtrade and current account positions are relatively good and willcontinue to be relatively good, partly because of what our domesticprojection is, and that should tend to give some strength to thedollar. So, it's really those two conflicting forces that lead us insome sense to a projection that the dollar will remain in the range ithas been for the last year or so. As far as the technical side of theprojection is concerned, we did in fact raise it from 88.5 to 90, butthat's a relatively small difference. It's in the same range where ithas been for the last 18 months or more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. We hear a good bit of publicity about domesticcredit problems. The Chrysler story is in the paper this morning, andso forth. I hear no mention of international credit problems, andthat seems to me to be an exposure that gets overlooked in theassessment. I don't know whether you have any feel for this or not.MR. PARDEE. There are several people who might be able toanswer that. In terms of the non-oil-[producing] less developedcountries, there is a lot of discussion about that.MR. WINN. That's the sort of thing I mean. It seems to methat's a problem that is ahead of us in spades.MR. PARDEE. I think both the Board staff and our staff, aswell as other staffs, are looking at this very carefully. We'removing into another period where the whole discussion of recycling isvery important. Since the 1974-75 period scared so many people,perhaps we're in a little better shape coming into this one. Peopletalk about Brazil and a few other countries that will have bigproblems, but of course the [unintelligible] decided not to talk tothe IMF. I don't know, Ted; you might want to comment on that.MR. TRUMAN. Well, as we said in the presentation to theCommittee in February, it's not clear how the international creditproblems will impact on the dollar per se or on the U.S. economy.There is a feedback between the policies that are adopted by othermajor oil importing countries in this framework [in terms of theireffect] on the dollar and the international credit situation. So, ifJapan and Germany and the United States, for example, decide that they4/22/80do not want to sustain the kinds of current account deficits thateverybody seems to be projecting at least for this year and next year,then we could have problems. It's not clear how it would impact onthe dollar, but the impact on banks and the financial system could bequite severe.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The difficulty of the non-oil-[producing] LDCs in borrowing sufficiently and the need to draw downreserves will probably lessen the pressures for diversification out ofthe dollar. On the other hand, the probable failure of thesubstitution account negotiations may increase diversificationpressures by the OPEC countries. My own view is that right now thebest estimate is probably that we'll be nip and tuck with the Germanson the external current account deficit. The picture is not asoptimistic as it was when we thought a couple of months ago that ourdeficit would be significantly lower than the German and Japanesedeficits. I agree completely with Scott that in the short run,meaning in the next month or two, there is likely to be pressure onthe dollar if the decline in interest rates moves very precipitously.But I think the outlook in the longer run, a few months from now orlater in the year, is sufficiently reasonable that we're unlikely tohave any major dollar pressure of the kind that we saw in October1978. But in the period immediately ahead of us, as these interestrates move very sharply--if they do--I think that will cause usproblems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the capital conversion situationnow? Have the Germans stopped that?MR. PARDEE.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we're not getting any now.MR. PARDEE. On the capital conversion? No, they haven't hadmany issues lately.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they had them, presumably we would getthem. But they just haven't had any.MR. PARDEE. Right.MR. PARTEE. I wonder whether it wouldn't be desirable tohave some downward pressure on the dollar, with the economy movinginto what could prove to be a pretty sizable recession. Wouldn't itbe nice to have a little better export market?MR. PARDEE. There are considerable lags. You're talkingabout effects in 1981-1982, not now.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I know. But we don't know how long therecession is going to last either.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the other hand though, Chuck,until the inflation rate does begin to go down, the reasonably stabledollar is one of the few things we have going for us. It isconsidered an anti-inflationary influence to a modest degree, so I4/22/80think we would be well advised to try to make sure, as best we can,that any decline in the dollar is a reasonably gradual one.MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not to resist a decline, but [toensure] that it is a gradual one.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with declines in the dollar isthat they get a certain momentum of their own.MR. PARTEE. And, of course, the thing that would bring theinflation rate down the quickest in the short run would be lowerinterest rates because the CPI is being affected so greatly [by]mortgage costs and other indirect costs of higher interest rates.MR. WALLICH. These all strike me as rather unorthodox waysof coping with our problems: Depreciate the dollar, bring downinterest rates, and fight inflation. Now, I don't think you reallymeant this seriously, but it sounded a little ominous because thereare people who do believe that.MR. WINN. One more question. The freezing of the Iranianassets [added] one aspect to the diversification desires of othernations. Did the suggestion in the latest of the President'sproposals that we seize them--not only freeze them but seize them--tomeet various expenditures, etc. have any further repercussions?MR. PARDEE. Well, the whole package, as I indicated, is thatas long as the United States is exposed, whatever we do to actunilaterally in Iran is seen as bad for the dollar. The indicationsout of the European ministries meeting today are that perhaps theywill help us, and that is giving the dollar a little lift. But, asfor individual items within the package we put together, it's hard toisolate what the effect on the dollar has been.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need a motion to ratify thetransactions.MR. WINN. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. As for recommendationswith respect to operations, we took an action last month regardingthese forwards with the Bundesbank, which we would turn over to theTreasury. I would hope that we could still do that. I take it thatthe Bundesbank is taking the position that if we have any swapsoutstanding, we have to use [the proceeds] first for that. I don'tknow if you can arrange to get the swap repaid before then, Mr.Pardee. If not, let's negotiate vigorously so that the Treasury gets[the funds].MR. PARTEE. Gets to realize its losses!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.4/22/80MR. BALLES. Peter, I'm very curious about what happened tothe expected April bulge. As you know, the Committee was concernedthat it not be allowed to happen. I'm not quite sure we were lookingforward to a negative bulge. Do you have any insights into what wasgoing on?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the aggregates have proved once againtheir lack of short-run predictability. We thought we had a surething going with April because [the money supply in] April has bulgedevery year for the past 4 or 5 years it seems.MR. BALLES. You can't believe in anything anymore, can you?MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure that I can pinpoint any specialfactor. I don't know if Steve wants to add anything. In New York ourfaces are even redder than those of the Board staff because we wereanticipating an even greater bulge.MR. AXILROD. Well, the growth rate [of Ml] in April of 1976was 6.6 percent; in 1977, 9.2 percent; in 1978, 12.6 percent; and in1979, 14.7 percent. My memory is that there is genuine weakness inthe unadjusted deposits. If one compared year over year and appliedthe seasonal factor of 1976--that is abstracting from all theadjustments we've made--the increase would be something like the 6.6percent recorded in 1976. I assume there is some possibility thatwe've over-adjusted because in the process there is a certain amountof coincidence of random factors. It's a conflict of terms, butsomething like that may have happened. And we may see [some rebound]in May and June. I'll have some comments on that in my own briefing.But other than that, we have no special explanation; there are nospecial factors that we could think of, unless income really is beingdestroyed at a very rapid rate here. But we don't have anysubstantial evidence of that yet.MR. BALLES. I heard Chuck mutter under his breath that itmight have something to do with the weakness in the economy.MR. PARTEE. Do we know what happened in April 1975?MR. AXILROD. Yes, [M1 growth in] April 1975 was -3 percent.In fact, one has to go back to 1970, 1971, and 1972 to have highAprils again. They were between 7 and 8 percent in those threesuccessive years.MR. PARTEE. I see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In April 1975 we were just coming out ofrecession.MR. PARTEE. Well, in terms of money demand--MR. AXILROD. I might say, Governor Partee, that the -3percent of April 1975 was followed by a May of 13 percent and a Juneof 16 percent.MR. SCHULTZ. So much for that!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.4/22/80MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, I was going to raise a question as towhether the seasonal adjustment might not have been a factor. But Iwould also like to ask Peter whether he could comment on hisconfidence or lack thereof in the projected rather strong money growthfor May and June shown in the report which I believe was put out inNew York.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't really want to claim anypaternity for the money projections that are made in New York! I lookat all those projections with great skepticism. In projecting afairly strong May and June, basically I think our people felt thatthey did not see a reason at this point to change the quarterly growthpatterns, which they tend to feel a little more confident in than themonth-to-month gyrations. And to have the quarterly growth come in asthey had seen it before, having had a weak March and April, one isdriven to project a rebound in May and June.MR. BAUGHMAN. But they use, do they not, somethingapproximating the Greenbook outlook for the general economy?MR. STERNLIGHT. They would be basing it on their own[forecast], but that is not a very different outlook in this case.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I can think of one small technicalfactor that might have affected [money growth]: The delay in mailingout the [tax] refunds might have made the money hit balances a coupleof days later, but probably no more than that. If we figured itcorrectly, that would account for maybe $800 million or something likethat but the estimates for the week of the 16th were revised down toabout $4-1/2 billion. However, one thing we wondered about waswhether or not the high interest rates and the greater availability ofmoney substitutes such as the money market mutual funds may have ledpeople not to build up their balances in anticipation of the tax datequite as [early] as they have in the past. How to measure that, Idon't know. But we also were wondering about this great weakness, andthat's all we could come up with as a possible explanation for it.MR. AXILROD. The delay does have an effect. Our estimate isslightly higher than yours through the week of the 16th. We have someslightly counterbalancing upward effect in the week of the 23rd; weassume it will be washed out by the 30th and probably have a trivialeffect on the month on average. But we are assuming that M1 for theweek of the 23rd, the week we're in, rises by something like $3-1/2billion from the week of the 16th, in part because of this delay. Ofcourse, if that doesn't develop, the negative for April will be muchbigger.MR. SCHULTZ. What about people paying off debts?MR. AXILROD. Well, they can pay off debts out of almost anyasset. They may be paying them off out of cash or they may be lettingother assets run down. I just have no way of knowing until we get thequarterly flow of funds.MS. TEETERS. But, Steve, didn't you say yesterday that thereis no evidence that people are moving into other types of money?4/22/80 -8-MR. AXILROD. Yes, so far. I'll have some of that in my ownbriefing. But that's right; thus far we don't have evidence of moneymoving into higher order Ms. We don't have data yet for Treasurybills or complete data on debt.MR. BLACK. I gather that there wasn't anything more than theavailability of more data that led to these downward revisions.MR. AXILROD. In the money supply?MR. BLACK. Yes, for the week of the 16th.MR. AXILROD. No, we don't have anything more than wenormally have as the weeks go by.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, before we feel that our inability toforecast monthly behavior of the aggregates reflects some sort ofweakness in what we're doing, I think we should keep in mind the factthat even the most ardent monetarists have never believed it ispossible to control money or to avoid fluctuations on a month-to-monthbasis. If we see an undershoot or an overshoot in the short term,even though it might seem desirable to lean against that deviationthrough the operations of the Desk, I really don't think we should.Nor should we feel that because the aggregates are unpredictable on amonth-to-month basis it in any way detracts from the wisdom of how weare conducting our business.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other comments, we have toratify the transactions.SPEAKER(?). So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are ratified.Let's turn to the staff report on the economic situation.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since we've identified with such accuracypast financial relationships, I think we ought to have our economistdiscuss prospective financial relationships.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can have some general comments aboutthe economic situation and policy implications and we'll return to amore precise discussion after an initial go-around. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. I had a question I wanted to raise, which may bemore on the technical side than the general side, Paul. Do you wantto hold that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to ask questions at thistime, too.MR. WINN. Okay. Steve, you have made an income analysis formoney demand in the period ahead. If one looks back at many previous4/22/80credit crunches, one sees that after the economy turns down, we get abulge in credit demand. The margins start to narrow; sales are offand inventories are up and there is continued price pressure for morecarry. So, first, there's the seasonal adjustment [problem] thatmakes me quite nervous about May and June. Now, this may or may nothappen, but there is also the possibility, it seems to me--withinterest rates turning a bit and attitudes changing a little--of arather substantial increase in borrowing in the May-June period aswell.MR. AXILROD. We actually have projected a rather sharp dropin borrowing in the second quarter, largely because we assume a verysubstantial liquidation of liquid assets built up by corporations.MR. WINN. But that runs out eventually.MR. AXILROD. That's right. So the sharp drop levels off,but with borrowings at a lower level. And, of course, we have someweakening in the consumer demand area. So, we don't have anysubstantial build-up in borrowing demand ahead of us. Over the longrun, of course, we could probably foresee some business desire torestructure balance sheets, but that's a shifting of the borrowingpatterns. We simply don't see any bulge, really, in credit demands.MR. WINN. But if you talk to some of these businessmen, theydon't have [unintelligible] they can hold out without having to comeback in. They are out now. Rates have scared them off and they areusing up what they have.MR. AXILROD. That's right. There is pressure; they're notgenerating internal funds to any substantial degree. It's true thatwe have them running down their liquid assets. There is some built-inpressure generated against expanding their spending to a great degree.We don't have a vast expansion in spending; and to the degree thatpressure is on them, it might constrain their spending actually atcurrent rates.MR. PARTEE. Don't you think, Willis, that they followed adifferent inventory policy this time?MR. WINN. They kept inventories pretty tight; but if salesdrop off, they still are faced with having to carry [inventories].MR. PARTEE. They seemed to cut production very fast, too. Idon't know.MR. WINN. The adjustment is not quite as easy as we like tothink of it sometimes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say in connection with all of theseconfusing money figures and related numbers, that we took some actionsin March that were unusual, to say the least, on consumer credit, onthe voluntary program, on the money market funds, and all the rest.And we had interest rates at levels nobody ever saw before. I suspectthis has led to some uncertainty and adjustments of a magnitude wecan't quantify very well. We may have had a lot of "money" held inthe form of Treasury bills for instance; we just don't know. It's notin our M2 and M3 figures. I suspect there may be something to what4/22/80Fred said--and we will not find out until later--in that a lot ofpeople may be scared about consumer credit, and they may now be takingsome money out of the bank and repaying their charge cards orsomething else. It's just a very uncertain period, too uncertain toreach conclusive judgments about anything. Unfortunately, we onlyfind out about these things later when we get more numbers and getsome more perspective as to whether we are getting a rebound or not.We just don't know at this stage. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I'd like to pursue, if I may, the reasoning thatSteve expressed. It's my understanding that back in October weadopted a policy of letting interest rates flow freely. Indeed,interest rates did move up rather dramatically and we did not act toimpede that upward movement; we let them move. Now, Steve, if Iunderstood you correctly, you expressed concern that if we permittedinterest rates to decline dramatically, there could be adversereactions from markets and other sources in terms of inflationaryexpectations--that they may misread that in spite of the fact that theChairman has repeated frequently the possibility that interest ratesmight decline and that it would not be a signal of any easing of ourdetermination to deal with inflation. I have two questions. Onequestion is: Isn't it illogical to let rates move one way and thenget "antsy," if I may use a bad phrase, when they move the other way?Secondly--and I might pose this question to the Chairman--if we permitinterest rates to drop, can't we in our published records, or throughcomments by the Chairman and others, explain that this is in no wayany retreat from our primary concern with inflation? In other words,one of the things that I think causes the concern that you expressedis that in the past we have acted with a degree of mystery and secrecyand let the markets draw their own conclusions. Can't we comfort themand explain the rationale behind what we are doing?MR. AXILROD. In answer to the first question, PresidentRoos, I was trying to bring before the Committee the various concernsthat the market would see and also the economic analysis. I was notexpressing my own judgment, particularly, on one or the other aspectsof this. The only thing I can say is that, empirically, in recentperiods when interest rates have gone down, we have had a great hueand cry in the market that may or may not have been rational. It hasprobably had effects on the thinking of those who spend and those whoinvest; and it has brought forth the view that perhaps inflation isn'tgoing to be conquered. That just seems to be a market event and Iwanted to bring it before the Committee. On your second question,since it was addressed to the Chairman--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't want to express any judgmentabout the persuasive powers of the Chairman, Mr. Axilrod? [Laughter]They are limited I would say.MR. ROOS. Are they limited, Paul, by the tradition of ourtaking an action and letting people decide what caused us to do whatwe did or are they limited for other reasons? I think your persuasivepotential--and it isn't salary-setting time, so I'm not polishing theapple--is enormous. [Laughter] But I think the Fed has traditionallynot used that potential in past years because we thought we shouldjust take actions and let the people out there decide why we did.4/22/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only answer I could give you is thatwe would get a mixed reaction. Some people will believe it. Peopleof monetarist persuasion will believe it more than others. Somepeople don't believe the underlying theory, so they have no reason tobelieve it. And there will be people in between. But I don't knowwhether there will be more or less [confusion]. There was certainly alot of confusion in late November, December, and early January for avariety of reasons. People saw the reserve figures going up, whichwas one confusing aspect. The money supply figures weren't going up,particularly, but the reserve figures were; and interest rates weregoing down. We get all different constellations of events. But Ithink you are misled if you think that pure persuasion is going toconvince people. It may have an impact, but we are going to get mixedreactions.MR. SCHULTZ. I would just remind you of how he charmed GailCincotta.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(?). The ability to persuade isasymmetrical also.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's probably right. People believewhat they want to believe. If they saw the inflation rate comingdown, they would be more persuaded. But we are in this unfortunateposition where I suspect the consumer price index, anyway, is going toremain at or above--or maybe if we are really lucky a little below--its current level for three months because of the extraneous questionof the oil import fee and the way the interest rates get factored intothat. We probably will have three months of that, which will carry usinto July. Now, maybe if we are lucky, the producer price index willbegin showing some declines; that depends partly I suppose on how theytreat the oil import fee in the producer price index. I don't think[the impact] is negligible. We are far better off if we see theaggregates under clear control and a given interest rate movement thanif we see the aggregates shooting up and interest rates going down;the latter would be the worst of all worlds. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I'd like to follow up on what Larry said. Ithink it is perfectly possible to convince the market that we aresticking to a fixed money supply policy. That doesn't mean that weare not engaging in a very stimulative policy at a time of recession.That's exactly the nature of that policy. It's not really a policy;it's a procedure. And it's analogous to building strong automaticstabilizers into the fiscal system where without tax cuts therecession will produce a large deficit which, of course, is verystimulative. Here we have generated a procedure that is highlyrestraining when demand for money rises against a fixed supply becauseinterest rates rise sharply; and it's highly stimulative on the waydown. So we convince the market that we are on track with ouraggregates. All that we are telling them is that we are going to havelow and extremely stimulative interest rates. Their analysis will bequite correct. Now, if it's a question of proving that we arefollowing our policy, I think we can be persuasive. But that doesn'tmean the market will believe that we are not following a policy thathas very stimulative effects. So, I think we need to look at thereality--namely, that we would be stimulating very severely if we letinterest rates go down--rather than at the procedure. The proceduresays we haven't changed our method of feeding money into the economy.4/22/80All that makes very relevant what Steve said: That we mayhave to modify our path. We may be able to do this within the limitsof the [annual] ranges of 4 to 6-1/2 percent for M-1B and 3-1/2 to 6percent for M-1A. I think we would not have to go outside thoseranges, at least for the remaining two months of the first half of theyear. It would be very alarming if we went to money growth rates forthe second quarter that would make us maintain the 5 percent rate ofgrowth from December to June because we would have to have two monthsof very high growth rates in order to overcome the weakness of Marchand April. This is an occasion where we ought to allow a little basedrift: Let the past be the past and make sure that in May and June wedo not have very large increases in the aggregates. Now, to theextent that the funds rate can contribute to controlling that, weshould be concerned about the funds rate and not let it drop very low.Our techniques of supplying reserves, of course, can give us a betterhandle on the expansion of the money supply. And when we get totalking about specifics, I'd like to supply some more specificsuggestions on how large an increase we ought to aim at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Our present target is not 5 percent. It's4-1/2 percent or somewhat less.MR. WALLICH. That comes out of the movement in the previousperiod, I think.MR. AXILROD. For December to June the Committee last timevoted on 4-1/2 percent or somewhat less.MR. PARTEE. It's consistent with the numbers you gave, whichare the average over the longer run. Henry mentioned M-1B also.MR. ROOS. Do you accept the fact that if we keep moneygrowing slowly, there is a direct effect on output? Isn't that partof the risk?MR. WALLICH. No. I don't believe there is any direct effectfrom money to the economy. The economy in my opinion runs on interestrates. The effect from money goes to interest rates and from there itgoes to the economy. And the prescription for a fixed rate of growthof the money supply, far from being a neutral and noninterventionistpolicy on the economy, is a policy of very extreme intervention. Onemight even call it fine-tuning. You want wide swings in the interestrates and that's what we get by having inelastic growth of the moneysupply. [Rates] are high in expansions, which restrains, and are verylow in recessions, which stimulates. There may be very good reasonsnormally for stimulating strongly in a recession and then as demandfor money builds up again to get interest rates rising early in theexpansion. But in our present predicament, where we have to worrymore about inflation than anything else, I don't think we can affordthis remedy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the staff's furtherdownward revisions in the projections for the forthcoming period. Andif I had to guess, I would say that they still haven't got them quitelow enough, because I just don't see any area in the economy thatseems to have significant strength. Housing is headed much lower, I4/22/80think. The consumer is grossly overextended. We are getting grassroots reports of growing personal and business bankruptcies. TheRedbook, and particularly the addendum that the New York Bank sent in,suggests that inventories are not as closely in alignment with needsas we had thought earlier, and that was the main thing we werecounting on to keep this recession relatively moderate. And I wouldguess that there is probably going to be greater-than-expectedweakness abroad, so that this recession might well take on more of aninternational cast than I think most people are assuming at thismoment. If I am right on this, then prices will probably come downsomewhat more rapidly than the staff and most other people areassuming. I have a lot of sympathy for what Henry was saying,primarily because I think we have made errors in the past. By thesame token, when it comes to policy, I think we would be well advisedto stick to the targets that we adopted last time, which inclines metoward "B." The only thing that causes me problems is this estimateof a sharp decline in the aggregates in April. If that [occurs], inorder to stay on this targeted path we have to have growth in May andJune in the principal aggregates of over 9 percent, and I think thatwould scare the devil out of the market and lead people to concludethat we had abandoned our October 6th policy. So, if April does comein that weak, then I would want to hit the midpoints of the rangessometime later--maybe in September or somewhere down the line ratherthan try to get [growth] back to the midpoints by June. What I'mreally saying, I guess, is that we ought to stick to the reservetarget. And I would like to see rates come down, if that's thenatural fallout of this. That should help prevent April from being solow and would permit us, hopefully, to hit the midpoints by June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. April is pretty well gone, I'm afraid.MR. BLACK. Well, probably so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we have the firstbig test of our new operating procedure ahead of us. It may be moresevere than the staff has projected because we feel the second quarteris likely to be weaker than the staff forecast. If at this juncturewe begin to revise our money growth targets, then in effect we areback to managing interest rates again. If we abandon, for allpractical purposes, our money growth targets at the first occasion wefind interest rates that are uncomfortable, then how is the marketgoing to have any confidence that when we require uncomfortableinterest rates on the up side we will not then also abandon our moneygrowth targets? We would be right back to where we have been. Now,to stay on the course, particularly if the economy is weaker than thestaff projects, is going to be uncomfortable. I think we're going tohave to live through a period of weakness in the dollar because of thevery short time horizon of the foreign exchange trigger. And we willget talk--no matter how persuasive our Chairman is--about the FederalReserve letting loose too soon. But we've simply got to ride itthrough. Rather than viewing lower rates as stimulative, as Henrydoes, I would view them as a force for mitigating the severity of therecession, because there is no question that we are in for a verysharp decline. The issue is: Do we want a monetary policy that isgoing to make the recession, if anything, sharper, steeper and longerthan the staff has forecast? So, it seems to me, it is fish or cut4/22/80bait on our new operating procedure in the second quarter--whether itis at this meeting or some other meeting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. First, Mr. Chairman--and it's possibly atrivial question--on page I-24 in the Greenbook it's reported that oneof the reasons for strength in exports of nonagricultural commoditiesis the high price of silver in [the form of] exported coins. Is thata significant business?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, exports of coins were something over $2billion at an annual rate in January and February.MR. BAUGHMAN. Aside from the silver price, was that about anormal volume?MR. TRUMAN. Well, we don't have volume figures for it; andin fact, we never will. That is one of the problems in puttingtogether the first-quarter GNP numbers. The price increase clearly issome of it, as well as other random factors in terms of when theexports actually take place. But the two together, and they willnever be unscrambled in the statistics, gave us a big increase in thefourth quarter.MR. BAUGHMAN. And this is a product in which I take it wecompete in the world market?MR. TRUMAN. It so happens that we had a lot of silverexports and that they were very high priced in that period, whichresults in a big increase in nonagricultural exports in that period.I don't think it goes beyond that. The price has since come down, soeven if we have a normal level of exports, we are going to get lowernonagricultural exports.MR. BAUGHMAN. But it is silver exports in formal coinsrather than--MR. TRUMAN. That's how it's recorded on the statistics;that's the only information I have.MR. BAUGHMAN. With respect to the general economic forecast,I have no particular quarrel with it. It seems to me that thedirection and the amount of the revisions from a month ago are quiteappropriate in the circumstances. With respect to the remarks thathave been made here that were oriented to policy, I think I agree witheverything that has been said.MR. MORRIS. That's not possible! [Laughter]MR. BAUGHMAN. It seems to me that it is. When we adoptedour current policy posture, we did it knowing that it was going togive us strong swings in interest rates as we undertook to determinewhether or not stabilizing the rate of growth of the money stockimparts stability or instability to the real economy. So as I see it,we decided that we would find out whether all of the statisticalanalysis that has been made through the years has a firm basis. Andit seems to me that we should stick with it until we do find out-14-4/22/80whether stability or instability flows from stabilizing money stockgrowth. We've redefined money with the idea that we're bringing thatback to the real world concept, so to back away right at this point intime would just preclude our achieving what it seems to me is atstake.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I agree that there's a sizable decline inactivity now in process. It was inevitable, I think. But it'sprobably worse because of the policies we've followed over the lastsix months in defense of a principle. The principle was that in theabsence of knowledge about how interest rates should move--because wehave so little knowledge of the rate that people are willing to paybased on expected rates of return and on inflation--we would provideaggregate growth that we thought appropriate to a moderation of theinflationary course. When we get into a decline, it has always seemedto me extremely difficult to forecast how far it might go becausethere are dynamics involved. There have been shocks: Chrysler, amajor bank that has been referred to, silver, and the possible failureof a brokerage firm. There are shocks of that kind that can affectattitudes and deepen, more than anyone anticipated, the reduction inspending that people are willing to undertake. And what we have arethe automatic stabilizers to guard against this becoming cumulativeand self-reinforcing in its downward movement. Now, the automaticstabilizer in the case of fiscal policy, of course, is the fact thatwe get budget swings. And the automatic stabilizer we've introducedin monetary policy is the fact that we'll get interest rate swings aswe hold to particular ranges of growth that we're willing to see inthe monetary aggregates. Not to let that automatic stabilizer workwould risk a self-reinforcing cumulative decline in activity becausewe don't know what is happening, as we didn't on the up side, topeople's willingness to pay rates of interest for the use of money. Ithink, Henry, that one ought to distinguish between the automaticstabilizer principle and the setting that we put it on, which is thelonger-run presumption. We have a setting for M1 growth; I won't sayM-1A or M-1B because I want to say it's approximately 5 percent. Now,if the underlying rate of inflation is 10 percent, which I think itis, or if it's 15 percent, which you think it is, that's a very, verytight setting on monetary growth because it means there isn't much ofanything left for real growth. In fact, it would suggest that unlessthe inflation rate comes down significantly, there won't be any realgrowth in the economy. And that is very much analogous to a settingin the budgetary posture of, say, a full employment budget of $100billion. It's quite similar. It seems to me that we deliberatelychose a tight setting and we ought to stay with a tight setting; butit also seems to that me we ought to let the automatic stabilizer workbecause not to do so would be very much like the actions of this groupin the period from 1929 to 1933. We could get a reinforcing declinein activity that is propelled by monetary contraction. And we can'tstand that kind of risk for our economy or for the world.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I don't know that I can add much to the commentsof my three colleagues to my right except to say that I'm essentiallyin agreement with them. It certainly took a great deal of courage forthis Committee to let interest rates rise to these extraordinary-15-4/22/80levels that we've seen, and I think that was the right thing to do.I'm beginning to see encouraging signs, at least, that we've brokenthe back of inflationary expectations. I think we should be equallycourageous on the other side, while sticking to our monetary targets.If that implies that interest rates are going to decline, that doesn'tbother me one bit. As far as the foreign exchange value of the dollaris concerned, I've never believed--and I don't think it's the view ofthis Committee--that some given level of the dollar is an objective inand of itself. Obviously, we want to prevent disorderly changes fromone level to another. But as far as interest rates coming down beingan implication of sticking to our present monetary targets, thatcertainly wouldn't bother me in the short run because of theextraordinarily high levels from which they'd be declining. Ourcredibility would be badly undermined, as others here have said, if weabandoned the monetary growth targets and went back to some implicitview of a proper level of interest rates. I think we can and shouldpersuade the market that what we're doing is a steady state coursehere; and if one implication of that is declining interest rates, somuch the better. That will teach them that we can operate on bothsides of this market. Personally I wouldn't be very much concernedabout the implications of declining rates in the near future if westick to these present targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The new operatingprocedures seem to me a bit more effective when we're seeking to.restrain credit on the up side than when we're trying to encourage theextension of credit on the down side. As a result, I've been pleasedwith what we've been able to do on the up side, but I am concernedabout where interest rates will go as we move into a recession. LikeErnie, I agree with much of what has been said here this morning; itseems to me it's all relative. If we move into the May-June periodwhen things are very weak, having come from a period when we'vesuccessfully--hopefully--killed off inflationary expectations andpeople are wondering what is going to happen and they see interestrates drop not to the 13 percent level implied by alternative B butmaybe to 10 percent, then we may lose all that we've gained over thelast 60 days by going to a 20 percent prime rate or a 19 percentfederal funds rate. Thus, I think this Committee does have aresponsibility to moderate [the movement of interest rates] on thedown side. It's not that rates can't go to 13 percent or maybe to 10percent, but they shouldn't do it in a 30-day period or perhaps evenin a 60-day period. I would be concerned if we just turn those ratesloose even with a down side of, say, 13 percent. If we're looking ata very weak economy and indecision by those who take down credit orhold money, then it is perhaps true that within a couple of weekswe'll find that 13 percent is not the right level; so via a[conference] call it will go on lower. I would hate to see that takeplace. If the staff is correct that to achieve [the money growth of]alternative B we're talking about increasing nonborrowed reserves at a20 percent annual rate through those two months, I think that's fartoo fast and would add confusion to the market rather than stability.And I think right now we need stability.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.4/22/80MR. MAYO. Well, Mr. Chairman, most of my points have beenmade. I would stick with the targets. I would not see any objection,however, to our interpretation of "about" 4-1/2 percent being 4-1/2percent or a little less rather than 4-1/2 percent or a little more.Okay, so that's fine-tuning, but I think we can lean in that way forone reason or another. Having said that, I would only add one otherpoint: I think the main advantage of the credit restraint programthat we have embarked upon, with great pain, is that it perhaps hasadded the public awareness frosting to the cake, if I may put it thatway. The average consumer--I think for the first time really--hasmade an association, even just from reading the front page of hisdaily paper, that somehow credit restraint does have something to dowith inflation. I've heard even from builders, believe it or not,that they can wade through this and that the whole idea that the banksare now clamping down a little on consumer credit and so forth isgreat in that it is going to help a great deal on inflation. Allright, maybe that is overly magnified. But I think we have thepublic's attention in a way that our October decision failed to getpublic attention. It was still a market-oriented attention that hadsome limited significance outside of the financial community but [theaverage consumer] really didn't understand it. They understand itwhen the First National Bank of Chicago puts in the paper that they'regoing to charge $20 for a Visa card. They understand it when theyfind that on their Sears bill they have to pay 10 percent rather than8 percent of the outstanding balance. These things come home. Ithink the main advantage of the credit restraint program has been inpublic education; and that in itself can have a tremendous effect oninflationary expectations, giving us a few months.- In the meantime,during the difficult period that Paul referred to, for the next two orthree months, we just have to grit our teeth and bear it. If interestrates go down, that's fine; but I would tend to lean a little towardthe lower end of our aggregate range--if not clear to the [lower]margin, a little below the midpoint.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. Just a couple of comments: On the theologicalissue, I come out with a view that we did make a decision back inOctober and that it was a very fundamental decision and we ought toadhere to it on the down side as well as the up side. In my scale ofpreferences, I'm going to worry more about a very sharp undershoot ofthe aggregates in the foreseeable months than about too sharp adecline in interest rates. And on a more technical scale, if we'regoing to have a decline in rates, I'd prefer to see it begin andproceed rather smoothly than to try to hold rates up and then all of asudden have a very sharp drop, say, in the second half of the year.So, if it's going to happen, we ought to let it start to happen.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I have no reason to disagree with the revisedprojections of the staff. It seems to me pretty clear that as aresult of recent developments the recession is going to be moresevere, that the recovery is going to be weaker, and that we'll be ina period of recession for a longer time than originally expected. Iagree with much of what Governor Partee has said and what Frank Morrishas said. I have very little to add to that. It seems to me that thebasic risks are that if we revise our targets downward, we risk making4/22/80the recession worse and that if we stick to our current targets, werisk some misunderstanding of our policy and the inflationarypsychology in the market might worsen. I would be clearly inclined totake that latter risk. I find it hard to imagine that whateverinflationary psychology might develop as a result of a temporaryexpansion in the rate of growth in money would last for a long time inthe face of a nominal GNP growth that is roughly twice the rate ofgrowth of the money supply. In other words, if we allow money to growat 4-1/2 percent against a nominal GNP growth of twice that amount, Ifind it difficult to believe that inflationary psychology can continuefor very long against those facts. Therefore, I am inclined to stickwith our current targets. And I would see the period that we're in--where we demonstrate that we are sticking with our course and aremaintaining our goal of restricting money supply growth--as anopportunity to educate the public on our operating procedure and whatit means as well as on our determination to stick to our goals forgrowth in the money supply.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I don't have much to add to what has been said.I would like to remind you that it took us two months to raise thefederal funds rate by 5 full percentage points. And if you'reuncomfortable about the period ahead, I'm very uncomfortable about theperiod we've been through. We choked the horse. Now, do you want tocompletely strangle him or do you want to be able to ride him a littlefurther down the line? I find these interest rates outrageously high.And March housing starts are real housing starts; they're not aseasonally adjusted number in the middle of the winter sort of thing.If we get low housing starts in April and May, we aren't going to haveany housing this year. And we're obviously not going to have verymany automobiles built.We went into this with the idea that we would do it as anautomatic stabilizer and that if [rates] went up, they went up. Theywent a lot higher than I ever anticipated. And I think they've done alot more damage than most of us know at this point. We should stickto our policy and, if anything, make some allowance for [rates] to godown a bit further. It's time that we come off [these high rates].We've always had the reputation in the past of staying [with a policystance] too long; this policy was designed to get us to the pointwhere the market was signaling what the interest rates were going todo. It seems to me the market is signaling rather strongly that thepeak is past; we should take that signal and let the market rates godown. I'd like to support Bob Mayo's comments about the March [creditcontrol] program. He's the only one who mentioned it this morning.The six of us here [on the Board of Governors] have been fighting allthese questions and answers and appeals and everything else; I thinkwe've had a tremendous amount of impact both psychologically and onbanks as to what the growth rates are going to be. Those standardsare in place regardless of what happens to interest rates in themarket. And finally, on the international scene, interest rates aregoing to have to come down in this country over the next 18 months.Whatever happens out there is going to happen. If we drop themsuddenly, we're going to get a market reaction; if we drop themslowly, we're going to get a market reaction; if we keep them up,we're going to get a market reaction. I view the international[situation] as one we're going to have to live with; we will have to-18-4/22/80take whatever comes out of it rather than try to gear our domesticpolicy at this point to controlling the international value of thedollar.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No one else has volunteered but there area few people [who have not commented], like Mr. Willes.MR. WILLES. I promised my wife I'd be quiet today. But aslong as you've given me the opportunity, I'll just make a few briefcomments. We had Yoshiho Suzuki from the Bank of Japan in our Bankthe other day and asked him to give a speech to some local people. Itwas very interesting to hear him in that speech analyze the Japaneseexperience where they have wholesale prices, because of oil imports,going up by about 24 percent and the consumer price index going up byabout 7 percent. They in the Bank of Japan ascribe that to theirwillingness to hold firmly to fairly stable rates of monetary growth.We found that a pleasant message, as you can imagine, in Minneapolis.MR. PARTEE. Are profits being squeezed? Is that how thatworks?MR. WILLES. To some extent, profits have gone down. Alsothey have found reductions in energy utilization being forced by thepolicy and so on. There has also been a cut in real incomes becausewages have not adjusted. They haven't allowed wages to [rise withinflation].MR. TRUMAN. And 5 percent productivity [growth].MR. WILLES. And 5 percent productivity [growth]. Thatdoesn't hurt. It's a question of what leads what; and that's a wholeother discussion, which I won't take time for. The only other thingI'd say, Mr. Chairman, is that I've listened to this discussion todaywith great interest and was particularly interested in the way Chuckposed the issue. As we look over the history of what the Committeehas done, what the economic profession has done, and what the economyhas done, it seems to me that we ought to have very modest objectivesbecause it's not at all clear that we understand in a very detailedway how this complex system of our works and how we can intervene insuch a way as to make it work substantially better. Therefore, it's aquestion of trying to minimize perceived risk. And it seems to us,given our current state of understanding, that the best thing we cando is to lay out for all the world to see a fairly simple policyprocedure, a rule that we're going to follow. I think it's very hardto lay out such a rule in terms of interest rates because interestrates are subject to too many variables. But we can lay out such arule in terms of the growth in the aggregates. It's not going to getus to heaven; it's going to have some undesirable consequences fromtime to time. But on average monetary policy is probably lessdisruptive if it is more predictable than otherwise. As aconsequence, it seems to us that the decision we made last fall was awise one and we ought to stick to it. And we ought to be rigorouslyconsistent about that because at least over time, as the markets cometo understand that we are going to be rigorously consistent, we willreduce substantially not only the risk associated with our ownpolicies but the over-reactions that the market sometimes makes totheir perception of our policy. So, as others have said, if interestrates are going to go down, I think this is one time when we just4/22/80ought to let them go down because we've got to make sure that weestablish the credibility in the basic policy thrust that we've beenfollowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I certainly would agree that it isimportant that we continue with a course that strengthens ourcredibility. I believe we have made the right moves in going to adifferent kind of procedure. I think it's important that we hold tothat 3-1/2 to 6 percent [Ml] figure for the year. But while I wantinterest rates to go down--I think it's important that they go down--Ireally am concerned about the speed with which they go down. We haveto keep in mind that this is where the action is right now. Thecountry is looking to the Federal Reserve. Like it or not, we are inthe eye of the storm. And people look at interest rates. We've donea lot of things. If there's anything to be said for the whole creditcontrol program--and in my view there's damn little--it's the shockeffect. And it has had a shock effect. It was important. [Changing]inflationary expectations was crucial. Why did the actions we took onOctober 6th not work better? Because people thought [our actions]were just going to be overridden by other things that were happening.So we see interest rates at these awful levels. But people arelooking at those interest rates; and if they see them come down toorapidly, they're going to say the Fed has given up [on inflation].And we're all they have to look to at this point in time. Let's notpanic and do something that will tend to negate the strides we'vemade. We're getting there and we're getting the job done. A fedfunds rate of 15 to 16 percent wouldn't bother me much, but I must saythat if it starts getting down around 13 percent or below, under thesecircumstances, I would get really nervous.As you know, we haven't been that good with our forecasts orprojections. It does look as if this economy is weakening veryrapidly and going off a cliff. But I would remind you that it lookedpretty weak in October. It looked as if we had done the job then.Now, [the evidence] is stronger this time, and I feel pretty wellconvinced; but I don't see the necessity for letting interest ratesjust absolutely also fall off the cliff. I think the implications ofthat are very important. We can do something here which says we willstay within the target ranges, but let's not panic on these interestrates. I'd let them come down slowly. I hope we can hold these fedfunds rates; I think they're important. I like our new operatingprocedure but interest rates, whether we like it or not, are aperception that other people have. And I hope we don't get in toomuch of a hurry and blow this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we've left you the unusualprivilege of going last, Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's the privilege of a newboy. I want to second very strongly what Fred Schultz said. I thinkwe ought to stick with the "B" targets and accept the March-to-Junetargets that fall out. I'm perfectly willing to see a decline ininterest rates, but I really would urge you not to permit tooprecipitous a decline. I would like to suggest, in view of the factthat the staff is projecting a 16 to 17 percent funds rate ascompatible with the alternative B targets, that we ought to have a4/22/80phone consultation if it looks as if the funds rate is moving downvery precipitously and significantly penetrating the 16 percent range.The reason I say that is because, like Fred, I feel that people judgeour credibility--at least all the people I speak with in New York--notsimply by a mechanistic adherence to the aggregates. They also judgeour resolve and our credibility, particularly given the fact that theyhave had considerable skepticism about it in the past, by interestrate movements as well. And I believe in your October 6th statement,Paul, you did say that this was not a mechanistic formula and thatjudgment would be used. Interest rates should go down. They will godown. It's not going to do any damage to the economy if the declineis somewhat more gradual. So, I would hope that we would have a phoneconsultation if it looks as if they're going to go significantly belowthe 16 percent level that the staff is presently projecting asconsistent with those "B" targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we have a break and comeback to this and be more operational in our comments after the break?[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me distill a bit what I think I'mhearing and what I'm thinking. The big change we've had--though we'vehad a lot of changes since the last meeting--is that we certainly havesome evidence of an economic decline that we didn't have before. Ifor one still think it's a little premature to make very conclusivejudgments about what kind of a recession we're going to have. I'd sayalso that it takes a little while to meet the definition of arecession. We've been fooled before. I do think that in allprobability we are going to have a recession. What makes it a littleriskier than before, and I thought it was risky before, is partly thatspecial credit restraint program. I think it did send a message tothe consumer and others psychologically and we may get a more suddenreversal in consumer spending than in some sense we'd like. Consumerspending was very high relatively, as you know; and if there's anattempt even just to make it normal relative to income, that wouldinvolve a big change in economic activity, which would then reflectback on the other sectors of the economy we've been reasonablyconfident about--inventories, and plant and equipment, and all therest. On the other hand, we've already had a substantial adjustmentin housing and domestic car sales.You know, the car business is interesting. The first-quarterselling rate was not bad at all, but a lot of it was imports. Thedomestic car companies just can't sell anything other than four-cylinder front wheel drives, and that's not likely to change in ahurry. But it's a little extraneous--not in its impact in economicactivity but in its causation, although I'm sure it's complicated bythe credit situation. All I'd say is that there is some uncertainty,particularly when one looks at the other side and the inflation side.Two months ago everybody was going for leather and wanting to buy inanticipation of inflation; I think that mood has changed.But when attitudes fluctuate as rapidly as they have, it's alittle premature to say attitudes couldn't relapse the other way. Andlooking at a longer-term perspective, there's no question in my mindthat in considerable part inflation is what got us into this dilemma.And it is recognized as a major problem. Indeed, all things-21-4/22/80considered--the amount of pain going on in the housing sector,agriculture, small businesses, and elsewhere--we have a considerableamount of support for keeping the inflation [problem] out in theforefront among the public at large and more directly politically. Weget a lot of criticism these days, and I don't want to underestimatethat; but there's also quite a lot of understanding about what we'vebeen up to and the importance of it. Certainly the Administration hastaken a cautious view and has gotten out in front on the creditprogram itself in terms of the extraordinary credit measures, andapparently it is willing to live with that. All of this has givenrise to an immense amount of confusion in the minds of the public, asnearly as I can read it, which may increase the risks of a substantialrecession. But it's entirely premature to think that [people] haveforgotten about inflation, particularly when they're going to be facedwith these high price numbers for a number of months ahead. In thatsense I don't think we're in a situation where there's any course ofaction that is risk-free or even in some sense a "winning" course ofaction because there's a lot to be lost by a resurgence ininflationary expectations and there's a lot to be lost by acceleratingthe recession; and I'm not sure that there's any real room betweenthose two contingencies. It has been implicit in everybody's commentsthat we have to keep our eyes on both [inflation and recession] asbest we can. All I'm saying is that I don't think there's any perfectanswer or any right answer that goes between them.So far as interest rates are concerned, we ought to remindourselves, as a number of people here have, that they wereextraordinarily high and that there is some psychological feelingabout [letting] them go down. But they weren't all that low inJanuary and February, and anything we're talking about in terms of arange of interest rates is still an increase over roughly a 6-weekperiod. Markets are always going to be more suspicious of ourintentions when rates are on the way down. But I don't want to loseall perspective; I suspect anything we come up with is not going tobe, in a broader perspective, a very low level of interest rates. Theinternational [situation] is hard to figure. Just in the past coupleof weeks it has been perhaps typical that the dollar got very weakbefore interest rates really came down--or at least rates had onlygone down a little--on the suspicion that they were coming down. Andsince they actually came down the dollar hasn't been strong but ithasn't been under enormous pressure either, presumably in part because[the decline] was anticipated by the earlier turn of events. I don'tknow quite what [markets] are anticipating now, but I'm sure in theend that that's going to be affected by a feeling of confidence about[our policy] more than a specific level of interest rates, within somelimited range anyway. It may be that changes affect psychology morethan amounts; I don't want to discount that as being a very trickyproblem, but I don't think we know just how it's going to breakprecisely.In terms of specifics, we started out talking to some degreein polarities here--whether we should keep to the targets or whetherwe shouldn't in some extreme. It is easy to conclude in the earlypart, not so much in the latter part, that the extremes areoverstated. I'm not very happy just in a tactical sense--in terms offiguring out what to do next and the psychology and all the rest--thatwe had this decline last week in the money supply. But we have toremind ourselves that that was one week and that April is one month4/22/80and God knows what [the money supply] will do next week and nextmonth. We just don't know. If we keep this in any kind of longer-term perspective, such as what has happened since October, the generaljudgment one would come to is that we're pretty much on target. Ifthese money figures mean something over a period of time--and we'vealways said that they're relevant in a 6-month to 1-year perspective--if we go back a year, we're above our present targets but we're prettyclearly in a moderating phase. Even if we look at them in a quarterlyperspective, the first quarter on a quarterly average basis was alittle higher than our target but December-to-March was lower than ourtarget. Just how one puts these numbers together makes somedifference. I don't want to put too much importance [on one week],although I personally would have been happier if that last drop inApril hadn't come about.I don't think we can throw everything out of perspective[because of] one week or even one month. I would assume from whatpeople have said, and I certainly agree myself, that we're going tokeep with this general targeting procedure and keep with the generaltargets that we have. It's a question of how to implement them. Weare very uncertain about the short-run projections, as uncertain as wehave ever been, after just having gone through much of April whereeverybody was projecting a big bulge on the up side and instead we aregetting a bulge on the down side. And we're not only uncertain aboutthe projections. Unfortunately, we are probably more uncertain nowthan before--given the special credit programs, given thepsychological confusion in the markets, and. given the confusion moregenerally--about just what these fine new techniques we have that lookall right in the 6-month perspective mean in a 2-month perspective.Just where to set the level of borrowings and the nonborrowed reservepath is not exactly a science at this point. And that is the realjudgment I think we have to make.So, it seems to me, in general terms, we are sticking withthe targets. Alternative B is roughly what we have now. I sayroughly; I guess it is precisely the targets we have now except thatwe added the proviso "or somewhat less" [at the March meeting]. As afirst approximation, I would think something like that and maintainingthe "or somewhat less" [proviso], particularly in the light of what Iwill say next, is appropriate. It comes down to a question of how tomanage it. If we take literally what the Bluebook says--and I'm notsure how much money one should put on these precise relationships, asI implied before, but we don't have anything better at the moment--we're talking about a general judgment based on the work we have doneof a level of borrowing, at the start anyway, of something like $1-3/4billion. That in Mr. Axilrod's judgment, around which I wouldsurround considerable uncertainty, implies a federal funds rate ofaround 16 percent or maybe a little higher at the moment.MR. PARTEE. Does that include First Pennsylvania?MR. AXILROD. Yes, that included [an allowance of] about $500million, when we were [calculating] that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually it included about $500 million of[borrowing by] First Pennsylvania, so one might say the equivalent isa little higher than that to allow for the fact that they areborrowing $600 million at this point. But that's fine-tuning. It's-23-4/22/80not all that far from where we are. There has been a lot of talkabout interest rates. I suppose what people mean when they sayinterest rates is the federal funds rate. We've had quite a declinein market rates, particularly in the long-term rates relative to thenormal fluctuation in long-term rates. They've gone back three-fourths or more of the [amount] they went up in January and February.Some long-term rates may be very close to where they were in January;the CD rates seem to have moved down faster than the federal fundsrate. The Treasury bill rate is down to 12 percent, plus or minus,depending upon which [maturity] you look at. As Peter said earlier,that's down 3 percentage points or more from the peaks. So in termsof the interest rates people are looking at in the market, there'sprobably room here for a decline in the federal funds rate thatwouldn't even be reflected much in these market rates because it hasalready been anticipated in some sense. I don't know whether that'sfair or not. We just don't know how it will hit the marketspsychologically because people may then anticipate the next move inthe federal funds rate.But I do recognize in making the judgment about where we setthe borrowing level, consistent with our techniques and amid all theuncertainties, that there are some implications for interest rates.There is a little danger, particularly in the short run, because wedon't know what all these recent money supply figures mean. Among theunfortunate things that could happen--and there are quite a few ofthem--if we propelled the funds rate to the extreme low end [of the"B" range], it could get low enough so that it affects the wholestring of market rates. If we began getting in May and June increases[in the money supply] of 9, 10, 11 percent or generally in the higharea, which is what the econometric relationships would say, in amonth or two months from now we're going to be saying that we have topull back in the other direction. And presumably at that point therecession would have moved somewhat further and I suspect we'd be inan extremely awkward position at that time of not being very eager to[tighten]. Perhaps I've leaned too far toward the risks, whether inthe exchange market or more importantly--and I don't think they'reunrelated--of in some sense having given up and [seeing] inflationaryexpectations rise again, having been [unintelligible] to a degree.And then, as I say, if the aggregates were really running high in arelatively short time period, having been through a rather futileexperience in this difficult business, we will be sitting here facingexactly the opposite dilemma we are in today of saying to ourselves:How much do we really want to tighten--tighten in the sense ofinterest rates or borrowing--at this point?What I am suggesting is that I'm not sure we have to make achange in the basic aggregates decision we made last time. Monetarygrowth is running short of that at the moment, which definitelyimplies some relaxation of money market pressures and the borrowinglevel. We've already gone some distance in that direction; we'd gosomewhat more. We would expect to see the federal funds rate declinefrom its present level. I don't know what that means for marketrates. I'd suspect, if anything, not much change to some furtherdecline. If Steve is right, that means 16 percent plus or minus onthe federal funds rate in the short run. I don't think we can be sureof that, but let's say he's right; I don't know what range to putaround it. But with a 4 percentage point range we can feel our wayahead on that perspective. We meet again in four weeks according to-24-4/22/80our present schedule; that's an unusually short period of time. Bythat time we will know whether we're getting some reaction or whetherthe straightforward projections of the money supply are being borneout. I do not mean that we would not in the normal course of eventsmake some further judgment on the reserve path and the borrowing pathif the money supply continued to be weak in the next four weeks. Theoption is clearly open--I don't know whether I want to pin it downprecisely but we can do so if you want--to consult, if in my judgmentthe degree of decline in the federal funds rate seems to betroublesome in terms of interpretations of our policy, whether thoseinterpretations were manifested domestically or internationally. Wecan always have a consultation, and I certainly would be prepared todo that. But I think we ought to recognize that the probability isthat there will be some decline in the federal funds rate. Again, Idon't know what that means for other interest rates, but the short-term outlook would definitely be for a decline in the federal fundsrate as we see it today. Now, if we suddenly get a burst in the moneysupply figures, maybe that won't amount to much [of a decline]; but ifwe had a great drag in the money supply figures, we would [expect]some decline fairly immediately. I don't know what the funds rate isdoing now Peter, but--MR. STERNLIGHT. It's about 17 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --with the high level of borrowingsearlier this week and some softness in the money market today andpresumably even more tomorrow, it will already have pointed in thatdirection because the level of borrowings currently is too high. It'svery simple in a technical sense, I suppose, [for the funds rate] topersist at a lower level next week. That's what one would expect themarket to do under these conditions. I think that's a fairly clearoutlook for the very immediate future. It probably will be in the 16to 17 percent area by the end of next week anyway, maybe throughoutthe week, just on this kind of decision which is basically analternative B decision. I think that's where I would leave it.One could argue either side of this. You could say that youdon't quite believe Mr. Sternlight--and I would agree that there's alot of uncertainty--and that the business scene is so uncertain youwould push for more money [growth] and take a much lower federal fundsrate in the process. I suggested why I think that may be imprudent inthe very short run. You can take the opposite view and say it's toomuch risk, so let's not have the federal funds rate decline at all. Ithink that would probably be a mistake in this period, too. I'd playit in between, which happens to come out [to alternative B].MR. PARTEE. Paul, are you specifying a funds rate target?Is that what we're going to be doing?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm just telling you where I think thefunds rate is likely to be with [an alternative B] borrowing target.MR. PARTEE. I see. I don't think there's any problem ifSteve is right and we get around 7 percent money growth in May andJune. But what if we got zero money growth in May and June?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We won't know that in the short run, soI'm really talking about what we will do in the next two or three-25-4/22/80weeks. We're going to meet again in four weeks. We will know more,obviously, two or three weeks from now, and we may want aconsultation. I'm just setting the dial at the moment and telling youwhat I think the result will be. I say it with some temerity or someuncertainty because we don't know all that much about theserelationships in the short run. But that is my best guess. Thedispersion around the guess is rather wide. I myself suspect that therisk, if that's the right way to put it, would be that the funds ratewould come out a little lower rather than a little higher than whatSteve has suggested. All I'm suggesting is that we adopt this courseand rely upon him for giving us the best single point estimate in avery uncertain situation.MR. AXILROD. I might add, Mr. Chairman, that we set that$1-3/4 billion [borrowing level of alternative B] before the banksthis week suddenly decided to borrow more. So I would go on to saythat there's a lot of uncertainty in this borrowing/funds rate/discount rate relationship here. But our best judgment at the time weset this was that $1-3/4 billion of borrowing would be roughlyconsistent with this whole pattern.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm saying basically that something like"B" looks right--or, more specifically, what we adopted last time,which is now "B" in terms of the December-to-June period as a whole,or 4-1/2 percent growth just looking at M-1A. We said about the samething for the others. Technically we said "or somewhat less" for M-1Band M-1A. And we said what for M2.MR. ALTMANN. [About] 7-3/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So this alternative does have a lowerfigure for M2 than we had last time, reflecting the decline in M2. Ithink what has happened in M2, certainly in part, is that we just shutoff the money market funds; and I'm sure there was some substitutionbetween money market funds and Treasury bills, which are not in M2.So I'm not certain that involves a real or substantive economicdifference. It just reflects what we count in M2 and what we don'tcount in M2. If we look at M-1A and M-1B, alternative B with theproviso "or somewhat less" is precisely what we decided last time.The difference, of course, is that growth has to be much faster thanthat in the last two months to come up into that range, which is whythe level of borrowing is being reduced from $2-3/4 billion orwhatever we had last time to $1-3/4 billion.MR. EASTBURN. Another approach would be to say "somewhatmore or less."MR. PARTEE. Or "around."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That depends. It gives a little feelingof how cautious we want to be about moving down the borrowing level Iwill say instead of the interest rate level. If we say "or somewhatless," there's a little more room for being a bit more cautious inmoving down the borrowing level.MR. PARTEE. That's what we said last time.4/22/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, consistent with "B," we'dhave to move it down. There's no question about that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Wouldn't it be a little better to seta borrowing level of about $1-1/2 billion plus emergency lending andany special contingencies since, as I understand it, included in that$1-3/4 billion is that uncertain situation and we don't know what elsemay arise?MR. PARTEE. We could do that, except it should be $1-1/4billion, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what we're really saying isroughly $1-1/4 billion plus whatever that emergency borrowing orseasonal borrowing or whatever happens to be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As we did the projections we thought$1-1/2 billion would be more consistent with the projections. But wedefer to Steve, if he feels that his 16 to 17 percent assumption andstaying on alternative B is more consistent with $1-1/4 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that connection, Steve, remind me:What has borrowing been ex this special borrowing situation?MR. AXILROD. In the first three weeks of April, ex thespecial borrowing, it has been running around $1.8 to $2 billion. Itwas about $1.8 billion in the week of the 16th. This week, though, ithas moved up to around $2 billion. That, of course, is with the fundsrate running 18-1/2 to 19-1/2 percent. So our thought was that withthe funds rate running in the 16 to 17 percent range, the borrowinglevel would drop from what it has been running.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Another thing is that if we had theregular discount rate at 16 percent, I think we'd be pretty sure thefederal funds rate would not rapidly go much below 16 percent.Whether our surcharge exerts any drag at all on the funds rate as itgoes down to 16 percent isn't clear. But there's very littleborrowing at that rate except for the special situation. My own guessis that it would exert a very minor drag rather than a really strongdrag.MR. PARTEE. We're also below [path] on total reserves,aren't we, Steve? That would be another reason for adjusting theborrowing down.MR. AXILROD. Yes. I should be clear, Mr. Chairman, that theborrowing level in alternative B was on the assumption that rateswould come down. And the borrowing level in alternative C--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By rates you're talking about the federalfunds rate basically?MR. AXILROD. Yes, the funds rate. Alternative C was morelike the borrowing that we had [earlier]. And even that was shaded alittle lower because we thought the funds rate would be more like 18percent, which is a shade below what it had been. So we did put insomething that carries with it an easing in the funds rate.4/22/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I realize that, but you said yourguess is around 16 to 17 percent or somewhat lower. I guess thatmeans 16 percent.MR. AXILROD. I'd say it means 15 to 17 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it also implies in the normal courseof our operations that if the money supply in the next week or twocontinued weak, assuming for the moment that Steve is right, [thefunds rate] would be lower. [Money growth] would have to be quite alot stronger probably [for the funds rate] to be much higher. But Ihave no particular feeling about the federal funds rate range we have[in alternative B]. It might be logical to reduce the upper endsince--MR. PARTEE. It would be rather nice symbolically to move theupper limit down to 19 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or 18 percent.MR. PARTEE. Well, that gets a little tight. I like 19.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I personally wouldn't like to see it go upto 20 percent again. I'm not at all sure I'd want to see it go up to19 percent.MR. PARTEE. After all, we could get a spurt in the moneysupply. The fact.that we've had two minus months increases the oddsthat we're going to have plus months. That's the only rule that Ihave and--MR. BALLES. Unfortunately, it hasn't worked that way overextended periods in the past, for example in the summer of 1979 and agood part of '76 and '77. We have a long history of sustainedovershoots and undershoots, and that's what I think we have to guardagainst now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're talking a little out of perspective.In perspective, with this unexpected drop [in M1] last week from alevel that was already running a bit low, we start from a lower base;but it's still one week's figure and heaven knows what the future willbring. We can't all be speaking. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Paul, the seasonal adjustment for April makes mefairly nervous, so I'd like to get a bit of feeling for May before wepump in an inordinate amount of reserves in the next week. I thinkthe danger of being whipsawed is very great. I haven't any concernabout your suggestion.MR. PARTEE. Of course, we don't pump reserves in unless wehave a shortfall.MR. WINN. No, I understand.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not beyond what I said. But if you'reinterpreting what I said as "pumping," it is "pumping" a bit.4/22/80MR. WINN. With the inflation problem being what it is andwith the fact that everybody doesn't read our policies the same way, aflip in our policy on inflation at this time could be mostunfortunate, given all the other things we've done to move in theother direction.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's get some other comments.MR. EASTBURN. I think your proposition makes a lot of sense.It's a good mini-max solution to the very uncertain conditions that weface. If you add the idea that we would consult (a) if the ratesseemed to be coming down faster than we'd like to see them or (b) ifthe aggregates were coming in quite low, which in my view would be thegreater [probability], I think what you suggested is probably the bestwe can do at the present time. Then we'll just [deal] with it day today.MR. PARTEE. I'm agreeable to it, too, Paul. It's a niceintermediate course, and it is only four weeks to the next meeting.We could get a reversal or it could get a lot worse. So I wouldsuggest, as I think you did, that we take a point off the upper end ofthat [funds rate] range and live with "B" and expect the funds rate tocome down some from where it has been, maybe to the area of 16 percentor a little below. It might have to go down further if we get greatweakness in the aggregates; it wouldn't have to go that far if we geta good rebound.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I feel some discomfortin what I'm about to say in the sense that it may be taken that Idon't have great faith in our new procedures. But maybe it's becauseof uncertainty. I'd feel somewhat more comfortable if we were to movetoward "C," [which has 4 percent growth for M-1A]. [Our directive]now has 4-1/2 percent or somewhat less. I'd also point out that the"C" [growth rates] are well within the ranges that we set for the yearas a whole, the 3-1/2 to 6 percent for M-1A, for example. So itwouldn't do great violence but would recognize that we have gotten abit less [money growth thus far] in the first half of the year. Andas a result, I'd feel more comfortable with it. I take some comfortalso from your statement that if the funds rate gets to the 16 percentlevel, whether we adopt "B" or "C"--and I don't think it makes muchdifference which one we choose in the short run--there will be aconsultation. And the point of that consultation would be to discusswhether or not interest rates should continue to drop very quickly. Ihave a considerable concern that we should not in the next two weeks,or even before the next meeting, be at a 13 percent rate, for example,which is the bottom of the funds range [under "B"]. Thus, I wouldprefer to move to "C," with the understanding that the consultationwould indeed take place at about 16 percent and we could discusswhether or not the rate should go below that in such a short period oftime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I would subscribe to "B," Mr. Chairman. I thinkyour analysis is totally consistent with the facts of life. I don'twant to belabor the 20 or 19 percent upper limit on the funds rangeother than to say that any change in it, to the person whoconcentrates on minuscule parts of what we're doing, might imply that-29-4/22/80we still have an inordinate concern about the fed funds rate. But Idon't feel strongly about that. "B" basically makes good sense to me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I'm afraid I don't like any of the three[Bluebook alternatives]. I'd like something a little stronger. Itdoesn't mean that we'd have to get outside of our range. We can livewithin the 4 to 6-1/2 percent annual range on M-1B, which [is theaggregate] I like to think in terms of. We would have to have a lowergrowth rate for the March-to-June period and, therefore, for May andJune. We'd have to go a little below [the growth rate in] alternativeC for M-1B for the second half of our half-year period, to somethinglike 3-1/2 percent perhaps. Bear in mind, if you will, that this doesmean a substantial increase in liquidity in the second half of theyear because nominal GNP, according to our forecast, is going to growat 5 percent and M2 on the path in alternative B is going to grow at ahigher rate than that. So we're going to accumulate liquidity on theway down. I don't know how fast we're going to come out of therecession.MR. PARTEE. Isn't M-1B growth just about that, 5 percent?MR. WALLICH. Well, [you are] talking of "B." But now lookat M2, which is after all what guides bank credit mostly. If that hasa reduction of velocity, I see considerable accumulation of liquidity.In any event, after all that has happened, I think we'll be sittinghere a year. or a year and a half from now and I will then be askingthat we stick by our targets. And some members of the group will say:What? You're trying to cut off this expansion at 8 percentunemployment? I fear the logic of the argument is going to cut bothways at that time. That's why I'm willing to budge now on my side,but I hope you'll support my side next time around. As far as thefunds rate is concerned, I don't care if we cap it at 19 percent ifthe aggregates turn out to be as fast as [estimated] and we follow thealternative B target. If that [monetary growth] were reached, wewould probably find [the funds rate] moving back to the top of itsrange and we would have to have a consultation. I very much think weought to put a floor on the funds rate [that would trigger] aconsultation at 16 percent at the minimum.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else wants to say something?MS. TEETERS. Henry has a one-way ladder. Have you noticed?It keeps ratcheting up as we go.MR. SCHULTZ. "B" sounds fine; I'm not a bit uncomfortablewith funds in the 15 to 17 percent range and I think having aconsultation point makes a lot of sense. Maybe I just don't knowquite enough about how the projections are put together to have greatbelief in them, but on the track record they have been[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's one of those things you're better offnot looking into too closely!MR. SCHULTZ. I'd really just like to sneak up on this animala little in case he springs at me. So, rather than borrowing at4/22/80$1-1/4 billion plus the emergency or the special lending, I'd like tostart at $1-1/2 billion and if things look a little weak, then we canmove back down in line with the sort of technique we're talking abouthere. It seems to me that we have time and, as you say, this lastweek may have been quite an aberration. We may get a big change inthese numbers. If we started at $1-1/2 billion and the aggregatescontinued to come in weak, it would be easy enough to move borrowingdown to $1-1/4 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. I don't have any problem with "B." And I thinkit would be desirable to move the top [of the funds rate range] downto 19 percent. It's not clear to me what the consultation point is.Is it 16 or 15 percent?MS. TEETERS. Or is it the money supply going negative? Wehave a consultation any time we get a big number but we don't seem tohave very many consultations when we get little numbers.MR. MORRIS. Well, we won't have a consultation, presumably,if the money supply is coming in weak.MS. TEETERS. I know.MR. WALLICH. When the funds rate drops as a result, we willhave a consultation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The implication, in terms of aconsultation, is that we would have a combination of two things. Wecan make a formal decision on it if you want to, but we would have acombination of a weak money supply and a sharply declining funds rate.If the money supply were not coming in very low, we wouldn't face theinterest rate constraint so to speak. So the consultation wouldbasically be about the money supply coming in low or the interest ratecoming in low, whichever way you want to look at it, becausepresumably it would be the same [phenomenon].MR. SCHULTZ. I'm not uncomfortable with consultation at 15percent. I wouldn't mind seeing it get down in that range, but itwould make me feel--to use Larry Roos' term--a bit antsy below 15percent.MR. ROOS. But Fred, if I may, Mr. Chairman, the factors thatwould essentially cause interest rates to decline would be a softeningof economic activity and a softening in the demand for credit of asubstantial scope. If that were to happen--if the economy were in aseriously weakened condition and credit demand fell off--and, let'ssay, we consulted, our only option it seems to me would be to pullmoney out of the economy with great force. And boy, that wouldcertainly put the final kobosh--if I may use another Missouriexpression--on the recession. Is that correct? I don't know whatpart of the world that expression came from. But that would reallydrive a very serious nail into the recessionary situation and would beprocyclical and accelerate a recession.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're probably overstating thepossible significance of what would be happening in a 2- or 3-week4/22/80period. I think what you say is true if one looked at it in a longenough perspective. But we're dealing with uncertain seasonaladjustment factors, uncertain week-to-week numbers, and an extremelyuncertain relationship between borrowings and the money supply in a2- or 3-week time period. That is all we're talking about.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not as experienced as the rest ofthe people at this table, but it doesn't seem to me that we need aformal decision in this regard. We ought to give the Chairman anindication, as he himself suggested I guess, that when the funds rategets down to the 16 percent range, more or less, he would initiate aconsultation. I don't think that requires any kind of formalinstruction. And at that point it really is a question of making ajudgment on what is happening not only in terms of the fed funds rateand the interest rate picture but on the aggregates and the rate atwhich reserves should be fed to the System. I think it's just aprudent measure to take, and I hope we would all be able to combine onasking you to pursue that.MR. WALLICH. I think we ought to look at other interestrates, too, because the funds rate has become a very poor indicator ofthe rest of the spectrum of rates. If bill rates, for instance, wereto fall more rapidly than the funds rate, that would be a furthersignal to the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know who has not talked yet. Idon't think you have, Emmett.MR. RICE. Well, I'm prepared to go along with what yousuggest. Alternative B seems right, and I would be willing to see onepoint knocked off the top end of the federal funds range to 19percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else has comments? I seem to have anumber of Committee members who haven't--MS. TEETERS. I can support alternative B and taking off theone percentage point [on the funds rate range]. I think we're morelikely to run into a problem of not being able to maintain the growthrates of the money supply, [which may mean we would] need aconsultation. I also think that the spread between the federal fundsrate and other market interest rates may be a function of thesurcharge. I think the banks are doing everything they can to keepout of the window and not pay the surcharge and, consequently, there'sgreater demand and greater pressure on the funds rate and on otherrates. So that gap may just have developed out of our own actionsrather than anything drastically different in the market. So I wouldsupport "B" and a 13 to 19 percent funds rate range. I don't knowabout the borrowings. I think we're almost going to have to play thatby ear. We may just have to end up with a range on the borrowings[and see] how they come in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me fine-tune this a bit further,if I can, after listening to people here. What I would continue topropose is the same language in the directive that we had last time,which in some sense is "B" minus. It's this language of "B" [Mlgrowth] or somewhat less, which has some significance. I don't feelstrongly about the federal funds rate, but there seem to be more-32-4/22/80people who would like to knock it down to 19 percent, I guess, Murray.In thinking about the borrowing again and listening to these comments,I would modify what I said to this extent: I'd suggest that we startout with $1-1/2 billion with the intention, if in the next week or sothe money supply were developing more or less as projected, of itprobably being at $1-1/4 billion in the second week or the third weekfrom now. I'm just being slightly more cautious; if the money supplywere kicking up above what we're now projecting, we'd probably stay atthe $1-1/2 billion for a while.MR. GUFFEY. Is that exclusive of the big bank borrowings?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, these figures all exclude the bigbank borrowings. So that's a slight modification toward a little morecaution than has been suggested.MR. AXILROD. I interpret that, Mr. Chairman, forconstructing the path--it's only four weeks here--as putting in $1-1/2billion for the first two weeks and $1-1/4 billion for the last twoweeks. What would actually develop--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess so, but the last two weeks wouldbe affected by what happens. We might move a little more rapidlytoward the $1-1/4 billion if money came in low; or if it came in high,we would--MR. AXILROD. I think that would happen if the data we gettomorrow or next week--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the money supply were right on thepresent projections, we'd presumably get down to $1-1/4 billion.MR. AXILROD. Two weeks from now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two weeks from now, yes.MS. TEETERS. We don't have the borrowing in the directive,do we?MR. ALTMANN. No.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think one thing we shouldhave learned in the last few months is that we are unable to forecastthe volume of borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to have some flexibilityhere. But it's useful to discuss this just to get some sense of whichway the caution should be exercised in the short run. What we'resaying, I think, is that we want to see some increase in the moneysupply, first of all, to meet these targets. We are willing to seesome short-run decline in the federal funds rate to achieve that, andthat is reflected in the lower borrowing figure. But there's also ahealthy feeling of caution about not moving so fast that we have toreverse ourselves. So that caution is expressed in going downtentatively over a period of time on the borrowing number. That's insubstance the way I would interpret [this directive]. That leavesHenry with some concern. Does that help you infinitesimally?4/22/80MR. WALLICH. It helps me infinitesimally.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. May I ask a question? If the fedfunds rate goes below 16 percent, will that make the 3 percentsurcharge on the discount rate sustainable? Would there would be alarge amount of pressure to take that off as not being appropriate? Idon't know enough about this--MR. PARTEE. I don't know, either, but it certainly wouldtend to bring the borrowing down pretty fast if we had a 16 percent--MS. TEETERS. There's not much borrowing at that rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's very little borrowing at that ratenow.MR. PARTEE. Except at one bank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a separate decision. Obviously, itwould raise the question at the very least. How much pressure it willbring I suppose is a judgment as to whether we want to give that kindof overt signal at that particular point in time. There's no doubtthat the question will arise. I'm not sure it would arise veryforcibly at 16 percent, but if the funds rate began to go below 16percent, then the question would arise.MR. EASTBURN. The only question that remains in my mind iswhether or not we want to say "or somewhat less." It would be helpfulto me if Peter would give me some interpretation of how it wouldaffect his actions any differently if "somewhat less" were in or not.MR. STERNLIGHT. That really has more to do with theconstruction of the paths than specific Desk action. Having the "orless" gives me a little sense or tone of being a bit moreaccommodative of lower growth. Steve might want to comment on that.MR. AXILROD. Operationally, I think there are two things,President Eastburn. If we construct the path on 4-1/2 percent, whichis the exact point, then the "or less" would mean to me that if totalreserves were falling short a little, we would not make a big upwardadjustment in nonborrowed reserves to offset that. That would be theimmediate operational [effect]. We'd just let the normal drop inborrowings occur and work its way through. The other thing that couldbe done, but which the Committee hasn't followed, of course, would beto set the initial path not at 4-1/2 percent but 4-1/4 percent. Butassuming the path is set at 4-1/2 percent, it would mean to me thatwhen total reserves are falling somewhat short we wouldn't rush in toraise nonborrowed reserves to offset that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we've accepted this kind ofoperation where the path is set consistent with the 4-1/2 percent butwe have a slightly higher borrowing figure at the beginning than theone in the center of Steve's frequency distribution. I happen tothink that frequency distribution is a rather flat bell instead of a--MR. AXILROD. Yes, but with some limits to it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, are we ready to vote?4/22/80MR. GUFFEY. Does this imply consultation at 16 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I have the message onconsultation. Don't hold me to an exact number. If the federal fundsrate drops to 16 percent on one day, on Wednesday afternoon or even onanother day, don't stay right close to the telephone. If there's aproblem in that area, I'll let you know. I have a sense that if themoney supply is running low and interest rates seem to be going downbelow that level, people want a checkpoint. And I understand that.MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree very much with Tony. I think wehave to be careful not to make this too formal because if it isformal, it ought to be in the directive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand [the thinking] about the 16percent. But the real sense of what we're saying, consistent withthese directions, is that if the money supply persists in coming inlow, that is what is going to make the interest rate go down. So wecould state it as--MR. PARTEE. Consultation if we have low money supply.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Consultation if the money supply doesn'tseem to be coming up. Are you ready to vote?MR. ALTMANN. This is 4-1/2 percent on M-1A, 5 percent onM-1B, with "or somewhat less" in the case of both, and a federal fundsrate range of 13 to 19 percent. M2 is 6-3/4 percent; that's thealternative B specification for M2.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoPresident Winn YesTen for and one against.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [To complete the agenda] I just have toremind you that there is a meeting set for Tuesday, May 20.We have a little time, and I won't take all of it. But amemo was distributed to you and we thought we would have a discussiontoday, though not a prolonged one, of these different ideas of reserve--what do we call it, Mr. Axilrod? It's not reserve management; thathas the wrong connotation. It's reserve computation, I guess.SPEAKER(?). Various reserve proposals.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Board, of course, openly will have todecide that. That material has been sent out to all the Reserve Banks-35-4/22/80and there is going to be a meeting of the Bank economists about it,isn't there, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Yes, I believe--we'll talk to Mike [Keran]--it's May 2. We, Mr. Lindsey, Mr. Simpson, and myself, will be meetingwith the various Bank economists to discuss it in detail.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pending that discussion, anyrecommendations have been left out of that document. That is myunderstanding; I have not read it myself.MR. AXILROD. That is right. We think we've covered theissues that the Committee members have raised. One is mildlyirrelevant, as we're told it's illegal.SPEAKER(?). Totally irrelevant?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've changed laws these days.MR. AXILROD. Unless the Committee members would like tosuggest other options, we hope to have this discussion with Mr.Keran's group and then be prepared to have a more pointed memorandum,with this as background, for the Committee at a later point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is just your opportunity, if you hada chance to read it, to convey any violent feelings you might have hadabout something left out of this or any tentative conclusions.MR. BLACK. Which one is illegal? Excuse me, Henry.SPEAKER(?). That takes the fun out of it, if you--MR. BLACK. Well, I always favor ones that are unpopular orillegal! I just thought I'd save some time.MR. WALLICH. Paul, this is a very technical matter and ithas many ramifications. Sometimes before when we've had a verytechnical matter, for instance on the directive, a subcommittee wasappointed. I wondered whether this would lend itself to that kind oftreatment. I guess by implication this examination by the ReserveBanks is a subcommittee in some sense. I don't want to carry this toofar. And then I assume this is not before the Open Market Committee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. The final decision is going to be aBoard of Governors decision. That's right.MR. AXILROD. But [we will present it at] a joint Board andPresident's meeting. We weren't assuming this to be part of an FOMCmeeting since it's a matter to be decided ultimately by [the Board].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we going to be able to have adiscussion about it next month, in substance, do you think?MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes; that's our idea.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The schedule will be that first it will gothrough the Reserve Bank economists together with the Boardeconomists.4/22/80MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then the document is going to be modifiedto reflect the discussion and it will presumably have somerecommendations, or differing recommendations, at that point.MR. AXILROD. There are no recommendations in this documentexcept implicitly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. So we will try to schedule asubstantive discussion of this at the time of our meeting prior to theBoard of Governors having to decide this.MR. MORRIS. But it is important that we make a decisionfairly soon, because if we are going to make a change, both ReserveBanks and commercial banks are going to have a lot of work to do.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. My problem with this in part is thatwhatever is nice conceptually, given all the other burdens put on theReserve Banks--or all of us at this point--with the membership and thespecial program and the seasonal borrowing privilege and theoperational problems, this may create [problems] for the banks on topof all the other things they're doing now at our request. We have areal hazard. I think we have to make a pretty persuasive argument,particularly if we're going to do it quickly on top of all these otherthings. I think one can draw the opposite implication: That if it'sa marginally good idea and we want to do it but [our desire is] notoverwhelming, we might want to wait a while just to let the banks getout from under some of these other special things we're imposing onthem now.MR. MORRIS. But if we were to do it, the logical date wouldbe September 1 when we bring in all of these new institutions, If weare going to make a change, if we could make a decision next month,that would give us five months to prepare.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that is one view on the Boardstaff. We're going to have to get these techniques out now. Theyreally are going to be tested. But it's going to be impossible to runon our current method after September 1st--with all the phase-in,phase-down, sideways movements, [vault cash] counting as reserves, andnot counting as reserves--because we won't know what we're doing.SPEAKER(?). Mr. Axilrod doesn't fully share that view, Ipresume.MR. AXILROD. I don't think we're going to be any worse offthan we are now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll be no worse off to we'll be in animpossible [position]. And some people think there's no differencebetween those two.SPEAKER(?). Well, at least we'll have better data. I thinkthat will be a big step forward.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] then the assumption isinteresting enough. Again, this may be a minority view. But the4/22/80estimate of the nonmember banks is that the way we do it now will bebetter than if they were reporting daily for some indefinite period.SPEAKER(?). I have to mention the credit unions.MR. BAUGHMAN. Could I raise a question on a differentsubject if we're through with this one?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure.MR. BAUGHMAN. In view of the policy action taken today,based on the prospects for the economy and so forth, I'd raise aquestion as to what kind of posture we should be taking now that we'regetting our first reports on our consultations with the big banks andbig holding companies [regarding the voluntary credit restraintprogram and its] 6 to 9 percent [limit on overall credit growth].Just by way of example, for all member banks in the Eleventh Districtthus far total loans have increased at a 12-1/2 percent annual rate.But in March they did not increase at all. Now, these first reportsare going to give indications that [credit growth] will run well inexcess of 9 percent, so we have geared up for some rather hard-nosedconsultations calling for plans, projections, etc. It seems to methat we could rather easily get into a posture here that would lookfoolish, and that's not a very good posture to be in. So I raise aquestion as to whether you have any advice in that respect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a gut reaction, but let's see whatGovernor Schultz's gut reaction is first.MR. SCHULTZ. That's pretty nice! My gut reaction is for nowjust to go ahead and get in their plans and talk to them. I'm notready yet to give up too quickly on the first go-around. I'mperfectly willing to take the chance of looking a little foolish; Ithink we're going to look foolish no matter what we do. I don't thinkthat's a situation we can get out of with credit controls, but I'dhate to give up too quickly on this thing. My feeling is to have atalk with them and then next month, if it looks as if things areeasing off, then we can begin to ease off. We may eventually have toface the question of whether we want individual banks to cut backbelow 9 percent if it looks as if the total for the country is goingto be at 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a little early to judge that, Iwould think. And it's very hard to lay down any sense of rigidityabout this. But as a matter of common sense, take your case. Youhave banks who probably are not unlike what we are finding in a lot ofareas. You say [loans] are increasing at an annual rate of 12 or12-1/2 percent for the first three months or a bit more than threemonths.SPEAKER(?). That's an average. So presumably half of themare well above that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, that's not a figure that'sabsolutely out of sight. And second, you say [that credit growth] isslowing down. It seems to me you should have a consultation withthose banks, as Fred is suggesting. But you're not in a situationwhere you would jump up and down on the table or whatever and say they-38-4/22/80have to be back within 9 percent by a certain date. You say: "Look,you were a little high or were quite high in the early part of theyear; the most recent information we have shows it slowing down, andwe presume it's going to continue to slow down. You have a program inplace and all the rest and we'll look at you again next month and seeif it has continued to slow." But you don't tell them to stop makingloans at this point to get within 9 percent in the next 30 days or 60days or 90 days.MS. TEETERS. But it's a regional problem to some extent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, to the extent we have a regionalproblem--. I don't know if other people have a sense of this at thispoint. Well, here's a question: Suppose there is a 20 percent loangrowth in a particular bank. Is that something we should stomp on?MR. PARTEE. What is it? Is it non-priority loans? Is ittake-over loans? That's another aspect of consultation.SPEAKER(?). Well, it will be heavily loaded with oil and gasloans, almost inevitably.SPEAKER(?). In the second respect.SPEAKER(?). Real estate loans have been very strong also.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But if you had a bank with 20 percent[loan growth] and it's not in a priority area, I think you have to betougher on that bank than on a bank that's way below and consistentwith the program. I don't think we can just say that the program[does not apply] for that banker when he comes in with a 20 percentfigure. That's in the interest of fairness, I agree.SPEAKER(?). I'd look foolish.SPEAKER(?). If our economic projections are correct, then weought to be phasing out this program in about two months anyway.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(?). In New York only one commercialbank has come in over 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At an annual rate? That surprises me.Well, you have no problem.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(?). We do have a bit of a problem withthree bank holding companies. But we're looking into the data onemore time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd say this isn't the time to stomp onthem the way we would if the economy were running away.MR. BAUGHMAN(?). Well, I've gotten what I asked for.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Were there any other feelings on this,while we're on the subject? I was going to [bring this] up afterlunch.4/22/80SPEAKER(?). I don't want this analogy to sound too strange,but I think credit controls are little like the Vietnam war. We needto decide earlier rather than later to declare that we've won and pullout. And it seems to me that we have a particularly difficult problemwith some regional differences that in a way are discriminatory. As aconsequence, the sooner the overall situation allows us to say "Okay,we've done it and we can now scrap it," the better off we will bebecause we are putting some institutions--through no fault of theirown, really--through a harder vise than other institutions. Andthat's one of the undesirable effects.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right to an extent, andnobody is going to be [happier than I] to get rid of [the program]when the time comes. It's just a question of when the time is[right] psychologically, which is difficult [to gauge]. But given thesituation we're in now, as opposed to two months ago before we had theprogram, I'd say we can afford to be a little more understanding of abank that has a legitimate regional growth problem. That was withinthe framework of the original program anyway; it was just a questionof how it should be administered.SPEAKER(?). Well, that's very helpful.SPEAKER(?). It looks to me as if oil and gas loans ought tobe priority items, too, if we can extend that priority list.MS.TEETERS. Not publicly.SPEAKER(?). Hang in there, Nancy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course the problem, I suspect, is thatmany oil and gas people are not getting the loans that they wanted.But the language that we use to one bank--SPEAKER(?). I know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --has to be reasonably consistent withwhat we say to another bank. If a banker says "Gee, I talked to BobBlack and he told me I could draw all the oil I wanted in WestVirginia" and then some other banker says "That's not the message Igot from Willis Winn"--SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible] in Cleveland.MR. PARTEE. Remember, if that's a loan to an oil company,that doesn't mean that it's a loan for the purpose of drilling an oilwell. It might be for some entirely different purpose.SPEAKER(?). Like borrowing silver!SPEAKER(?). That wasn't the kind I was talking about though,Chuck.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By and large I think you can be tough onthe qualitative guidelines [unintelligible] gas drilling, but I don'tthink you should be giving them any sense that this is an open seasonon takeover loans or silver loans or something like that.-40-4/22/80 -41-SPEAKER(?). We'll regard this as a dance instruction. We'lltip-toe around it until it is demised.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments on this program?SPEAKER(?). Let's go to lunch!END OF MEETING