Meeting of Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 4-5, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D. C., starting on Monday, February 4, 1980, at 4:50 p.m.and continuing on Tuesday, February 5, 1980, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. BallesMr. BlackMr. ColdwellMr. KimbrelMr. MayoMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Baughman and Willes, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Axilrod, EconomistMr. Holmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Brandt, R. Davis, Ettin, Henry, Keir,Keran, Kichline, Scheld, and Truman,Associate Economists2/4-5/80Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Kalchbrenner and Prell, Associate Directors,Division of Research and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,Division of Research and Statistics, Board ofGovernorsMs. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMr. Smoot, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of PhiladelphiaMessrs. Balbach, Corrigan, J. Davis, T. Davis, andEisenmenger, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, New York, Cleveland,Kansas City, and Boston, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Danforth, Mullineaux, and Sandberg,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Minneapolis, Philadelphia, and New York, respectively-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 4-5, 1980February 4, 1980--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will call the non-meeting to order. Weare not in a meeting at this point anyway; we may be in a meetinglater. I would just remind all of you that I sent out a memorandum onthe idea of possibly changing the [FOMC] meeting dates. It probablywould amount to having fewer meetings on the theory that with thecurrent operating procedure, I sense--maybe nobody else senses--that ameeting after only four weeks doesn't give us much evidence on whichto change anything. With lagged reserve accounting and with a lag inthe numbers, we're hardly in the period that we were discussing beforethe next meeting comes along. So there may be some logic in doing ita bit differently. This is partly based on the idea, after looking itover--and I think we all agree--that we need a little longerperspective. It seems to me better to get the longer perspective bysticking to calendar quarters rather than just always looking threemonths ahead on some kind of moving average basis. If we take that asan assumption, logically we should meet somewhere around the beginningof a quarter and look at that quarter. We can review it sometimeduring the quarter and also look ahead to the next quarter. Then whenwe get to the end of the quarter, we will be looking ahead at the nextquarter. There seems to be a certain logical progression in thatmethod of looking at it as opposed to meeting more frequently when thebasic decision was whether or not to change the federal funds rate.But I will return to the subject at the end of the meeting and then[we will decide]. There's nothing magic about any particular time tochange.MS. TEETERS. Well, there is some magic in it. I looked atyour [proposed] schedule and I thought that we probably should meet atthe very end of the quarter to plan for the next quarter. Then Irealized that we have constraints on two [meeting dates]. One isbecause of the budget and the [President's] economic report [and] theHumphrey-Hawkins testimony; so we have to wait until January to dothat one. Then we have a similar constraint in July when we have towait for the midyear review of the budget before we can do very much.I finally came around to your schedule on two of the quarters anyway.So, we might as well change the whole schedule into a similar pattern.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I had nothing invested in any of theparticular dates or when we would change, if we change. But I do havethe feeling that every four weeks is a little frequent if we areoperating in this particular mode. I wouldn't feel that way if wewere operating more on money market oriented criteria.MR. ROOS. Could [we meet] on the original dates in thosemonths instead of moving--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a little hard. But look at thedates carefully. As I say, I had nothing invested in the particulardates that were put on that proposal, particularly when we get near[the usual] dates, if there are problems in changing them. Forinstance, for that proposed April 1, which looks logical except forApril Fool's day, March 25 is almost equally logical. And we couldbasically have the same pattern by meeting on March 18th, because I2/4-5/80understand [that date is on] everybody's schedule now, although thatwould leave a longer lapse before the next meeting. But there'snothing sacrosanct about any of those particular dates.MR. ROOS. Is there supposed to be a response?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, you can wait until later; it can waituntil after the meeting tomorrow. I just wanted to remind you to haveit in mind so that if you have any strong feelings they could beadequately verbalized tomorrow.The first thing on our agenda today is lagged reserveaccounting. Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, lagged reserve accounting, as thePresidents and Board Members know, has been a subject of considerablecontention in the System since it was adopted in 1968.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to get an issue pretty soonfor which we just can't pull out the old memoranda.MR. AXILROD. That's what I was getting to. There has beenconsiderable contention since 1968 when it was adopted. And I mustsay from an internal perspective there was contention between 1966 and1968, when it was being studied for adoption under a rather differentinstitutional environment and different operating procedures than wenow have. Various staff groups have studied this since 1973. I amafraid you are not quite getting independent results since I think Iwas Chairman of three of those groups. And they all three unanimouslyconcluded that there is very little to be said for lagged reserveaccounting from a monetary policy point of view if the Committee isoperating on a reserves target. One can't make a case that it is theleast bit of help and one can make a case that it is harmful. Therehave been divergences among the staff even in that context of it notbeing helpful. The question is: How harmful in fact is it? Somewould contend more strongly than others that it's harmful over thelonger run. Others would contend that it doesn't matter over thelonger run: That with or without lagged reserve accounting we canperk along on a reserve target and manage to hit our objectives. Ithink that's a legitimate source of dispute because the long run iscompounded of a number of short runs. And in a very simple-mindedsense in any 1-week period there is no defined relationship betweenthe multiplier on deposits and reserves in that week. That is,reserves this week can bear any relationship to deposits because allone has to do is worry about two weeks from now. So we rely almostentirely, therefore, on banks' responses to interest rates to controldeposits. When you cut through it all, fundamentally that is nodifferent from relying on a fluctuating federal funds rate target.So, I personally would tend to take the view that lagged reserveaccounting can make it virtually impossible to hit our targets in theshort run and probably is of some importance in making it difficult tohit our targets in the long run. Thus, I think it is really quiteinconsistent with the present operating procedures. Now, I don't meanto say that there aren't other things that are equally difficult. Thediscount window is a problem and our own graduated reserve requirementstructure is a problem. But in the latter regard, some of Mr.Lindsey's research would suggest that lagged reserve accounting2/4-5/80accounts for bigger divergences in the multiplier from predictionsthan does the graduated reserve requirement structure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From Mr. Who's research?MR. AXILROD. Mr. Lindsey, on my right. So I would say thatwhile doing away with lagged reserve requirements is not going tosolve all our problems in hitting the aggregates, it at least lookslike a step in the right direction. In view of this cogent staffanalysis, one might be curious as to the reason no action has beentaken to date. I assume there have been two reasons. One was thatwith the federal funds rate operating target, which has been theprincipal System operating target for years, or even with a netborrowed reserves operating target, lagged reserve requirements areessentially an irrelevancy, like almost any reserve requirement is anirrelevancy. With a funds rate target, the Committee is simply tryingto aim at that interest rate which will cause all the adjustments bybanks and the public, whether or not there are reserve requirements,that will bring about the proper money supply. So in that sense it'sirrelevant. The other issue was membership. The lagged reserverequirement is viewed as a benefit of membership. To test that viewwe did run a survey during one of these staff analyses and, except forthose at the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank, all of the directors ofReserve Banks who represented member banks said lagged reserveaccounting was desirable. In St. Louis, the directors said it wasundesirable.MR. ROOS. When was that?MR. AXILROD. That was in 1976.MR. ROOS. That was before the good days!MR. SCHULTZ. That sort of follows the pattern for mosteverything, doesn't it?MR. AXILROD. The staff has no other way of assessing laggedreserve requirements as a membership benefit. One's instinct would bethat it is minor relative to the real burden, which is the reserverequirement itself. In sum, Mr. Chairman, the staff does believe thatit is probably appropriate now to move toward contemporaneous reserveaccounting if the Committee is going to continue with a reservetargeting procedure. In that context, we did offer three alternativesin the memorandum. One is moving from a two-week lag to a one-weeklag, which would presumably speed up the response of the bankingsystem a bit. The second is making reserve requirementscontemporaneous for Reserve City banks and leaving a lag for the other5,000 banks. And the third is an essentially contemporaneous schemefor all banks. Without going through all the reasons that aredetailed in the memo, Mr. Chairman, we did conclude that we see verylittle advantage to any move now except the move to contemporaneousaccounting for all banks. That is, if the Board did not feel disposedto move toward contemporaneous accounting now, for whatever reasons,the staff would not suggest taking either of the other twoalternatives. We believe that their advantages do not outweigh thedisadvantages that might be entailed in terms of messed-up reporting,failure to quell the public debate, and certain problems of the2/4-5/80multiplier that the mix system brings about. Those are all thecomments I have, unless Mr. Lindsey would wish to add something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have not left a lot of doubt asto where you stand, Mr. Axilrod. Is there any dissenting opinionamong the staff on the importance of this matter?MR. LINDSEY. I might say that, if anything, my views aremore extreme than Steve's.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the articles and academic papers and soforth that have been written on this subject, do they bring anythingto light or make any argument that you have not made?MR. LINDSEY. No, in preparing these memoranda for the Board,we thoroughly reviewed the literature starting from the early '70s on.My own view, which isn't particularly humble, is that the quality ofthe analysis presented here is much superior to the academic work.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would expect that! Well, it's justthat the conclusion comes through a little more strongly than I readit in that memorandum itself. I had a feeling that you saw somedisadvantages in the degree of certainty with which the Desk wasoperating. Maybe Mr. Sternlight would like to comment.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, I'd like to add a word or two. I feelmuch less convinced than Mr. Axilrod that there would be significantbenefits from a switch to contemporaneous accounting. I can see thetheoretical case that he makes. I'd be among those who feel that inthe longer run even that theoretical case makes very little, if any,difference. I can see some impediments to the Desk's operations undera contemporaneous system in that we don't know required reserves inthe week we're operating in. Perhaps more significant than that, whensome deviation in required reserves stems from a factor other than thebehavior of the monetary aggregates--for example, a bulge in interbankdeposits or something of that nature that essentially we would want toaccommodate rather than resist as part of our reserve targeting--Ithink contemporaneous accounting could send us off in a perversedirection. So, I came out feeling that there is not all that muchadvantage to it. And having the minus on the membership side--I don'tknow how strongly to evaluate it, but I am told that it still doeshave some significance--just made me pretty dubious about thedesirability of a change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Holmes, you were there before andafter. Do you have any comments?MR. HOLMES. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I can recall back in thegreat debate over whether we should have lagged reserve accounting,all sorts of claims were made that it was going to help the Desktremendously and that the Wednesday [settlement date] would be astable day in the funds market. We at the Desk never believed that.But, if it does make a difference for bank relations and on thatground alone it is useful to the banks, then we see no harm in thelagged reserve accounting. I feel very much as Peter does that itdoesn't make all that much difference. It seems to me that the Systemhas introduced enough other changes recently in statistics and inprocedures that I see no urgent need, certainly, to go ahead with a2/4-5/80move back to contemporaneous reserve accounting. Along with Peter, Idoubt if it really makes that much difference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not going to make a decisionthis afternoon, but anybody who would like to comment on this subjectshould comment.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have long felt that if we'regoing to have a reserve operating base, sooner or later we are goingto have to move to contemporaneous reserves. As one example, let'ssay that later on this year we get into a period where the moneysupply is not growing or is contracting. That would mean that inorder to hit our target of total reserves, the Desk would have to pushin very large amounts of excess reserves at the expense of a prettysharp reduction in the funds rate. That might look a little funny ifwe're willing to do it, but it is one of the consequences stemmingfrom lagged reserves. It is very awkward to control reserves with alagged system. On the other hand, this is a very awkward time for usto make a change. As far as I am concerned, it's only a matter oftiming--of when we do it. I don't think this is an optimum time,first because of the membership bill. I wouldn't want to throwanything on the fire that could in any way interfere with that bill.I'd want to hold off until it has been decided one way or the other.Second, all of our computer systems people in the whole FederalReserve System are [working] flat out. We have the system automationprogram and we have the work going forward in connection with thepricing of Federal Reserve services. At least in the Boston Bank, wedon't have any capacity to do the work on [a shift from laggedreserves]. And I think that is probably true around the System.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How big a job is this for us internally asopposed to for a bank?MR. TIMLEN. Depending on the alternative--the memo had threealternatives--some of our people said four to six months forprogramming.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am assuming going all the way to what iscalled contemporaneous reserves, which isn't quite contemporaneous;it's a one-day lag.MR. MORRIS. I was told it would take us 90 days to implementit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Boy!MR. BALLES. I'd strongly support what Frank has said. Onthe substance of the argument, I certainly join Steve; that's exactlywhere I come out. Like Frank, I would also stress that it would bevery risky in my opinion even to raise this outside the Fed until weget a membership bill passed because there will be some adverse memberbank relations in a transition. Secondly, I'd stress that both thebanks and the Reserve Banks need a long lead time on this, longer thanSteve thinks based on the impression I have from the staff memo. Iwould think six months would be an absolute minimum. When you thinkof banks in the West with statewide systems and 1,000 branches and soforth, it gets to be a very, very complicated system of reporting.2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say it will take a long time becausethey will--MR. BALLES. Well, both for the banks and for us for thereason that Frank said. Our data processing people within the ReserveBanks have been knocked flat by the tremendous number of changes inthe current reporting series, by the cranking up of IBA, and by themarginal reserve requirements. We have the possibility of amembership bill on the horizon, which will bring us a lot moreinstitutions to deal with. On top of that, all at the same time, ifwe try to plug in a very detailed, cumbersome, time consuming,expensive reprogramming effort and try to do it too quickly, I thinkwe'll rue the day we did it. I'll tell you this: (1) I would hopethat a decision would be made to move to contemporaneous reserverequirements; (2) I wouldn't even raise the issue unless we get amembership bill; and (3) then at that point, I'd make sure that plentyof study is given to lead time needs of both the banks and the ReserveBanks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I appreciate your caution about raising[this issue], but I did this morning.MR. BALLES. Oh, you did? Now he tells me!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think your caution is well taken and Idid it with some hesitancy. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. Well, most of my speech has already been given.But I would say of the three alternatives Steve presented, I certainlywould agree with the staff, or the reserve requirements policy group,that a return to contemporaneous reserve accounting would be thepreferred solution. I think it is better than lagged reserves. But Itoo feel, though I probably can't say it as eloquently as John justdid, that it very definitely ties into the membership bill, and Iwould postpone it if only for that reason. I also feel, even though Iam known around this table as a pragmatist or eclectic or something--no comment Mr. Roos--that there are two other ways that have not beenthoroughly presented and discussed by the Axilrod Committee but shouldbe. They have been subjected to a lot of good academic thought.Maybe they are cockeyed, but I can't see the holes in them myself yet,and I think they're worthy of discussion. One of them is Bill Poole'spaper, Frank, on what amounts to a 100 percent marginal reserverequirement on the most recent changes since the last determination.The other is the idea of some sort of reverse lag where, as we alllearned in our elementary money and banking text books, the FederalReserve or the Central Bank sets the reserves. That isn't as silly asit may sound. We are not saying to a bank that it can't accept anymore deposits because its reserves have already been set. That can behandled by the way it works through the accounting system. But itseems to me that both of those ideas have enough merit that they atleast ought to be kicked around a little more by the SRAC and bySteve's group. So, while I agree that the major reason for delayingthe implementation of this relates to the membership issue and thetiming, I would suggest that we have a little more work to do in termsof analyzing these two ideas, just as examples. And if we want toblow holes in them, let's do it. But some of us, at least, areintrigued by these two ideas and the possibility that, if they work,2/4-5/80they will bring us closer, though obviously not completely, to a chaindrive rather than a belt drive, if I may use that [analogy].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have you looked at those, Mr. Axilrod?MR. AXILROD. We have in the past looked at those and severalother gimmicks that have been advanced.MR. SCHULTZ. And he will now deliver an unbiased opinion!MR. AXILROD. We'll be glad to consider them further.MR. MAYO. There are good gimmicks and bad gimmicks. We dealonly in good gimmicks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, like Bob, my speech has beenpretty well given. I'll start with a conclusion: I think it would bea mistake to make a change right now. There are several reasons. Inaddition to the ones that have been given, I think the magnitude ofthe problem has not been demonstrated to be great enough to justifythe cost of a change at this time. We knew when we made the changeyears ago to lagged reserve accounting that it would have the effectit is having. But at that point we judged that the membershipbenefits overrode the negative effects it would have on the linkagebetween the policy target and achieving the target. It seems to methat the balance today is even stronger in the direction of membershipthan it was at the time we made the change. And my recollection isthat the views we received from the Manager of the System Account thenwere the same as have been expressed today. The Desk did not see itas presenting an insurmountable operating problem. As to thesuggestion that it's irrelevant if we're operating with a federalfunds target, I find that persuasive. But it does seem to me thatit's inappropriate to throw into the same box the net borrowed reservetarget. That seems to me a different animal than the federal fundstarget. And the suggestion that we have to achieve the monetaryaggregate target through interest rate effects is a part of anyoperating procedure. The people who borrow from banks and the bankofficials who are handling banks' investment decisions are operatingin response to interest rates. And it's through the interface of thebanks and their customers that the asset side of their balance sheetis affected, and then the liability side seems to me to flow fromthat. So we cannot escape working through the interest rates in themarket to achieve influence on the monetary aggregates. I thinkthat's true whether we try to work through some reserve aggregate or afederal funds target or a net borrowed reserve target. It comes downto our ability, whatever the target, [to determine] the linkagebetween [our objectives] and the aggregate we attempt to affect. Butin the final analysis [the key is] our willingness to let our effortsinfluence interest rates in the market.Along with Bob's reference to a couple of items and gimmicksin the literature, I was expecting to see at least some passingreference--to use the vernacular on the table--to a "gimmick" that waskicked around fairly extensively a number of years ago: namely,grouping banks into about five groups and having their reservesettlement dates come up on a different day of the week.2/4-5/80MR. AXILROD. We have studies of that also, PresidentBaughman. We will be glad to--MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, I don't know whether [those in] theprofession--MR. MAYO. These are professional gimmicks!MR. BAUGHMAN. On the willingness to let that [academic] feudquiet down: Was it a matter of your persuading them or simply thatthey felt we turned off our hearing aids?MR. AXILROD. As far as Professor Friedman is concerned, Ithink it was the latter. He was the chief proponent of it.MR. BAUGHMAN. It seems to me that we should anticipate thatthat will likely surface again. So, my view, Mr. Chairman, is that weshould not change at the present time. I agree with the conclusionthat our present mode of operation would work a little better if wewere on a concurrent basis. But I think the cost of going there wouldbe excessive now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Just to set the record straight, I have a changeof position since the advent of the age of enlightenment in St. Louis.We're strongly in support of contemporaneous reserve accounting. Iwould subscribe to John Balles' concern about moving before theoperational changes have been considered and made and [so forth]. Intalking to our bank relations people, I got the impression that asmany banks dislike this lagged reserve arrangement as favor it.Anyway, let the record show that whatever happened in 1976 does notreflect our present position. We support it.SPEAKER(?). Yes, in June of 1976.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, in deciding whether lagged reservesare good or bad for policy, I think we have to decide whether thelikely errors in hitting the money supply stem from a lack ofresponsiveness to changes in the volume of reserves or whether theystem from unexpected changes in the appetite of the market for moneyof the type that Frank Morris assumed. If it's the first, then onecan make a case that we get a little quicker response under laggedreserve requirements than under the other in the sense that if weinject a given volume of reserves, required reserves don't riseimmediately, so the banks feel a little easier and they kick this offa little faster. In the case of unexpected deviations stemming from ashift in the demand for money, then we do have an automatic brakingthat comes about under contemporaneous reserve requirements that tendsto stop this unexpected change in the demand for money. I think it'sthis latter type that's really the most troublesome for us under ourpresent mode of operation. So that does give a slight edge tocontemporaneous accounting under the present procedures. But I don'tthink we ought to overemphasize that. I come out very close to whereAlan Holmes and Peter Sternlight did. At most, I would think thedelay would be two weeks. And if you accept any of the points that2/4-5/80Irving Auerbach was raising in his debate with Bill Poole in theAmerican Banker, then you may conclude that it may take longer thanmost people assume for these multiple contractions or expansions inbank credit to take place. In the kind of environment in which we aretrying to bring about a steady rate of expansion in money, and givenall these other slippages in the monetary multiplier, it's hard for meto see that it makes a great deal of difference under presentprocedures. But I do think that it is good for us, if we can, toquiet this criticism that has been stemming from the monetarists. Ihave two reasons: (1) It would divert their efforts toward trying tohelp us achieve a monetary target and they would stop assuming thatit's as easy to hit as most of them have assumed; and (2) it wouldremove any excuse that we have for not hitting the targets. And bothof those [results] would be rather salutary, I think.As far as the other side of the coin is concerned, bankrelations, a lot of the academic commentators assume that it's easierfor a bank to adjust under contemporaneous reserve requirementsbecause it does not involve as large a change in excess reserves. Butthey are not talking to the bankers I've talked to. I think most ofthe Reserve Banks now provide each of their banks with a dailystatement on reserves, which shows their required reserves asdetermined from deposits two weeks earlier. They subtract from thatany vault cash they held two weeks earlier, either add to that orsubtract from it the amount of carryover from the previous week, andthen show how much the banks must hold in their reserve balances forthe remainder of the reserve period. In fact, we even show that on adaily average basis. So far as the small banker is concerned, all hehas to worry about is looking at that statement that comes every day,early in the day--it never misses its schedule except when the carrierdoesn't run, which is very seldom--and he knows exactly the reserveshe has to hold on a daily average basis for the balance of thatreserve period. And if he misses it a little, he has the 2 percentcarryover. Most of them, if they watch it very closely, can getpretty darn close to zero excess reserves. But I wouldn't favor theadoption of alternative one--moving to a one-week lag--which I thinkis the best of those Steve outlined, for the reason that John Ballesand Frank Morris and many of the rest of you have stated. It would bea major problem [of implementation]. But as we move ahead, we mightthink about how we could go to contemporaneous reserve accounting andyet solve this bank relations problem. The problem doesn't stementirely from not having all the banks as members. I don't think we'dwant to burden the banks unduly even if they were all [members].So, what appeals to me most would be a month-long period ofcontemporaneous reserve accounting. I think that would havepractically all of the advantages of the [weekly contemporaneousaccounting period]. It would involve less rate volatility becausebanks would have more opportunity to engage in interest arbitragewithin the reserve period. It would also give more time for thisadjustment to the changes in the demand for money--that multiplecontraction or expansion that some of the commentators seem to thinkoccurs almost instantaneously. It would reduce the work of theFederal Reserve and the work of the commercial banks a great deal ifwe didn't have to put this out on a weekly basis. It would reduce theemphasis on the weekly figures that now cause us so much problems.And if we eliminated the carryover in the process--and I think we2/4-5/80probably could get away with eliminating that if we went to a month-long period--it would eliminate a form of slippage. But there aresome disadvantages to a month-long period without the carryover interms of unexpected reserve movements toward the end of the period.And this would not be simply the last day in the case of many banksthat don't know their required reserves until five or six days later.But if we did have an unexpected movement toward the end of theperiod, it would have an effect on only 1/28th to 1/31st of the wholeperiod because of the month-long period as compared with an effect of1/7th as we now have with a seven-day period. We also could notprovide as much help to the banks through giving them statements oftheir required reserves, and that removes one of the inducements forthem to report more promptly to us. Certainly that is important tous. Finally, with a long period of time, in a sense one could arguethat the banks wouldn't have to come to grips with a change in reserveavailability quite as promptly, and we might have some slippage there.But on balance, if we combined these two, that might conceivably bethe best of the two worlds. But I would urge that we not move to thatat this time for reasons others have already stressed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, those were very thoughtful observationsby Bob Black. I just would like to make two points on those before Ibriefly say what I meant to. I am not sure that we'll satisfy themonetarists by this change. I think their reasoning is that they wantto minimize Desk operations. They believe that with contemporaneousaccounting all the adjustment can take place through a change indeposits and none of the reserve needs have to be met by Deskoperations. You pointed out that these adjustments of levels ofdeposits don't take place instantaneously. We need a very largechange for each dollar of reserves, something like a $10 change indemand deposits and a $20 change in time deposits. These changes arereally so large that they can't take place quickly; any reservedeficiency or surplus must still be met very predominantly from Deskoperations. My other reaction is that the one-month procedure soundslike an ingenious possibility and well worth studying, but one can seethe danger of slippage if we expanded this [time period]. Suppose wemade it not one month but one year. One can see that that wouldn't beworkable. So somewhere between a day and a year there is an optimumin terms of less disturbance but also less loss of effectiveness.As far as moving to a contemporaneous basis right away isconcerned, I think the gain we have in terms of the monetarists'analysis wouldn't be very great. The staff memorandum convinces methat the gain in terms of speed might be very considerable. Theeffects of any reserve shortage begin two weeks earlier unless we wantto assume that somehow a reserve shortage or surplus casts its shadowahead and the banks move into very short-term assets as soon as theysee their deposits moving in one direction or another. But that isn'tvery likely because all they see is their own deposits moving; theydon't see the aggregate moving necessarily. So, there does seem to bea significant advantage in terms of speed of adjustment and I thinkthat is important because even though we say that it really doesn'tmatter over a quarter or so whether we deviate from our target, it isalways very hard to get back on track. It doesn't matter if wedeviate if we indeed get back on track. Nothing happens to the real-10-2/4-5/80sector. But getting back on track may be very painful because theforces that pushed us off may still be operative.I have one question on something that I'd like to understandbetter. I have the impression that under the present procedure, thefunds rate still serves as a guide to reserve needs. Peter seemed tosay that if we move to contemporaneous, we would lose that. Atpresent, a movement in the funds rate is an unambiguous indicationthat reserves are either too large or too small and it is clear thatthe Desk must take action unless it wants to have the reserveimbalance met by borrowing or repayment. If we have contemporaneous,then a move in the funds rate may mean indeed that market factors haveproduced a deficiency or excess of reserves. But it also may meanthat the aggregates are moving in a particular direction, creating areserve surplus or deficiency. If the latter is the case, we may notwant to counteract that; we may want to let the change in the fundsrate do its job. Say a decline in deposits leads to a decline in thefunds rate. We would want the decline in the funds rate to help pushdeposits back up. So there seems to be a possibility of using thefunds rate as a guide to operations under lagged [accounting] and lessof a possibility to do that under contemporaneous. Since I amtroubled, frankly, by the use of the funds rate as a guide tooperations because it exposes us to the appearance of still being on afunds rate target, I wonder whether this wouldn't protect us againstthat suspicion that we're trying to control the funds rate rather thannonborrowed reserves and the aggregates. And I wonder whether theDesk wouldn't be able to judge what it needs to do--determine the needto add reserves or the absence of a need--without this indicationcoming from the funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Well, I have the feeling that the honeymoon of ourexperiment is about over. Consequently, I get a little more itchy tofiddle with the machinery rather than to let it stand. I am convincedthat the acceptance of the Federal Reserve making this [procedure]work is going to be more important than for membership and a wholehost of issues. I would not back off because of the effect it mayhave on the membership legislation at this time. This is moreimportant than the membership issue. I am convinced that while thereare programming problems involved, we can get it done faster than weassume if we change our priorities a bit. I would give up on some ofthe other things we are doing, I think, and put this in place. I amnot sure how much time [it would take] but the biggest problem isgetting the Banks to rearrange their priorities in order to mesh withit. I would pick up on some of the other comments about theimportance of saying that this [procedure] works. I am concerned thatthe slippages are going to show up much more. There is a lack ofconfidence in the market now about what we are doing and either [weneed to do] that or look at the discount rate again, or perhaps both,very promptly or I think we are going to be in trouble.I would like to raise one question. With [the development]of the managed liabilities and RPs and other things, are we seeing achange in the adjustment process now that will [become morepronounced] if we start to tighten? Are we seeing that [adjustmentnot] formally showing up in the deposit base but in some of theseitems? I get lost in all the accounting as to how that flushes out.-11-2/4-5/80MR. AXILROD. We have often expected that when the Systemtightens, there will be an increase in managed liabilities that holdsdown demand deposits. For example, there would be an increase inissuance of CDs and RPs and all that. That didn't turn out to be truein the fourth quarter when there seemed to be a sharp reduction inbank credit demands. But for unchanged credit demands, so to speak, Iwould expect that to be an element in the adjustment process. Itwould be an aspect of the tightening--issuing [such] things andputting upward pressure on interest rates in so doing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do you think we are running out ofhoneymoon time or however you expressed it, Willis?MR. WINN. Paul, I hear more doubts being raised in moreareas than I ever thought possible. Their suspicion is that we are[not] on a money target [unintelligible] very much a funds target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't see it in the money supplyfigures.MR. WINN. Well, we are confusing it by all these differentmoney supply figures we are surfacing.MR. PARTEE. We haven't done that yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they don't know--MR. WINN. People are looking, Paul, at the reserve baseuntil we get--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how far the ingenuity of ourstaff goes, but we will get off bounds on one definition. We changedthe definition in the seasonal adjustment factor--fixed it upperfectly, I would say.MR. COLDWELL. If we shift from lagged reserve accounting tocontemporaneous and confuse that issue--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, I speak somewhat tentatively on thissubject which I have observed raging around here for many years. Itis somewhat religious in character. By the way, St Louis, I think hasalways been on the side of the angels, Larry! They might have had alittle falling off or--MR. ROOS. Steve tells me we were the only people--MR. PARTEE. I would say you were always in favor ofcontemporaneous accounting and I would say that Bob Black has alwaysbeen against it because he saw the public relations cost or the bankrelations cost. The latter was a major factor involved, I thought, inthe Board's accepting the lagged way in the first place. I amimpressed by Henry's argument. I do think the speed of adjustment issomething that is going to plague us because I personally believe thatsooner or later, but perhaps not right now, Willis, we're either goingto get a big surge or we're going to get a big collapse in theaggregates and then we are not going to be able to do anything about-12-2/4-5/80it because of the lags with which the demand schedule can be affected.And two weeks is a meaningful amount of time in shortening thatprocess, if indeed it does shorten the process. I don't know that itnecessarily would because, after all, the Desk knows that the moneysupply has surged or has fallen out of bed before the reserves have tobe put up to support the higher amount or the lower amount; andpresumably if they don't follow a strictly mechanical formula, theycan begin to make adjustments for it early on in their strategy. Soeven that can be overcome.My biggest problem is that I would lean towardcontemporaneous accounting except that I think the structure is muchtoo complicated to use it. Reported deposits are extremelycomplicated; there is quite a variety of deposits with different kindsof reserves against them. And it seems to me all of that is much moredifficult [to manage] on a contemporaneous basis; it would not be adisadvantage otherwise if we had a very simple structure. Now, italso happens that the membership bills all propose a very much simplerstructure of reserves than we now have. And it seems to me that if[the structure were simpler], that would also tend in some sense, Bob,to do away with the bank relations problem because it is no longer anoptional matter as to whether to follow the specified procedures. Itseems to me that a very much simpler structure and the change in thewhole reserve apparatus that would be associated with a new bill,which probably wouldn't take effect for six months or something likethat, might be a time for introducing a change. But I would tie it tothose kinds of developments; I wouldn't do it now.By the way, I do believe the point made by Frank and othershas some value: With our current way of processing the daily reportof deposits and the programming that exists we probably don't have thecapacity to make the change without risking a collapse of thestructure. That has begun to bother me. So, I wouldn't do anythingnow; but the introduction of a new simplified system on differentterms and conditions might be an occasion for going to it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I have heard at least sixeconomists at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York opine on the matterof reverting to contemporaneous reserves. Not one of them thinksthere is any major advantage in such a change, so I will be disposedto follow that professional judgment in my Bank. I must say that JohnBalles has given most of my points in terms of the bank relations[effects of] such a change and I would like to stress the importanceof that. It is lead time, not only at the Reserve Banks but at thecommercial banks as well. I would say, too, that I don't think thatFirst VPs are in a position to start changing their priorities in thecomputer support area. We have a number of very key projects goingforward in that area to bring up our new FRCS 80 communicationsnetwork. We are entering the area of resource sharing. And to changeour priorities to accommodate something that is not held out as havinga major advantage is to me very poor planning. I would also say thatwe have had so many changes in the area of reserves--and those changesinvolve a cost to our member banks--that this would just add to thedifficulties of shaping things in an orderly way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.-13-2/4-5/80MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I also tread tentatively in an arealike this. In general, I am persuaded by Mr. Axilrod's theoreticalarguments that contemporaneous reserve accounting has advantages inthe short run when applied to a reserve targeting approach to monetarycontrol. Mostly though, I am impressed by what Mr. Sternlight and Mr.Holmes had to say, which is that it probably won't make a great dealof difference in how the Desk operates. I just have one question thatI'd like to ask Mr. Axilrod, if I may. I assume you are familiar withIrving Auerbach's arguments in favor of lagged reserve accounting. Itake it that this is essentially an argument that the effects of anyshifts in money demand won't be very quickly felt in markets and thatthe argument is based on the actual behavior of commercial banks intheir lending and in their portfolio management. I wonder what youwould say in response to Mr. Auerbach.MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Rice, Irv has a much morecomplicated mind, I think, than I do. Also, the evidence with regardto bank response has been developed over a number of years when theSystem has been running a different kind of policy that is veryaccommodative to bank needs. If at today's interest rates the bankneeded reserves, the System supplied it. So every banker worth hissalt knew that he could rely on the federal funds market within plusor minus 1/4 percentage point to make his adjustments. In that kindof environment, adjustments do tend to be made quite slowly. That maybe the best kind of environment; I am not questioning that. But Ithink that's the basis for the empirical evidence. Without laggedreserve accounting you introduce the possibility of controlling totalreserves. Now, you may or may not want to control them literally, butyou introduce that possibility whereas with lagged reserve accountingthat's much more difficult to do. If you can control total reserves,offsetting borrowing as it occurs, then it follows that the banks aresimply not going to be able to put out the deposits and that inconsequence interest rates are going to move sharply up or sharplydown as banks are forced to make those adjustments. If the Committeewants to move toward the kind of world where it is more certain ofcontrolling total reserves in the short run, or indeed in the longrun, then I think abandonment of lagged reserve accounting would makeit more practicable to do so. Now, if bank adjustments take a longtime, then it might require a lot more interest rate variation in theshort run to overcome that kind of inertia. However, I would feelreasonably confident that after some transition period the process ofbank adjustments would be much shorter. Of course, in that processbanks would begin holding more excess reserves so we'd have thatproblem to worry about. I know this is somewhat general, but that'show I would respond to the kinds of comments that Irv makes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends in considerable part upon whatwe do with the discount window issue.MR. AXILROD. Yes. I am sure, even if we leave the windowopen and don't close it, total reserves leaves you the possibility ofchasing it. You may not ever catch it, but it leaves you thepossibility of chasing it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.MR. COLDWELL. I have only two comments, Mr. Chairman.First, I would agree with the Account Manager that this is likely to-14-2/4-5/80have [only] minor advantages. But secondly, I would caution theCommittee that this is another interruption in the overall picture of[the policy] the Committee is trying to follow. If we add that on topof our redefined aggregates as well as possible daylight overdraftsand additions from the membership bill, we're likely to complicate thefigures [further] and they are going to be difficult for people tofollow, even our very good staff.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't contemplate that possibility.President Willes.MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I found Henry'scomments and Chuck's comments particularly useful. So I would like to[be recorded as agreeing with] whatever you wrote down for them. Iwould add one thought, which goes back to the comment that Bob Mayomade. I am not much for gimmicks, either. But if there's a bankrelations problem, as many think there is, it just might be possiblethat the kind of proposal Bill Poole made can be structured in such away that we don't give much away but present it to the banks as thoughwe are giving them something when we are taking away lagged reserves.His kind of penalty scheme, for example, in terms of the carryoverwould make it possible to say that we are going to take away laggedreserves but we are going to give banks some flexibility they don'thave now. And yet if we structure that penalty in the right way, infact, we're not going to give away much in terms of sloppiness in thereserve figures. Looked at in that way--unless, as Chuck says, we getthe whole thing solved with the bill--it might be useful to consider agimmick like that simply as a bank relations vehicle. It may be ameans to get the advantages and not have the negative bank relationsimpact that some of us, at least, are concerned about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess everybody has talked who wants totalk. Is there anybody else who urgently wants to talk? Mr. Kimbrel.When I put the adverb in front of it, you're in trouble!MR. KIMBREL. I have a personal bias toward contemporaneousreserves. And if we were operating so that we could accomplish it, Iwould certainly opt for that. But I suppose our real thrust [shouldbe] Desk efficiency in discharging our directives, and those at theDesk don't seem to be too enthusiastic about contemporaneous reserves.I accept that against the environment of the costs of programming sucha change at the Reserve Banks and commercial banks. And, Mr.Chairman, right at the moment any change in our relationships with ourmember banks, even this, is not exactly very well timed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, those cautions seem to be ratherunanimously felt. I must say the other side of it is--I don't knowhow important it is substantively--that when we work with a two-weeklag in the context of what we're trying to do now, one has a greatsense of artificiality. We are working to affect a reserve figurethat we always know we cannot affect because it always depends uponsomething that happened two weeks earlier. It leaves me at least witha very uncomfortable feeling over a period of time. But I think ithas been useful to get all these considerations on the table. I don'tknow whether we have to look carefully at the reverse lag situationand so forth or not.-15-2/4-5/80MR. AXILROD. Well, we can. It depends how promptly theBoard would want to take this up. But Mr. Lindsey has already doneconsiderable work in that area, so we would be in a position todevelop something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are in a position to talk prettyquickly about that. I don't know where we'll come out, but--MR. PARTEE. Paul, if we are going to be doing additionalstudies on this, I have always been very taken by the notion of doingaway with Saturday and Sunday, which is another gimmick.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's coming up anyway, isn't it?SPEAKER(?). You mean for Federal Reserve purposes only?MR. PARTEE. Yes, excuse me, for Federal Reserve purposesonly, because of all the inefficiency of flows back and forth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the relevance of that comment isthat one thing leads to another. And there is this question ofwhether to make a whole bunch of changes at one time or to keep makingchanges, as I think we have been doing, that upset people.MR. AXILROD. A memo on that very subject, on the effect of amove from 7 to 5 days, has been prepared for the Board. We didn'twant to send it forward right at this time because of the confusionwith the memo prepared for this meeting, but we do have a staffrecommendation on that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the very least, obviously, there are alot of arguments to delay for a while. I think we ought to get allthese things on the table; maybe we won't want to delay them all. Wecan look at the membership issue in a month or two and see where thatstands, but we ought to have at least a preliminary feeling of how wewould want to go, depending upon the resolution of that issue. Let'shope it gets resolved one way or the other. Well, I don't think thereis anything more to add on this unless the Desk people want to sayanything in conclusion. Well, it has been useful [to see] how uniformmany of the views are about the theoretical desirability and thepractical difficulties in this.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to add onefootnote to this. From my perspective, it is not merely theoreticaldesirability and practical difficulty but, as you commented, theartificiality of playing with these numbers. That is driven home tome almost every week, so I feel some practical impact of that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're going to have a presentationon the international scene. I think a variety of questions havearisen on this which may or may not be of any immediate relevance towhat we [do].MESSRS. TRUMAN, SHAFER, and HENRY. [Statements--seeAppendix.]-16-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's proceed to a formal meeting and hearfrom Mr. Pardee about the international [scene] in the last month nowthat we've heard about it for the next two years.MR. PARDEE. Every time somebody mentions the internationalvalue of the dollar, I don't know where I am. I feel like the zookeeper who is worrying about lions and tigers and bears and is toldthat the animal kingdom is improving or not improving during thecourse of the day. I am working in a different world than the onewe've just come from, though I have great sympathy with many of thethings that were said. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions for the zoo keeper?MR. BAUGHMAN. I move slowly now so I didn't really capturewhat you said in that very last statement. If the Bundesbank sellsdollars and takes in marks presumably, you say we may share in thosemarks. What are you telling us?MR. PARDEE. We have a bit of a dilemma. It would be rathernice to see the dollar rise at this stage, after all the pressuresthat the dollar has been under for these many months. And on thatbasis, it's awkward for us to see the Bundesbank go into the exchangemarket and sell dollars and thereby keep the dollar from rising as itmight otherwise. At the same time, we have $2.6 billion worth of swapdebt remaining and I am going to have to ask for a second renewal on agood chunk of that swap debt. And the U.S. Treasury has a verysubstantial short position in that it used a lot of the resources ofthe earlier Carter notes in the intervention last fall. So, we have arather great need for marks. We have to balance off our wish to seethe dollar rise a little to reinstill a bit of confidence in themarket in the dollar against this need for mark resources.MR. BAUGHMAN. Are you telling us that the procedure has apossibility of lightening our mark debt?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When the Germans sell dollars and buymarks, they give some of them to us sometimes.MR. PARDEE. That's right.MR. PARTEE. They give them to us?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They sell them to us.MR. PARTEE. For dollars? How do they get an advantage outof that?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because we're repaying the swap.MR. BAUGHMAN. Are you projecting a reduction in our markdebt?MR. PARDEE. I am if the dollar remains where it is [or]continues to rise. There is still a rather substantial calendar ofmark-denominated issues coming into the international markets, whichwill be converted at the Bundesbank. And this rediversification--there's no term for it and the politics only goes one way--this flow-17-2/4-5/80of funds back into the dollar provides us with opportunities. TheBundesbank had one offer put to them this morning on which it decidedit didn't like the exchange rate. We would see quite a bit of that aswell: People coming back to the dollar, selling large chunks of markson the exchange market, and either the Bundesbank or ourselves takingthose [marks] off the market.MR. BAUGHMAN. Our decision as to whether to use any marks weacquire for the purpose of repaying debt will hinge not on the factthat we've got some marks but rather on what is happening in theexchange rates?MR. PARDEE. Well, there is a certain urgency as far as ourrepayment of debt is concerned. And whenever the dollar is strongenough to take it, we open doors and windows. We have not gone intothe exchange market as an open buyer of marks. That's one point I wasmaking in my [report]. But to the extent that someone comes along andoffers marks to us, we will take them and use them to repay debt.MS. TEETERS. Why is there a certain urgency of repayment?Are those bonds coming due?MR. PARDEE. We've had swap drawings outstanding since lastJune and we're going into the second renewal on a number of these.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a recommendation to make in thatconnection?MR. PARDEE. I don't have the numbers, but between now andthe end of February we have a rather substantial list of swapdrawings, totalling about $1.8 billion, coming up for second renewal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions sincethe last meeting. Do we have a motion to that effect? Withoutobjection they are so ratified. And you are asking for permission torenew $1.8 billion of swap debt maturing between now and the nextmeeting?MR. PARDEE. By the end of February.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When are we going to meet next--March?MR. PARDEE. Not until March 28th.MR. PARTEE. The drawing has been outstanding for six months,Scott?MR. PARDEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This goes beyond any feasible next meetingdate I am sure. Do I have a motion? I do and I have an enthusiasticsecond. Have we any objections? If not, are there any otherquestions or comments on this?MR. COLDWELL. Your pressure for urgency of repayment ismerely the annual date coming up?-18-2/4-5/80MR. PARDEE. It's not merely the annual date; I think I havea responsibility to the Committee to keep these things short term.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He always feels under pressure. I don'tknow--MR. COLDWELL. I understand that, but I thought you wereconveying a sense of real urgency and that maybe we ought to takefurther steps than what we're now taking.MR. PARDEE. Oh, no, I am not trying to go in that direction,as far as the policy is concerned. But in terms of my ownresponsibilities I feel that I have an urgency to clear this up. Now,there is a tradeoff--we have to choose--because we're covering thisdebt at a rather substantial loss to the Federal Reserve. And if wewaited three months or six months, the exchange value of the dollarmight be such that we could repay at a profit. On the other hand,experience has shown that to be a 50-50 [probability]; we might bepaying it off at a substantially greater loss. I would rather get itoff the books while we have the opportunity and free up our resourcesfor later problems.MR. COLDWELL. I was just testing the degree of urgencyyou're putting on this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only his normal pressure.MR. WALLICH. Nothing as drastic as going into the marketand buying some D-marks.MR. COLDWELL. And nothing as drastic as the Bundesbanktelling you that we have to get out [of debt].MR. PARDEE. Well, we're having daily conversations with themon their pace of selling.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I forgot to ask for approval of theminutes of the last meeting. Without objection, they are approved.How long is your presentation, Mr. Kichline?MR. KICHLINE. Probably about 20 minutes.MS. TEETERS. But then the questions will take it beyondthat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have time for questions. Thereis no ground swell for wanting to hear that presentation tonight. Inthat case, maybe we'll dispose of Mr. Sternlight. He's always very[brief].MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think I'll take that long, Mr.Chairman. Shall I go ahead?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]-19-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before I forget, maybe we can go ahead andratify your transactions. Without objection they are ratified. Ithink we'll do no more than hear whatever comments or questions youhave to Mr. Sternlight.MR. WALLICH. Could you expand a little on what you perceiveas market expectations about future inflation? I see that Treasurybill futures, for instance, have changed by a very substantial amount,something close to 100 basis points over a month or so.MR. STERNLIGHT. I hadn't focused on a particular quantity,Governor Wallich. It's just that "expectations of inflation" seems tobe the most commonly cited factor for this very marked rise in thelonger end of the market, with the longer bonds up about 100 basispoints over the past month. And there is the budget message; eventhough it perhaps more frankly acknowledged inflation than some pastAdministration messages, there is still the feeling that if theAdministration is saying it's that bad, it's going to be even worse.I guess this is the kind of thing that greets one at times like this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You mentioned that some people thought thenew money supply figures would look higher. Why should they have thatidea?MR. STERNLIGHT. I suppose just fear of the unknown, really.We're coming out with something new, and it's partly that. It'spartly perhaps a misconception that since these new series are likelyto include some elements that have been growing rapidly the aggregateswill tend to show more rapid growth. That's the feeling. If there issome account taken of the checkable deposits and money market funds--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The reason I asked is that they don't haveany sense of this revised seasonal.MR. STERNLIGHT. No, but they have expressed skepticism aboutthe recent seasonal. Certainly I have heard the comment that the slowgrowth in the past few months may have partly reflected an inadequateseasonal adjustment for that period.MR. BLACK. Peter along those same lines, all the newdefinitions in January would show greater growth rates than we had forthose same measures in September to December whereas all the old onesshow less in January. What is the market going to say to that? Thisis very closely related to what you were saying.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think they might feel that some oftheir skepticism was well placed.MR. BLACK. That's what I am afraid of, really.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a press conference scheduled forThursday, I think, to attempt to explain these new figures, and thatquestion is sure to arise. I don't look forward with a great sense ofanticipation to trying to explain either the substantial actualcomplications or the fact that the numbers look higher.MR. PARTEE. We do have the revised seasonal, Paul. That'san annual event to revise the seasonal.-20-2/4-5/80 -21-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it doesn't have to go higher.MR. PARTEE. Well, it happens to have done what the marketexpected it to do. That is, it raised the seasonal factors for thewinter quarters and dropped them for the summer.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have lots of problems. This M2 numberis more like the old M3 number, but since it's called M2 and is higherthan the [old] M2, we've got a problem. Any other questions orcomments?MR. BLACK. Stress the long run. Go back to the [previous]six months and it will look a little better as you explain it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will adjourn until tomorrow at 9 a.m.[Meeting recessed]2/4-5/80February 5, 1980--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We got through our agenda down to item 4anyway, yesterday. I suggest that we begin with the staff report onthe economic situation and then perhaps take a little more time, if wewant to, on the discussion of the economic situation and implicationsfor the longer-term ranges in the light of the fact that this is themeeting at which we have to set them for a year ahead. Mr. Altmanntells me he would appreciate, for purposes of writing the minutesanyway, a fuller discussion of your views than we have had at somerecent meetings. But more important substantively is the fact thatthis is the annual meeting where we have to consider and rationalizewhat we do in terms of the longer-range outlook. In that connection,I don't know whether all of you noticed that the President exercisedhis prerogative to relocate, I guess is the right word, the Humphrey-Hawkins objectives. In the original Act they were 4 percentunemployment and a 3 percent rate of price increase in 1983, and hemoved back the unemployment objective 2 or 3 years and the priceobjective--what, 5 years?MR. PARTEE. I think it's 1986 [for the unemploymentobjective] and 1988 [for the price objective].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it was 3 years and 5 years. It isthe first time that particular prerogative has been exercised, andmaybe it will make everyone feel more relaxed regarding how onereconciles what we do with the dictates of that Act. I mentioned lasttime that it might be useful--I will not insist upon this--to quantifyyour feelings about the outlook. I'd say the best way to do it interms of the real GNP would be on a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarterbasis. In terms of prices, the consumer price index is the easiestone to think about. And I suppose the unemployment rate would be thetraditional one. If you want to give some sense of your figures, youcan do it with any appropriate qualification that you think isdesirable: That you feel reasonably confident about it or immenselyuncertain about it or anything in between, because I think that ispart of the flavor within which we must operate. [We need] to takeaccount of the uncertainties in setting our own policy. Given wherewe're starting, I hope to have a great revolution and perhaps have thecoffee break a little earlier, more toward the breakfast hour thantoward lunch, after we finish the discussion of the economic outlook.With that, you may begin, Mr. Kichline.MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, and TRUMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a little confused by this last chart.This shows a rising rate of inflation through most of the first halfof 1981, or the first quarter anyway. I thought your projectionearlier showed a declining rate of price increase over that period.MR. KICHLINE. Well, this is the GNP implicit deflator; on afixed weight basis it goes down. As you know, the GNP implicitdeflator subtracts out the energy prices coming from abroad and, infact, gives us a lower number than is being experienced domestically.So the implicit deflator at this time would be an understatement ofthe impact of inflation in this early 1980 period. The fixed weightdeflator is around 10 percent.-22-2/4-5/80MR. PARTEE. How do you reach those confidence ratios? Idon't really understand the process by which you get a 70 percentconfidence interval.MR. KICHLINE. We use the errors from the quarterly model inthe equations, which are determined from past history. We run a largenumber of simulations; in fact this is based upon 400 experiments withthe model. And when looking at that, we determine it with a 70percent confidence interval.MR. PARTEE. How many were above?MR. KICHLINE. How many of those were above and how manybelow? In effect, using this very large number of simulations, themodel would say that 70 percent from the past fall within that bound.MR. SCHULTZ. I'd like to comment--I'm probably the onlysimple-minded person on the Committee--that I found your presentationto be the best I've seen. It was presented in a form that I foundvery easy to understand and I liked it.MR. KICHLINE. Thank you.MR. COLDWELL. Could I ask a question, Mr. Chairman? TheChairman [of the Congressional Committee] has asked us to talk aboutpossibilities regarding real GNP, the CPI, and unemployment. As Iunderstand your presentation, your real GNP forecast for 1980 would bedown 2.2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, wait a minute. That's for the yearas a whole, isn't it?MR. KICHLINE. That's fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.MR. COLDWELL. Isn't that what you're asking?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes it is.MR. COLDWELL. And you have the unemployment rate at 7-3/4percent at the end of the year.MR. KICHLINE. That's right.MR. COLDWELL. What's your CPI? That is what he asked.MR. KICHLINE. Well, you'd want to add a line on that tablefor the staff forecast for 1980, QIV to QIV. The staff has a forecastof 11.4 percent for the increase in the CPI. And for 1981 the staffforecast for the CPI is 8.6 percent. Just for comparison--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the fourth quarter of 1980 you havewhat?MR. KICHLINE. No, for the percentage change from the fourthquarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980 we have 11.4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the rate of consumer priceincrease in the fourth quarter of 1980?-23-2/4-5/80MR. KICHLINE. 9.2 percent.MR. COLDWELL. But the change over the year is 11.4 percent?MR. KICHLINE. Well, we have a forecast of around 15-1/2percent in the first quarter of this year with a combination of energy[prices] and high mortgage rates driving it up. It drops to 11-3/4percent [in the second quarter] and then to 9-1/4 percent in thesecond half of this year, which measured fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter gives you around 11-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand. What was it in thefourth quarter of last year?MR. KICHLINE. 13.0 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it's going to be 9.2 percent in thefourth quarter of 1980, according to this projection?MR. KICHLINE. That's right.SPEAKER(?). Give or take a percentage point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is this change of 11 percent thatyou're talking about?SPEAKER(?). Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.MR. KICHLINE. You take the level of the index in the fourthquarter of 1979 and calculate the percentage change in the level tothe fourth quarter 1980. Early in 1980 we have very rapid increasesin the CPI and they slow later on.MR. MAYO. Why don't you give us the quarterly figures. Itmay help us.MR. SCHULTZ. And year-over-year is different from fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter.MR. KICHLINE. Well, if you want to look at some of thesenumbers: The fourth quarter of 1979 is 13.0 percent; the firstquarter of 1980 is 15.6; the second quarter is 11.7; the third quarteris 9.2; and the fourth quarter is 9.2. Measured fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter, that is an increase of 11.4 percent.MR. SCHULTZ. What do you have year-over-year, for 1980 over1979?MR. KICHLINE. I think we have that on a different table. Ifnot, someone may have a calculator and we can--. It's 12.8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just have to decide what figure I wanthere. I think I want the fourth quarter rate of change, your 9.2percent figure.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that's right. The rate ofinflation as measured by the CPI is reduced by the end of the year to9-1/4 percent. The Administration has more than that, doesn't it?-24-2/4-5/80MR. KICHLINE. I have a December-to-December calculation forthe Administration. They didn't calculate it quarterly; I have thedetails, [so I can] calculate it. It's roughly comparable. Forfourth quarter-to-fourth quarter it's 10.4 percent in 1980, whichcompares to our 11.4 percent. And for 1981 we're both at the samelevel, 8.6 percent from the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The figures we are looking for, then, arethe [counterparts] of your minus 2.2 percent--that's the fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter change in real GNP--the level ofunemployment in the fourth quarter, and the rate of change in theconsumer price index during the fourth quarter.MR. PARTEE. You want the CPI in our [forecasts] rather thanthe implicit deflator?MR. MAYO. It happens to be the same; it's 9.2 percent forthe fixed weight price index, too.MR. PARTEE. It does happen to be the same.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can you tell me what the consensus is ofprivate forecasts at this point?MR. KICHLINE. The consensus of price forecasts or what?MR. SCHULTZ. For everything.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, for these three items or someapproximations thereof.MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't have a consensus. I can giveyou some numbers based on a couple of the econometric model forecasts.I might just say that a great deal of difficulty is associated withthis sort of exercise in that both the monetary and fiscal assumptionsdiffer. And in many cases one doesn't know what the energy priceassumptions are. Most outside forecasters that I am aware of nowinclude in their control projections some sort of tax cut as well as aconsiderably more expansive monetary policy if specified, or if notspecified, implicitly so. Most of them have a recession, I would say,that is two or three quarters in length beginning now. They havemaintenance of very high prices and a much sharper recovery inactivity late this year or in 1981. The Wharton model is somethinglike that, for example, and they do have a tax cut. And they assumeM1 growth of 6-1/2 percent compared to our 5 percent. In comparison,the bill rates in that sort of forecast by the fourth quarter of thisyear are below 10 percent, compared to 11 percent in the Board staff'sforecast. So, a good deal of the difference probably relates toalternative policy assumptions. DRI is the most confusing of all. Ithas an increase in nominal GNP from the fourth quarter of 1979 to mid-1981 that averages 10 percent at an annual rate and has the bill rategoing down 3-1/2 percentage points. All of that is achieved with a4-1/2 percent M1 growth, which is magic compared to anything in thepostwar period.MS. TEETERS. Do you have the interest rate assumptions inthe Administration's forecast?-25-2/4-5/80MR. KICHLINE. Yes, I do. Do you want a fourth-quarter levelor--?MS. TEETERS. Fourth-quarter level.MR. KICHLINE. The level in the fourth quarter of 1980 is 9.6percent on the 3-month bill rate; in the fourth quarter of 1981, it's8.8 percent. The staff forecast has a bill rate of 11 percent in Q41980 and 11-1/2 percent in Q4 1981. There is no explicit moneyassumption that goes with the Administration's forecast.MR. COLDWELL. But if you calculated it, what would it be?They must have some [implicit assumption]. Is it higher than yours?MR. PARTEE. It would have to be higher.MR. COLDWELL. It has to be higher than yours.MR. AXILROD. We are very pleased that they have not put thatin.MR. MAYO. Me, too, Steve.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They may be using a different equation.MR. MORRIS. Let sleeping dogs lie, I guess.MR. SCHULTZ. Eggert is very cheap. Why don't you go aheadand buy it so you can have it?MR. KICHLINE. We do buy it; I don't look at it. Well, Ican't say I don't look at it. It's a rundown of 30 or 35 forecasts.Unfortunately, they come out with different time periods and nolisting of the policy assumptions, so it's very difficult to compareone to another. It's helpful if one just wants to scan what privateforecasters are thinking, but we've had difficulty trying to relateour forecast to others unless we have the detail of the monetarypolicy [assumptions], for example. But we do receive that and do lookat it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me add one more item on the list thatI asked you to comment on and that is the fiscal policy[unintelligible]. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Jim, maybe you've answered this. I am a littlelost. On the GNP implicit price deflator, where your projections showan increase into 1981, did you put any weight on monetary policy? Inorder words if, as we have announced, we are going to reduce graduallythe rate of money growth, do you still anticipate this upward movementin the deflator, or was that not put in your--?MR. KICHLINE. No, that plays a very important role. But wehave inflation coming down in 1981; it's not going up.MR. ROOS. But you show it going up [initially]; it's sort ofa roller coaster.-26-2/4-5/80MR. KICHLINE. Well, as I say, in part the deflator is astatistical artifact when import prices are rising very rapidly. I dobelieve that there's little that can be done to change the course ofprice developments within the next three or four months. In fact,already just about half of the first quarter is over, so in our viewwe're locked into a very adverse price performance in the first halfof this year.MR. ROOS. Do you see that prevailing through the secondquarter of 1981? In other words, you don't see any relief even thoughwe're doing what we are doing here in gradually reducing the rate of[monetary growth]?MR. KICHLINE. As I say, part of that is attributable to theperformance of import prices in influencing this calculation. It isour view that prices do improve. If you take a look at an alternativemeasure of prices, in the section that Jerry Zeisel was referring to--go back one section [in the handout] right before the yellow sheet--there is a chart that plots the gross domestic business product, whichis a fixed weight price index. There some of the problems fromshifting weights are at least taken out, and you can see that we dohave a decline beginning in the second half of this year, stretchinginto and throughout 1981.MR. ROOS. But if we hang in there, which we are determinedto do, and keep firm control over and gradually reduce the growth rateof whatever Ms we are controlling, don't all these other things fallinto line? Or do you still have to run 400 equations to see what--?MR. KICHLINE. What falls into line? I only wanted to tellyou that while we give you point forecasts, we're quite aware thatthere's a wide range of error associated with any forecast. We triedto look at past history to suggest how big that range is, and it'ssizable. We have no difficulty with your point that monetary policyover time does have an influence on the economy and on prices. Infact, the answer is: Yes, we agree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like Governor Schultz,I found this a particularly interesting presentation, but I think fora slightly different reason.MR. BLACK. You mean you're not simple-minded?MR. WILLES. Without touching that line with a 10-foot pole,I want simply to refer to the very last chart! I think the staff hasdone us a great service in presenting that because with all theconversation about whether the increase in the CPI is going to be 9.2percent or whatever, if you look at that band [depicting the range oferror], that's an incredibly large band. We talk about the CPI in thefourth quarter and it could be plus or minus some very large numbers.While it's useful to go through these exercises to see where we comeout, I think we really don't pay as much attention as we should to theenormous uncertainty that attaches to these forecasts. We've had somepeople doing some work at our place--and I don't understand thetechnical details so I won't take you through it--but let me just giveyou an example of the kinds of problems one runs into in making-27-2/4-5/80quantitative forecasts. If you think of watching a wagon on a TVscreen or a movie screen, you'll notice that the wagon is goingforward and it looks like the wheels are going backwards. The reasonfor that, of course, is that as the wheel goes forward in the firstframe the spoke is up in the center and then it goes forward and it'sthe second frame before it gets all the way back up to the top againand so on around. So, even though the wheel is moving forward, whenyou take pictures, it looks as if it's moving backwards.MR. PARTEE. It depends on the speed of the projector.MR. WILLES. You're exactly right. It depends on the speedof the projector and the speed with which the wheel is moving. Now,let's suppose that decisions are made in continuous time and you takeeconometric snapshots on a monthly or quarterly basis. It could be amatter of pot luck that the speed of the decisionmaking framework andthe speed of the projector are the same. If they're not, you canactually take a picture that gives you just the opposite view ofwhat's going on. We happen to think that in many cases that's exactlywhat happens. We have all these nice pictures that are actuallygiving us pictures exactly the opposite, in terms of policyimplications, of what is going on in the "real world" and how it'sfunctioning. I simply say that to indicate that I think we need to beparticularly [cautious] at this time, given not only the uncertaintiesin the world but the uncertainties about the tools that we're workingwith, about what we think we can even say in terms of the time pathfor the economy over the next eight quarters.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have expressed yourself eloquently onthe wide band of uncertainty. Would you care to express a view on thecentral tendency as you see it? Or are you so uncertain that you haveno view on this policy?MR. WILLES. If you press me to the wall, I will. I don'tthink I can say anything with any credibility, but I'll give younumbers anyway. And if the numbers turn out to be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it is not unimportant thatyou say there's a great degree of uncertainty and I would like to getthat--MR. WILLES. With that great big long caveat that I just gaveyou, the numbers that we have in terms of real GNP for 1980 are morepositive than the staff's. We think on balance that there's going tobe some very modest positive real growth during 1980 and we tie thatin with what we see happening with fiscal policy and slightly strongerbusiness investment. I don't quarrel at all with the staff's deflatornumber or their CPI number. If anything, though, given what I justsaid about defense spending and so on, those numbers might turn out tobe low rather than high. I also don't quarrel with their unemploymentnumbers.MR. PARTEE. Even though you have positive output growth, youwould agree with that unemployment number?MR. WILLES. Yes.-28-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have any particular feeling aboutfiscal policy?MR. WILLES. Yes, the deficit is understated.MS. TEETERS. By the staff or--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is, without a discretionary taxdecrease it is understated.MR. WILLES. But by how much, I--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you wish to say whether you think a taxcut is a good idea or not?MR. WILLES. I think a tax cut would be a disaster.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, that's a clear view! Mr. Timlen.MR. TIMLEN. The one number I can read accurately from thiswhole list of numbers is our projection of unemployment in the fourthquarter of 1980, which is 7.3 percent. In New York we're probablygiving more weight to defense spending than the Board staff is giving,not only in terms of defense spending by the Federal government butcapital expenditures by the private sector in anticipation ofgovernment orders. In terms of real GNP, then, our picture for theyear, quarter by quarter, differs slightly in the timing and the depthof the possible recession. Our four quarters run a positive 1 percentfor the first quarter, a positive 0.5 percent in the second quarter,then two negative numbers in the third and fourth quarters of minus 1and minus 2 percent. On a full year average basis that comes out to[minus] 0.6 percent. Our deflator quarter by quarter ranges between8.5 and 8.9 percent, so for the year we have 8.5 to 9 percentinflation [as measured] by the deflator. Our CPI is somewhere around10-1/2 to 11 percent. One thing that I would throw out that you havenot asked for is that our people in New York think the saving ratewill continue to be quite low for the entire year of 1980; to wit,they have it averaging out at 2.9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming on the saving rate?MR. KICHLINE. It drifts up and for the year 1980 averages4-1/2 percent.MR. TIMLEN. Yes, there's a big difference between the Boardstaff forecast and ours on the saving rate. On the federal fiscalsituation, for fiscal 1980 we are looking at a deficit close to $45billion; I'd say $40 to $45 billion. And for fiscal 1981, dependingupon a tax cut, we have $40 billion on the low side without a tax cutand $60 billion on the high side with a tax cut. I don't really havea good judgment on whether there will be a tax cut on not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you think there should be one?MR. TIMLEN. Do I think there should be one? For a change, Iwould agree with Mark Willes. But some of the numbers are hard for meto estimate in terms of the full impact of defense spending, whetherout of the government or the private sector. In terms of the-29-2/4-5/80consumer, I just don't know how to read currently the effect of themild winter. I would have been rather concerned about the cost ofheating but I know our Buffalo branch is running considerably belowbudget in terms of heating that building. What the experience is inprivate homes, I just don't know. So the consumer may have a littleuptick there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take it that you think there's a fairamount of uncertainty.MR. TIMLEN. I wouldn't put it in quite the same language asMark, but I am uncertain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.MR. COLDWELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, this is the last chance Iget to say this so I am going to say it. In fact this is my last FOMCmeeting.MR. MAYO. Why don't you stand up, Phil?MR. COLDWELL. No, I am not going to chance that! I agreethat there's a high degree of uncertainty, but our track record andour past performance clearly indicate that we've underestimated therate of inflation and I expect we will continue to do so. I thinkthere's going to be a rapid defense build-up, but impacting largelyupon expectations in the first part of this year. If that is thecase, we may see a moderation from what the staff was [projecting] inthe rate of decline in the first half. I think fiscal policy is goingto be easier than portrayed by the Administration's budget. Fiscalpolicy is likely to be stimulative instead of restraining and Isuspect we will probably underestimate the aggregate data that we areusing. As for the data you've requested we comment on, Mr. Chairman,I would put real GNP in a zero to plus 1/2 percent mode, the CPI atthe end of the year in the neighborhood of 14 percent, and theunemployment rate at about 7 percent. And I have already indicatedthat I think fiscal policy is going to be easier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you're not in favor of a tax cut, Itake it.MR. COLDWELL. I am certainly not in favor of a personalincome tax cut. I think there is a case to be made to improve therate of business capital stimulation in the area of improving jobexpectations, but I would question whether this is the right time todo that. There's a fundamental fact of high inflation, which we needto continue to keep our eye on; unless that is damped, thepossibilities of a rising rate of inflation are very good. I justdon't find myself in agreement with the idea of gradualism in economicpolicy. It's a lovely theory but a practical monstrosity. Creditavailability in the economy is high in my view right now. And withexpectations of high inflation, the interest rate restraint isminimal. Banker attitudes reflect no feeling of quantitativerestraint; to the contrary, they are seeing business as usual. Iadmit the majority of the bannking profession seems to say that theonly thing that would satisfy them would be a major depression. But Istill think we have not obtained control over this and I suspect thatthe recent trends in the international financial side are going to-30-2/4-5/80create some dollar problems for us for the coming year. As youstruggle through these, I wish you well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. We're going to be left withyour decision for the rest of the year! Mr. Smoot.MR. SMOOT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had very little timeto prepare for this. Dave is not well and sends his best, however, toall of you. The last time I was down here I did have time to preparea great deal and I was very confused. Now I haven't had much time toprepare very well and I am still very confused! Nevertheless, wewould be somewhat less pessimistic than the Board staff's projections.To address your questions: On the real GNP, we see it negative forthe year, but maybe in the range of 1 to 1-1/2 percent negative. Onthe CPI, we'd say up 10 to 11 percent for the year, but if I read myown charts correctly we'd be closer to 10 percent in the fourthquarter. And on unemployment, consistent with our somewhat moreoptimistic view on the economy, we would be in the range of 7 to 7-1/2percent. On the tax cut, we have considered a tax cut in the secondhalf of the year in the range of $25 to $30 billion. I would agreewith Governor Coldwell that it ought to be carefully constructed tostimulate capital formation and to look at the social security tax.Other than that, I don't find our differences with the Board staff tobe that great. There are a lot of marginal things that just add up toa somewhat more--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand you, your forecast has atax cut in it?MR. SMOOT. Yes, we would anticipate one. I would alsosubscribe to Mark's comments that differences of 1/2 or 1 percentagepoint at this time really appear to be somewhat meaningless.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The staff's forecastis a bit more pessimistic than our forecast, and that largely centerson two differences. One is the saving rate, which the Board staff'sforecast suggests will increase over the coming year while we believeit will be either flat or at least at a low level, thus givingconsumers the ability to maintain in part their standard of livingeven in view of heavy inflation. Secondly, we believe defensespending will be somewhat greater than the staff is forecasting forthe year 1980 coming into the third and fourth quarters; it may be $2to $3 billion larger in each of those quarters than the staff hasprojected, thus giving stimulus to the economy. As a result, we wouldsee the real GNP at about flat, zero to maybe one percent on thepositive side, with unemployment someplace between 7 and 7-1/2percent. The CPI in our judgment, however, is going to continue at afairly rapid rate. Our judgment is that it will still be in the 11 to12 percent range in the fourth quarter. As to the fiscal side,obviously there will be much more expansion than the staff or theAdministration are forecasting. And as to a tax cut, I would agreewith whoever said it would be a tragedy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.-31-2/4-5/80MR. PARTEE. Well, I have been concerned about defensespending as a question mark in the outlook. I must say that the chartthe staff has provided us, showing an alternative with $10 billionmore defense spending this year and $20 billion more in 1981 and in1982 on top of the 6 percent real growth that's already in there fornonpersonnel costs, strikes me as a good liberal estimate of the extradefense spending that might occur or that is possible in the shortrun. And I would point out to you that it doesn't change the numbersall that much. I believe they did this with the model, so it includesorders effects and that kind of thing--that is, effects that occurbefore the actual defense spending. So, both that and the fact thatit seems to me to look a little less [tenuous] than it was a month agomake me feel that it isn't such a big possible plus in the economy inthe immediate future as it might have been. Also, the saving rate isjust very difficult [to forecast]. New York has a continuation of avery low saving rate throughout 1980 and one could argue that therehas been a permanent shift in the saving rate. I don't think so. Ithink it's going to come back up. I agree with the staff on that.There is no evidence of a permanent move from money to goods of thekind that would be indicated by that. So, I come down to anexpectation that real GNP will fall some this year, though probablyless than the staff has [in its forecast]--maybe 1 to 2 percent. Theemployment rate I am quite sure will rise significantly because I justdon't think it is possible that services and trade will continue toadd to the employment rolls without output, without a commensuratevalue added, much longer. So a 7-1/2 percent fourth-quarterunemployment rate is probably a reasonable forecast. I'd haveinflation a little higher than the staff has--at 9 to 10 percent, say,for the deflator and 10 to 12 percent for the CPI in the year ahead.As for fiscal policy, I think there will be a tax cut but probably notuntil next year. That's not as early as the alternative staffprojection has it, which is the middle of this year. It probably willoccur in early 1981, sometime in the spring, and it will improve 1981results a little from what the staff has projected. But I would pointout to you that I think an absolutely binding assumption on therecovery of the economy is the monetary assumption which, of course,we have the ability to control. Did I get everything on this [list]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. You wouldn't particularly push for atax cut earlier.MR. PARTEE. No, I think we ought to wait. I think it willbe necessitated by a high and rising unemployment rate, and I figurethat will be obvious to everybody by early next year. So it's a nextyear venture rather than this year. When it occurs I agree with thecomments that have been made that we ought to do what we can to makeit stimulative for business investment if we have any effect. But Ido have to tell you that I think the full push will be to make it aconsumer tax cut when it occurs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, I would like to go back to the last chartagain, as Mark did. You notice those tolerance lines, the top and thebottom, are fairly narrow over the next three quarters. So it seemsto me that we're looking basically at a fairly set outlook for thenext three quarters and possibly into the fourth quarter, and I don't-32-2/4-5/80want to throw away what is one of our major advantages. The Humphrey-Hawkins Act requires us to give our outlook for this year. We have afairly good idea where we're going this year and where we're going toend up, and our views do not differ a great deal as I hear what hasbeen said around the [table]. It's plus or minus a little here orthere, and that certainly falls within the tolerance limits of whatthe staff has projected. Secondly, the Humphrey-Hawkins Act says thatin the middle of the year we are to reassess what we are doing. Tolock ourselves into a policy at this point from now until 1981 is thebiggest mistake we could ever make. We have some idea where we aregoing for the next two quarters or we can come pretty close to it. Wehave a chance to reassess it in the middle of the year. And Icertainly don't want to vote for a policy at this time that is goingto result in T-bill rates of 11.7 or 12.2 percent in 1981. I wouldn'tquarrel a great deal with what the staff has projected. I would agreewithin one percentage point on almost any figure they gave us, thoughI'd probably expect a little higher unemployment rate than they'reprojecting and a little higher inflation rate, again depending on whathappens primarily in defense. But if you look at the full employmentsurplus in the fourth quarter and the first quarter of 1981, it jumps$30 billion. And it jumps another $20 billion between the first andfourth quarters of next year. We don't have to make a decision on[1981] at this point. We have two more major decision points betweennow and the beginning of next year, and I think we should utilize themto the fullest. [We need to] consider the fact that we may settle ona 4-1/2, 5, or 5-1/2 percent rate of money growth and it's not goingto have a great deal of influence over the next nine months. However,at midyear if we have unemployment rates of 7-1/2 or 8-1/2 percent, wemust be prepared to change our policy at that point. I don't want togo down the line item by item because I don't have a great quarrelwith [the forecast], but I do urge that we not give up theflexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like first to turn to page3 of this package of charts and ask a question to the staff and thenmake a comment. On the calculation of the high employment budget youshow for 1980 and 1981, Jim: These are your calculations, I assume,rather than the official figures set forth by the Administration?MR. KICHLINE. They're our calculations but we use the sameprocedure, which has been revised.MR. BALLES. In other words, it's benchmarked at a 5.1percent unemployment rate?MR. KICHLINE. Correct.MR. BALLES. All right, thank you. My comment is this:Within the last couple of years our Research Department has done quitea bit of work [on this subject]. In fact, we circulated a paper tothe rest of you, just to share this view, giving an alternativenoninflationary full employment rate, which we estimate to besomewhere between the high 5 percent [to] low 6 percent area, maybecentered on 6 percent. That's based on a lot of detail I won't gointo, but it [involves] all the factors going into the changes in thecomposition and behavior of the labor force. I asked our staff to-33-2/4-5/80make a computation of what the high employment surplus would be if oneassumed a 6 percent unemployment rate, and it produces some radicallydifferent figures. For 1980 the high employment budget surplus, [ascalculated] officially by the Administration, is said to be $4billion. But using the 6 percent unemployment rate figure, we come upwith a deficit of $20 billion. Furthermore, off-budget financing,which as I understand it is not included in this high employmentbudget surplus calculation, would add another $17 billion. So lookingat it in this alternative way, I can see the possibility of fiscalstimulus to the tune of $37 billion even on a so-called highemployment basis, defined as 6 percent in this calendar year. Andthat, by the same reasoning, translates into a surplus of $12 billionin 1981. The reason I went through this exercise was to get adifferent view, depending on one's assumptions, of whether we havereal fiscal stimulus or fiscal restraint or how fast we are movingfrom one to the other. It nets out for this year, certainly in myview, to a pretty sizable fiscal stimulus rather than the restraintofficially forecast. And I think that has a pretty broad bearing onappropriate monetary policy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A part of the question, if I may justinterrupt, is whatever the level, how much does it change?MR. PARTEE. You have an improvement, John?MR. BALLES. Yes. In my calculation, it changes from a $37billion stimulus on the high employment basis, which adds in off-budget financing of $17 billion and assumes a 6 percentnoninflationary full employment rate in fiscal 1980, to a $12 billionsurplus in fiscal 1981. Now that is quite a movement. But it startslate this calendar year and [continues] into 1981.MR. SCHULTZ. What kind of assumption do you have on normalGNP growth? To put those figures together, you need some assumptionon normal growth too. Is 2-1/2 percent what you used? That's what Ithink the staff here is using as their assumption.MR. BALLES. I'd have to turn to Mike [Keran]. Do you have afigure readily at hand on what we assumed for normal growth of GNP? Iam not sure we assumed [something on] that.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, you have to make some assumption to comeup with the calculations.MR. BALLES. Well, it falls out of the 6 percent unemploymentassumption--a certain growth in the labor force, a certain growth inproductivity, and that kind of thing.MR. PARTEE. But you have to have a normal growth that willkeep the unemployment rate at 6 percent. I don't know what Mike used,but I am sure he has a figure.MR. BALLES. He may have a figure; I don't have it readily athand. We'll get it for you later.MR. KERAN. It would be the same, [2-1/2] percent.MR. PARTEE. 2-1/2.-34-2/4-5/80MR. BALLES. Turning to the other questions you raised, Mr.Chairman: Our staff forecast for the economy for this year is quitesimilar to the forecast of the Board's staff, showing a decline inreal GNP from the fourth quarter 1979 to the fourth quarter 1980 ofexactly the same amount, 2.1 percent. We have the CPI going up by11.1 percent from the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter. Sir?MR. SCHULTZ. That's fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter,though; that's not [the rate] in the fourth quarter.MR. BALLES. No, that's from fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter. Our figures show in the fourth quarter of this year a rateof 9.7 percent. That is our staff view; I am not that optimistic.That is where our two staffs differ: The Board's staff sees acontinued rise in the inflation rate through part of this year; ourstaff has a more optimistic assumption that we're at or near the peakright now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The [Board's] staff shows a decline in theconsumer price index for this year.MR. COLDWELL. Yes, down to 9.2 percent [in the fourthquarter].MR. BALLES. Right, but I was thinking of their trend line onthe GNP deflator, which is going up for a while. Our unemploymentrate by the fourth quarter of this year is almost the same as theirs;ours is 7.6 and they're showing 7.7 percent. The difference in ourviews is that our staff is more optimistic with respect to a fairlystrong bounceback in calendar year 1981, which I hope is right, up togrowth of 4 percent plus, whereas the Board's staff is looking for1981 real growth of only 2.6 percent. I am giving the staff views ofour Bank. My own personal instincts are that we're probably going tohave more inflation and less decline in real output than the researchstaff at our Bank expects. That's based on pure hunch or instincts asto what is going on in the way of a semi-wartime economy here. And mypessimism on the inflation rate--my view being worse than either staffis forecasting--comes among other things from what has been going onin long-term bond markets in this past month, which I find extremelydiscouraging. People are putting their money where their mouth isreally in anticipation. To me that is a very dangerous signal of arejuvenation of inflationary expectations. And it is discouragingespecially in view of our demonstrated good track record since October6th in getting a genuine, observable, real deceleration in the moneysupply, which I had assumed would impact favorably on inflationexpectations and hence on long-term bond rates. Yet despite what wehave done, we have seen a move in the long-term bond yield, which Iview as a good index of inflation expectations, back up to a new high.So I'm very concerned that we adopt a posture that is a strong signalof continued deceleration of monetary growth because that is the onlytool we have to combat these recently renewed rising inflationexpectations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not advocating a tax cut?MR. BALLES. No, sir. I support your view 100 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.-35-2/4-5/80MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the Greenbook revision resulted ina move from a V-shaped decline to a sort of saucer-shaped recession,which is probably in the right direction. Despite this, I think theunderlying foundations of the economy are quite weak. What strengthwe have had recently has come mainly from efforts on the part ofhouseholds and some others to beat inflation. Now, I am aware of theargument that the rising wealth of households stemming from suchthings as appreciation of the value of housing may produce a wealtheffect that will cause them to hold their expenditures at higherlevels. But I think that is really a pretty weak reed on which tohang the forecast. Sooner or later, this artificial prop to spendingthat stems from inflation is going to fall apart, and an inflationaryeconomy is not a healthy one. And if it does fall apart, then at thattime I would expect, if inflation is worse, that we would have agreater decline because of the attrition of real income and the highinterest rates that would discourage business investment. Also, Ithink we would have a clamor for wage and price controls. If, on theother hand, inflation is showing signs of abatement, then the effectsof this decline are going to be diminished. So I think Chuck'sobservation a while ago that a lot depends on what we do is a verysignificant point. That will affect the outcome to a great degree.And I think we're going to have a very difficult job in the monthsahead because, like John Balles, I feel we're going to have morestimulus from the fiscal side than most people seem to be assuming.But I do think we are dead serious about our stated intention to bringdown the rate of growth in the aggregates, and I think we'll standfirm. But since I won't be voting next year, I have a little lessconfidence in that than I otherwise would have.MR. MAYO. You want to say that again?MR. BLACK. To get down to the figures, I think the drop inGNP might be nearer 3 percent than the 2 percent the staff hasprojected. Since I expect us to do well in the policy area, I wouldput the fourth-quarter rate in the consumer price index a bit lower,at 9 percent. I would guess their unemployment rate is not very faroff; my guess would tend toward 8 percent. As I indicated, I thinkthe deficit is understated--the stimulative effects are understated--and I certainly would not favor a tax cut at this juncture.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel.MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, our views are not significantlydifferent from those enunciated by the staff. To put numbers to them:For real GNP, we're looking at a minus 2 percent; for the unemploymentrate, we're in the neighborhood of 8 percent; and for the CPI, 11percent. We do feel, though, that the fiscal [package] may beconsiderably easier than the staff is now reflecting. We certainlywould not support a tax cut unless it were directed toward capitalinvestment. We wonder if defense spending may not be somewhat larger,particularly in the private sector anticipating [orders]. Finally,Mr. Chairman, we are growing somewhat concerned--and our concern wasnot lessened any by Mr. Sternlight's comments yesterday afternoon--that the market increasingly is believing that we are not slowingmoney growth to the extent it expected from our October decision.[Given] that and our track record in this upcoming period of the yearwhen with tax refunds we've been somewhat less than successful inanticipating what money growth would be--if indeed we miss that as-36-2/4-5/80much this year and we do have excessive money growth--I have tobelieve that inflationary expectations are going to be escalatingagain and may contribute more trouble than we need. So, I hope thatwe will be demonstrating pretty forcefully that we expect to restrain[money] growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said 11 percent on consumer prices.Is that year over year or during the fourth quarter?MR. KIMBREL. Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have a fourth-quarter figureitself, just for comparability purposes?MR. KIMBREL. I guess 9 or 9-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, a question [to the staff] first.Insofar as there may be a windfall profits tax, are you assuming thatthe revenues raised thereby will be placed back into the economy or isthat pretty much outside the projections here?MR. KICHLINE. No, it's included in the projections. Thewindfall profits tax--technically I think the words associated with itare "energy trust fund," but that's a misnomer if one believes thatthe revenues are segregated--is included in the budget figures. For1980 we have something like a net addition of nearly $5 billion torevenues. It's something like $7-1/4 to $7-1/2 billion in revenuesand $2-1/2 billion in expenditures, so it's around $5 billion netreceipts. And for 1981 it's around $10 billion net receipts. So,that is included in these figures.MR. BAUGHMAN. Thank you. I don't have a view significantlydifferent from the staff. I think the degree of uncertainty in theoutlook is not unusual at this point in time; it's probably less nowthan it was a couple of months ago. It seems to me that the cork isout of the defense expenditure bottle now and that that will probablygo along about as fast as orders can be placed and procurement can bestepped up. That leads me to think that insofar as we may deviatefrom the staff projection it is likely to be in the direction of astronger economy, less progress on the inflation front, and probably alittle less build-up in unemployment. But for our purposes here, I amperfectly satisfied to accept the staff projections. If I were toshade away from them, it would be in the direction I have indicated.In addition to the defense spending, I have a view similar to the NewYork Bank's view that consumers are still in the process of adjustingto inflation and that the saving rate is likely to stay very low untilthey do see some improvement on the inflation side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I base my projections almost entirely on a rate ofbasic money growth, and the figures I will suggest are predicated on arate of growth of M-1A and M-1B of roughly 5 percent. If there is a 5percent basic money growth rate, I would see real GNP declining bymaybe 1 percentage point fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter. I wouldsee the GNP deflator, which is what we look at really, at about a 10-37-2/4-5/80percent rate during the fourth quarter of next year, or maybe 9-1/2percent--obviously, these percentages can vary by 1/2 point--and Iwould see an unemployment rate of roughly 7 percent. However, I feelvery strongly that what we do will have a very direct bearing on theoutcome of these figures, and if we were to set growth ranges for M-1Aand M-1B at 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and if growth came in at close to3-1/2 percent, that would have a significant weakening effect on thesethree figures that I suggested, as we see it. In other words, GNPwould be significantly lower and unemployment significantly higher.And if growth came in close to the top end of that band, at let's say6-1/2 percent, I think we'd see a much more serious acceleration inthe deflator, a significantly stronger GNP result, and a significantlylower unemployment rate. What I am driving at is that I think we havethe key to this in our hands and that all three of these factors willdepend on what we decide to do and how carefully and with whatdetermination we stick with whatever we decide to do. I wouldpersonally be very much opposed to a tax cut. I would perhaps be muchmore tolerant of a tax cut that was an across-the-board, consumer-directed tax cut if later in the year or next year the governmentdecided to give some tax relief directed to stimulating capitalformation. I think that might be desirable but I do not favor a taxcut, not that it makes much difference in that regard what I think.But in what we do, we can make a big difference on the money growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. I think it's great that we get these scenarios outon the table. My only concern is that my camera may be in sync but itmay be out of focus. So the picture that comes out may be quitedistorted. But let's take several of these assumptions that we'vepassed over. First, the level of interest rates. I must confess thatwhen we talk about double digit interest rates, I get nervous. But Iremember that last year I got lectured by any number of people that ifwe passed the 10 percent rate, that was going to cut things off; and Iremember after October 6th how things just dried up completely. But Ithink we forget that it's real interest rates that people probablytake into consideration. And I have been amazed at the amount ofmoney coming out of the woodwork in the last two weeks of January andthe number of deals that are being formulated with respect toapartment houses, hotels, commercial buildings, and so forth. Theamount of money that is being committed in this area has stepped uptremendously after this hiatus. I think we see it in the bond market,John, in terms of their attitudes. Some of the current financing Ithink is being done to repay short-term debt. There's an awful lot oftalk going on with respect to financing, but that's not going to comeinto the investment picture until the last half of this year. Andthat being laced on top of defense expenditures, should they comealong, makes a little different scenario for this year's[performance].One other thing: In terms of your employment figures, haveyou put anything in there for a possible draft or increased militaryemployment?MR. KICHLINE. No, we have not.-38-2/4-5/80MR. WINN. If you do this, you get a different scenario.Again, this doesn't occur over night but it is another factor thatseems to me is down the road.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was "this"?MR. WINN. If you put a draft in the picture, then it changesthese employment figures.MR. PARTEE. Probably in 1981.MR. WINN. It's probably down the road; I don't say it isimmediate. But, again, as one [looks at] various scenarios with somedifferent inputs, there are different results, obviously. Whilehousing is down, I too am amazed at the amount of money that is evenshowing up for housing at the moment. So, as I look at the level ofrates, I go back to looking at availability; and I get nervous as towhat [level of] interest rates it will take to have a damping effecton some of these [sectors].In my scenario, I come out with a dip in the first half ofthis year because I think it's already under way. But I can see somerevival in the second half, so that I get a 1 percent decline for theyear but it's quite a different shape. The price [situation] reallyscares me. Go back and look at 1973 and 1974; maybe we're going tomultiply that distortion created by prices. And if the worldsituation changes, some of the pressure for relief could come nextyear--I think it's already under way for this year--and carry throughfor a while. But we may be [unintelligible] upswing continuingthrough part of 1981 and then real price distortion problems hittingus by the end of the year. I see price problems in the 15 percent[CPI] rate; that is going to give rise to increased wage demands andre-opening of contracts and all kinds of pressures and we don't knowhow that is going to factor through to the balance of the year. Andthat's not in your scenarios, in terms of the wage assumptions thatyou put in. One gets different price results with some of thesedifferent assumptions. So I am even more concerned about inflationdevelopments and what they mean not only for 1980 but perhaps for 1981and thereafter. And that has implications for the international sideand a whole host of things, which change the [scenario]. I think thepressure for a tax cut is going to come both with the election problemand the first half year results. That will further complicate theproblem and I would be opposed to it. This would be in my scenario,Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you have an unemployment rate or aprice [forecast]?MR. WINN. I get an [average] unemployment rate from thefourth quarter to the fourth quarter of maybe 7 percent, but I thinkit will probably go higher before it comes down unless we get a draftand some other things that would change my numbers. I don't know whatis going to happen, but you get a different picture if you change yourassumptions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're in the high uncertainty group?MR. WINN. Very much so.-39-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, we ought to be recorded asgenerally supporting the Board staff's projection and its numbers.However, unlike most of the others, if the forecast is in error, Ithink it will be because the recession could be substantially moresevere than they are projecting. We had a miss in our forecast in thelast half of 1979 because consumer behavior was much stronger than wewere forecasting on the basis of income growth and so on. This hasled New York and Kansas City and perhaps some of the rest of you tolook upon a 3 percent saving rate as a norm for the future. I thinkit is also possible that when the unemployment rate starts rising theconsumer will turn defensive and we will see the saving rate risehigher than the Board staff has projected and a bigger recession willresult. Also, the housing sector could be weaker than the staff hasprojected. We don't really yet have a good fix on how the currenthousing rate structure is impacting demand. But the Board staff hasthe weakest quarter at 1.4 million starts. It seems to me that wecould see at least one quarter substantially below that. So, I thinkwe have a risk of a much sharper recession in 1980 than the Boardstaff is projecting. It's a risk, but I can't attach theprobabilities to it.As far as defense spending is concerned, we've talked to themajor defense contractors in the Boston area like Raytheon and others,and they say that for the kind of hardware the Defense Department istalking about most of the money will be going into long lead timeitems. And while we may get a big effect on expectations in 1980,they don't see a big effect on employment until 1981, even if theprogram were to get geared up fairly soon. So, it seems to me that wecould see a different pattern: a very sharp recession followed by atax cut, an increase in the defense budget, and a big jump in 1981.That's another hypothesis that hasn't been stated around this table.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll get every hypothesis on the table!Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that the odds have clearly movedin the direction of less recession and more inflation than they weresome time ago. I think the degree of uncertainty is very high becausethe saving rate is abnormal and, therefore, potentially unstable. Andif we move to higher rates of inflation, people could react veryunpredictably. But the thing that most impresses me about thebehavior of people is that in the last surge of inflation, in 1974,the saving rate went up--and it did so not only in this country butall over the world--while this time people have reacted differently.They pulled the saving rate down. That seems to be a message. Theyseem to be saying: "We're no longer so scared of losing our job thatwe're stopping our spending. We're now out to beat the game." Andthat suggests to me that we may be in a new ball game unless the moveto higher inflation rates throws a new scare into people.Well, I had anticipated a somewhat more severe recession thanthe staff, but recent events have taken me off that. I could see asmall dip in 1980 of maybe 1 percent, but [my forecast has] a verywide variance. I see inflation now at very high rates, with thedeflator at 12 percent for the year, that is year-to-year. And theCPI could be close to 15 percent. These [increases mean that] real-40-2/4-5/80interest rates are no longer positive. I know that some of us don'tbelieve that real interest rates mean very much. But we're only 19people and there are 220 million out there who believe differently orat least act as if they believe differently. So I share what PhilColdwell said on that score. I don't see quantitative monetaryrestraint being in effect--that is, availability restraint. And Idon't think that these interest rates, particularly when one considersthem after taxes, really bite. So we have to consider now that we arein a group of high inflation countries with Italy and the UnitedKingdom. Then comes a tier of moderate inflation countries and thencome the low inflation countries. We've moved very far. That is whyI don't really expect a tax cut this year. I think these forces willgive people pause unless there is a significant deterioration in theclimate. Eventually, I think there will be a tax cut simply becausewe are getting more fiscal drag than we can accommodate over time. Icertainly would oppose a tax cut, and I would lean toward firmmonetary restraint. I don't know [how] one can have that confidencein the nominal aggregates that M-1A and M-1B convey. All we know isthat these [measures] are extremely uncertain. I don't think the newdefinitions capture all that's going on, especially in the Euromarket.We capture only a small part of that. So I believe money is reallyexpanding faster than we think, and I would want to take that intoaccount in thinking that we can have 15 percent inflation. Onunemployment, I have no difference with the staff; 7-1/2 percent bythe end of 1980 seems a possibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. First, to go back to the charts for just a minute:I greeted with some astonishment the chart on unit [labor] costindicators where output per hour, having deteriorated badly from thebeginning of 1976 to the present or the last available quarter,suddenly takes a new spurt of enthusiasm and becomes positive. Andyour unit labor cost, of course, shows just the opposite trend. Iwould like to believe this, but I am not sure what the staff has basedit on.MR. ZEISEL. Basically it is associated with our assumptionsor conclusions about more rational behavior by employers in regard totheir staffing. The deterioration in productivity is the other sideof the coin of this tremendous increase in employment relative to thelack of growth in output. We're anticipating that the pressures ofrising costs and the evident lack of strength in markets over the nextcouple of quarters will persuade employers that they are overstaffedand that, therefore, they will be laying off employees and trying tobring their costs better into line, which will show up in a somewhatimproved productivity performance. But as you will note, we havenegative productivity throughout 1980. It just isn't as bad as it wasin 1979.MR. MAYO. In effect, you're suggesting that whatever laborhoarding has taken place to date really isn't going to continue. Andthat's one of the reasons your unemployment rate is moving up as muchas it is. Is that correct?MR. ZEISEL. That is true, yes.-41-2/4-5/80MR. MAYO. My other question on the charts relates to defensespending. Frank stole my headline on that by his mention of long leadtimes on defense contracts. I find the assumptions both in the budgetand in your table on real defense spending unreal. I don't think itis possible unless there is an awful lot of shelf items involved--morethan I can imagine--to add 6 percent to real defense spending in theremaining six months of the fiscal year. And that's all there is leftin this fiscal year. We have a history over the last 30 or 40 yearsof projecting increases in defense spending prematurely, and I thinkthis is happening again in the budget figures and in the staffforecast. Instead of being up 7 percent and up 8 percent or whateveris shown on this chart, I would say it's more likely to be up 2percent and up 12 percent. So, that would affect the attitude towardthese figures in 1980. On the other hand, I would support the totalthat you have in your staff forecast because I think it's more likelyto burst out on the nondefense side in light of other factors betweennow and the beginning of the new fiscal year. Now, that doesn't meanthere isn't an attitudinal and expectational response. But I think itstems mostly from the evaluation of the inflation and the real GNPoutlook a year ahead, rather than manifesting itself in defensespending in the fiscal year of 1980.Having said that, I won't repeat Mark's caveats, but in termsof point estimates I really don't have much quarrel with the staffforecast on real GNP. As for the probabilities, I would say theprobability is that there will be less growth--in other words a biggerdecline, net, than the [minus] two percent the staff has--maybe a[minus] 3 percent for the year. I am not quite as pessimistic asHenry, but I will take shelter under his umbrella on the price index.I don't think there is more than one chance in ten that we can getdown to 10 percent on either the CPI or the fixed weighted deflator bythe fourth quarter of this year. The chances are very good--I hate touse the word "good" that way--that it will still be above 10 percent.On unemployment, despite my question on the labor hoarding problem,the chances are unfortunately also very good that unemployment will beabove 8 percent because the inflation rate is so sticky and so builtinto consumer expectations that I think this is the way it's going tocrank out. No tax cut, please.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, what I wanted to say was saidby Frank Morris. I have no reason to argue with the staff forecastwith respect to GNP, the unemployment rate, and the CPI. Given whatwe know today, these projections seem to me to be the most probableoutcome. But, I suppose like everybody else, I do have some worries;and one of them is the cumulative effect of the erosion of disposableincome on consumer expenditures. Consumers may well be prepared tospend less than has been projected in the forecast. And, of course,if that happens, there will be further consequences for the economy.Now, this may well be offset by the buildup in defense expenditurestoward the end of the year. So there is some uncertainty. But I doworry that the possible shortfall in consumer expenditures may wellmake the recession more severe than is projected. I also worry aboutthe cumulative effects of a restrictive monetary policy. If we aresuccessful in damping inflationary expectations, the reaction may wellbe stronger than we now see, and this may also operate to make therecession more severe. But these are just vague worries; I have no-42-2/4-5/80data to support them. And for the purpose of making suggestions as tomonetary policy, I am prepared to accept the staff's forecast. As fora tax cut, I would be opposed to a tax cut at the present time.However, depending on how things emerge in the future, a cancellationof the anticipated social security [tax increase] package could wellbe an appropriate measure. But that judgment would await futuredevelopments.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, as everybody around here is aware, I havehad a high degree of uncertainty about what was going to happen. Ihave a little less right now, so far as my feelings about the nearterm are concerned. I see three areas of weakness. First, I thinkthe economy is a little weaker than the numbers will show in Januarybecause the weather in January was so remarkably good all over, and Ithink that had a considerable effect. I am seeing some areas ofrestraint that are secondary kinds of reactions to the October 6th[action]. In the area of consumer credit, more and more banks arecutting back on the availability of consumer credit and are increasingthe price and other factors. We're also seeing that with [creditextended by] retail establishments; Sears and Penneys and others haverecently made those kinds of announcements. So, I think we are seeingsome restraint that hasn't been there before and the pressure isincreasing in that area. I do not think that we have seen the low inhousing. I agree with Frank Morris that it's going to go lower; itcould go considerably lower. We saw that chart on the commitmentrate, and my understanding is that the situation may be even worsethan that chart looks. And that's bound to begin to spill over intohousing durables pretty quickly. It hasn't done that much yet. Asfar as autos are concerned, I don't see anything that is going tobring them back very fast. Things may have to get worse in that area,partly as a result of the [tighter] consumer credit and partly becausegasoline prices are going to continue to go up. We see that there ismore conservation than we really thought. People are more concernedabout [gasoline prices], and I think it's going to have a big effecton their purchases of automobiles. So, I don't look for any strengththere in the near term.On the other hand, longer term I see some areas of strengththat may be stronger than the staff assumptions. I disagree with BobMayo on the defense side. The reason I do is that we're looking atall of the news reports that say this involves sophisticated weaponsand there's a very long lead time. We are not looking at theoperations and maintenance side. My understanding is--I have justseen some recent figures--that the Pentagon is estimating that forammunition alone they need more than $20 billion. Now, ammunition issomething that can be produced pretty quickly. So I think we may seesome faster impact on the defense side. The other area is the taxside. It is an election year. I do not favor a tax cut this year; Iwould, I think, next year. But we may get it this year. If you lookat the staff's chart "fiscal alternative-tax cut" and see what apolitician would see--that with a cut in payroll taxes he can have thebest of both worlds, better growth in GNP and lower inflation, whichis what that chart shows--that's very attractive to a politician. AndI just think that we may get enough weakness in this first half tomake a tax cut much more likely this summer. So, my figures are alittle stronger than the staff's: GNP down 1 to 2 percent;-43-2/4-5/80unemployment 7 to 7-1/2 percent; and the CPI in the fourth quarter alittle worse than the staff's, at 10 to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have missed one personal objectiveof speeding up the coffee hour appreciably. But since we're short of11 a.m., let me make a couple of observations. I do have the feelingin listening to some of the different economic forecasts and commentsthat our staff, which is sometimes accused of being Keynesian, feelsmore constrained by the money supply assumptions than more monetarist-oriented people. And that accounts for some of the differences inview. Assuming that we're all intelligent people around the table,[given the] differences in outlook that have been recited, I don't seehow anyone can come to any opinion other than that there is a greatdeal of uncertainty in this forecasting business.In terms of what we have accomplished or have notaccomplished in monetary policy in recent months, particularly asreflected in expectations as best one can judge them, we have toconclude that we've been [set] back very substantially and havesuffered a grievous blow from everything that has been going oninternationally--whether you're talking about oil prices, or Iran, orAfghanistan and concern about defense spending. There's nothing muchwe can do about that, but I think in some sense we're back to squareone or worse in terms of the public's concern about inflation. So Itend to agree with those who see a risk of an inflationary breakout,in modified terms, on the up side as a real danger. I also agree withEmmett Rice and a couple of others who said that we could get a longerreaction in the economy on the down side if that happened. I don'tknow what we can do about that. We can't deal with both situations atthe same time. In fact, I don't think we can deal with the risk of adownturn and ignore the inflationary side, because they're part of thesame parcel in some sense.I feel rather strongly that it would be a great mistake toput much money on any particular forecast at this point. I come backto what Mark Willes said at the beginning, and I think the saving ratequestion is a perfect illustration. I can hear persuasive argumentsaround this table as to why it is going to go up and I can hearpersuasive arguments as to why it is going to stay down; and I don'tknow of any criteria by which I can choose between those two choicesat the moment. In a direct statistical sense that will be the mostimportant influence on the economic outlook in the near term. Thereare a couple of other things that might be mentioned that haven't beentouched upon. We have some uncertainty about tax refunds in the nearterm, with some expectation that they may be very high relative topast experience--I am talking about [the time period] between now andApril or beyond--and what that will do to the near-term timing ofconsumer spending. What it will do to the near-term timing of thekind of forecast the staff has I think is an unknown. If one assumessome lag in defense spending but also assumes that the option of highdefense spending is going to come along [later], we could get apattern of big refunds for a while, in a sense artificially holdingthings up, followed by a defense impetus coming late in the year andtaking over after the refunds subside. It only adds to my feeling ofcaution about any forecast.So far as the bond market and the banking system and theavailability of credit are concerned, I'd just make two observations.-44-2/4-5/80I think the bond market people, who from the way they are behavingapparently are quite discouraged about the inflationary outlook, haveconcluded that money is freely available. I see one side of it. Butalso, in talking to some bankers, I think there is something to whatFred Schultz just said about a cumulative impact of restriction.That's beginning to be felt by some bankers, who have talked to me,anyway, not only in consumer lending but in mortgage lending and insmall business lending and other types of lending. I think it is truethat the last ones to feel that are probably the big companies thathave access to the bond market and to the banks, too. I don't thinkthe picture is all one way. There has been great confusion about--Iguess it was John Balles who said it--whether the money supply isgenuinely [or only] statistically under control. I think it isstatistically under control. I am not sure the market thinks it isgenuinely under control. And it comes down in part to some confusionover our own operations. I meant to mention earlier--and I don't knowwhether the presidents have seen it--that we put out an elaboratetechnical explanation of what we're doing, which Mr. Axilrod authored.It has gotten no attention in the press thus far, but it was anattempt in considerable part to meet the questions that have beenarising about why reserves are going up 10 percent or 12 percent or 8percent, depending upon which number you're looking at, while themoney supply is going up 3 or 4 percent. I don't know whether we willconvince anybody as that seeps into consciousness. But there has beengreat confusion engendered by the differences in growth rates amongall these measures, including right now the various reserve measuresgoing off in widely different directions. I will leave you with that.Let's have the coffee break and when we return get back onthese long-term and short-term targets.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can start. Let me make acouple of preliminary remarks and just devote our attention to thelong-term ranges at this point. One preliminary remark is that,whatever we do, I am afraid that we inevitably are going to have quitea lot of confusion with the changes in definitions [of the monetaryaggregates] coming at the same time as [the setting of our] targets.We are going to have a press briefing, not to give the targets, but toexplain the changes in definitions and the changes in patterns. Wehave had to add to all our other complications the usual annualrevision in seasonal patterns. We can now go forward and talk aboutthe new numbers but we are talking about them against the backgroundof an increase of almost 5 percent in January, if we can switch ourminds now from 1-3/4 percent or whatever was projected before on thebasis of the old numbers. The new M-1A and M-1B are growing atsomething like 4-3/4 percent in January, as I recall, which is prettymuch on the target that we set for ourselves by the grace of arevision in seasonal adjustments. If policy fails, we can alwaysrevise the seasonal adjustment factors for a while! [Laughter]MR. SCHULTZ. Well, we may have to consider it; it may bemore important than lagged reserve accounting!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do think this is going to be troublesometo explain, but we inevitably have to do it. Another complication,which we don't have to face right now, but it is inherent in this-45-2/4-5/80situation, is that basically the reason we have both M-1A and M-1B isto allow for growth in NOW accounts, and that [dichotomy] is atransitional device. The staff's judgment is that growth in M-1A andM-1B will not be any different this year if the law legalizing NOWaccounts doesn't pass. But the high probability is that that law willpass, presumably sometime during the spring, and that we will have tore-estimate M-1A and M-1B to allow for that; I presume we would wantto make a technical adjustment in the targets. I don't think we haveto worry about that now--maybe we can wait until midyear for ourregular revision anyway--but I just warn you that sometime during thespring, I suspect, if the law does pass, we think there will be asignificant difference between M-1A and M-1B and that some suitablechanges will have to made, if nothing else, consistent with what wedecide today.On the substance of the matter, if it is true that we face awide disparity of views in what the outlook might bring and a highdegree of uncertainty, I suspect we are on an approach--whatever othermerits or demerits there may be--that will provide us with some fail-safe protection. [By that I mean] that if the economy really goesdown hill, almost any figure within the range of what we have beentalking about should produce an easing in the outward externalities ofpolicy, but if the fears of a stronger economy and an inflationarysurge appear, the opposite ought to happen. And I presume that in avery crude way, anyway, either of those results would be appropriate.When we discussed this the last time, there was a consensus--and maybefor a variety of reasons it was not quite unanimous--or a stronglypredominant view to maintain a 3 percentage point range, and all thesealternatives are couched that way. The ranges in the Bluebook fullyencompass all that people were talking about last time, I think. Thedifferences in the ranges are not very wide, as you know, and nobodyis bound by what he or she said last time. To orient you a bit: Itwas not true for everybody but the predominance of views fell betweenthe alternative II and alternative III choices shown here; and therewas actually some plurality if not a majority for alternative III.But people were talking in a preliminary way and rather loosely. Myown feeling is that we probably [should] end up in that area, and Idon't have enormous feelings that a difference of 1/2 percentage pointis of great significance. When we are in that area, the strength ofmy views is not pronounced among [those alternatives]. But judgingfrom the discussion last time, we are predominantly in that area. Sowith that introduction, who would like to be more precise in statingtheir views about where we should be for the annual range in 1980?Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, my feeling hasn't changed a lotsince our last meeting. It is true that the economic outlook haschanged somewhat from what most of us expected. In particular, thegovernment's demand on resources appears likely to be much greaterthan we earlier thought. But far from providing the reason forrelaxing or delaying this long-run task of ours of lowering the rateof growth in the aggregates, the inflationary dangers posed by thisfiscal stimulus suggest to me that the System needs to stick all themore firmly to the goal that it has often stated in the past. Themidpoints of alternative II look good to me. I was one of those whopreferred the narrower ranges last time. I would much prefer a 1percentage point range for M-1A and M-1B and a 2-point range for theother aggregates, M2 and M3, because of their interest volatility.-46-2/4-5/80Now, one can certainly argue that we need more flexibility since wemay be moving into a recession and we may be moving into moreinflation. I recognize the validity of that argument, but it seems tome that the narrower range would do a lot to enhance our credibility.Therefore, it would enhance a great deal the beneficial expectationaleffects that I think we'll get if we do in fact announce lower targetsthan what we have achieved in the past. I would be rather unhappy ifM-1A and M-1B, which are the two aggregates I consider most important,came out at the top of their alternative II ranges. So, my figureswould translate to 4-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent for M-1A, with a midpoint of5 percent, the same as in alternative II. My other ranges would be:M-lB, 5 to 6, with a midpoint of 5-1/2; M2, 6-1/2 to 8-1/2 with amidpoint of 7-1/2; M3, 7 to 9 with a midpoint of 8; and bank credit,6-1/2 to 8-1/2 with a midpoint of 7-1/2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a word. You reminded meabout M2, M3, and bank credit. First of all, I'd just note that ifpeople feel strongly about the weight to be put on those numbers, theyought to say so. Secondly, in the normal course of events, given theway we are operating they may get a little less weight than they havein the past because we won't have those figures as up to date. So faras I am concerned, I take on faith the staff analyses of theconsistency of the particular ranges they put down for those numbersas compared to Ml. I don't know of any strong reason why they shouldbe different from what the staff put down, but I have a littleresidual suspicion that those are indeed more volatile numbers thanthe M1 numbers because quite a lot does depend upon the evolution ofinterest rates, and I don't know in which direction they will go.MR. BLACK. Well, I have said most of what I felt along thatline. I would emphasize M-1B because it catches the transactionbalances better; M-1A has lost a lot of the transaction balances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, Mr. Chairman, last time I indicated somepreliminary specifications that would have been consistent withalternative II. I want to argue this morning for alternative I.That's a difficult thing to do and I have always found myselfunsuccessful in such arguments in the past. But let me try it oncemore. The staff projection for nominal GNP, fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter, is for a 7 percent increase. The direction of thinking as wewent around the table was to convert that to a somewhat higher nominalGNP increase because almost everyone thought inflation would be a bithigher than the staff has projected, and quite a few people thoughtthat the decline might be a bit shallower than the staff hasprojected. So I would say that the Committee view, as opposed to thestaff view, is that nominal GNP will increase at least 8 percent. AndI believe the Administration, Jim, has a 9 percent increase in nominalGNP fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter. In drawing these long-termranges, the relationship between money growth and the nominal GNP isof central importance because it really indicates the amount oftension there's likely to be in markets as the year goes on. And even7 percent [for nominal GNP growth] with a 5 percent midpoint on M-1Aand 5-1/2 percent on M-1B, which is alternative II, does imply anincrease in velocity of a couple of points. If, in fact, we thinknominal GNP [growth] is going to be a little higher than that--let'ssay 8 percent instead of 7 percent--it seems to me that as a matter of-47-2/4-5/80practicality and credibility in achieving the targets we set, we oughtto recognize that a bit in the specifications we pick. Going fromalternative II, which had been my former choice, to alternative I adds1/2 point to the midpoint. It makes the midpoint for M-1A 5-1/2percent and that for M-1B 6 percent, compared with, say, an 8 percentnominal GNP, and I think it does suggest a very considerable tensionon markets throughout the year. And it's [a target] that we might beable to achieve.I would point out one more thing: Every private forecastthat I have looked at, and I just reviewed them yesterday, suggests afederal funds rate at the end of this year of 10 percent or below.The only exception might be Salomon Brothers, but they don't specifythe funds rate in their projection. We are suggesting somethingaround 13 percent. The difference, I think, is in the impliedincrease in money in the private projections, which is stronger thanwe have. Now, if we go through a recession and hold the interest rateup throughout the recession--hold it pretty close to where it is now--start a recovery, say, a year hence or thereabouts with a rising trendof rates and high unemployment, we will have done really quite a lotto restrain the economy [through] monetary policy compared with anypast cycle that I can recall. And I think that also argues for beingjust a bit more liberal so that we'll have something we can achieve.I understand fully what Bob says about narrowing the ranges, and I doagree that there is quite a difference between, say, 4 percent and 7percent in M-1A, [which are the limits] in alternative I. But in theinterest of again being able to achieve growth this year within theranges we specify, which we managed to do for the first time in ourhistory in 1979, I think we need to hold the width of 3 points that wehave had but try to [achieve] the midpoint of the range. So, I wouldcome out with alternative I for the reasons that I have explained, andI would stay with the 3-point range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I agree with those who have argued, startingwith Governor Teeters and others, that in view of all the economicuncertainty, we do need a lot of flexibility as the year unfolds. Andfor reasons that Chuck has just reviewed, I would support the idea ofhaving a 3-point range. As I often do when we get to this time of theyear, I like to speak to the two faces of the ranges that we arediscussing here. The one face is the public reaction or theannouncement effects, for what they are worth. They may not be wortha lot, but I can't believe they have no effects at all. I admit, asTed Truman pointed out to us yesterday, that the public pays moreattention to what we do than to what we say we are going to do. Butreverting to my earlier deep concern about an apparent re-escalationof inflationary expectations over the last month--[manifested] invarious ways, especially in the rise of long-term bond yields to newhighs, as I pointed out--I think there is a lot to be said for pickingranges just in terms of public announcement effects that are bothbroad, because as I have already indicated we need the flexibility inview of the economic uncertainty that lies ahead, and that would tendto ensure that we do in fact get continued deceleration in monetarygrowth. Our record since October has, in fact, been very good onthat. But I am afraid that there's some skepticism among marketparticipants and others that we may not persist. One way of puttingthat skepticism to bed, or at least helping to diminish it, would be-48-2/4-5/80to have upper limits on our ranges which even if hit would stillinvolve slightly less monetary growth in 1980 than in 1979. For thatreason, I would support alternative II with respect to both M-1A andM-1B because even if we hit the upper end of 6-1/2 percent in the caseof M-1A, that would be less than the 6.8 percent growth of last year.And even if we hit the upper end of the alternative II range of 4 to 7percent for M-1B, growth would be less than the 8 percent growth wehad last year. And for the same reasons, I would choose thealternative III ranges for M2 and M3. The upper end of thealternative III range for M2 is 8-1/2 percent, below last year's 8.8percent actual. In the case of M3, the alternative III range of 6 to9 percent is below the 9-1/2 percent actual we had last year. So ifthere is any sense at all in what I am saying about the publicperception of the maximum [rates of growth] we specify, assuming thatunder our new operating procedures we didn't exceed the upper limitsof the ranges, those upper limits would involve at least a 1/2 pointdecline from the actual rates of monetary growth in 1979. As forwhether we should target all four of these, Mr. Chairman, I have gravedoubts. I think M-1A is still so influenced--or perhaps contaminated,to use a word my research staff is fond of using--by past and ongoinginstitutional changes that I personally would be prepared to drop itright now and put our faith in M-1B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's much differencebetween M-1A and M-1B, barring this legislative change; the differenceis a small number.MR. ROOS. I found more to the change [unintelligible]. Ithink there was some confusion last time. Wouldn't M-1B--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They both will. The problem is that if weget the law change, M-1B will rise both because it's taking [funds]out of M-1A and out of M2.MR. AXILROD. Only because it's taking funds out of M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it will only rise because it's takingfunds out of M2. M-1A will go down. [M-1B] will rise because it'staking out of M2; and M-1A will decline because [funds will be taken]out of that aggregate.MR. BALLES. Well, in short, I would like to make a pitch fortargeting M-1B and M2 as opposed to targeting M-1A and M-1B, [assuggested] in the draft directive language. Our own experience in thepast has led us to place somewhat more confidence, in terms of the olddefinitions, in M2 as a predictor of inflation and real GNP. Ofcourse, it remains to be seen whether that is going to hold for thenew M2. But based on some of the statistical tests that we've done,M-1A is certainly the least reliable predictor of real GNP of the fouraggregates mentioned. The differences are quite significant, andthat's why I am somewhat disillusioned about M-1A. We've tested itretrospectively and view it as a considerably poor forecaster offuture real GNP. That is the main reason I would like to drop it.Those are my recommendations, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.-49-2/4-5/80MR. WALLICH. I think we face more inflation and lessrecession than would have been [the case] before recent changes in theeconomy. Now the question is: How does one finance a higher nominalGNP with a given amount of money supply? In Chuck's calculation youhave to look at the nominal GNP and ask how it can be financed fromthe rise in money, and a rise in velocity is very logical. Moreover,one can't say nowadays that we would get some rise in velocity out ofrising interest rates because presumably we wouldn't. So we'redependent, really, on the amount of money growth in the effectivemoney supply--that is, the amount of money growth plus the regulargrowth in velocity at a constant interest rate. And I think the staffputs the drift in the demand function at about 2 percent.Since we've opened up the question of the aggregates, I wouldlike to express some doubt not only about M-1A, on which I share whatothers have said, but M-1B. In general I think we are not yetincluding everything that acts like money, and we probably never will.Money market accounts and mutual funds are not in M-l, although Iwould suspect that they have a very strong effect on people's holdingsof demand balances. That is, they aren't used for transactions--theirvelocity is low--but they are very good substitutes for a cashbalance. I hear that brokerage firms are now setting up, in effect,zero balance overdraft facilities. If that takes over, one needs nocash balance at all any more; one can just finance one's current needsagainst one's stock holdings. There are Eurodollars, of which we[include] what seems to be a small part in the aggregates. I don'tthink we capture even all the Eurodollars owned by U.S. residentsbecause we don't know their total and we certainly don't include anypart of Eurodollars owned by nonresidents, even though one would thinksome of those dollars are going to be used in the United States, notfor purchases of goods and services but for purchases of assets, whichinfluence our interest rates and so on. So, I think the monetaryaggregate [targets] are really symbols of restraint--orders ofmagnitude, but not to be taken at face value. If we did take them atface value, I'd say look at M2 and you will find that underalternative I [the staff] projects [growth at] 9-1/2 percent, theupper limit. That's more than [the projected] nominal GNP increasefor 1980, which I believe is about 8 percent, so we'd be over-financing in those terms. This does not allow for any drift in themoney function.MR. PARTEE. There's no drift on M2.MR. WALLICH. There may be no drift in M2, but that dependson how one believes these extraordinary items, Eurodollars and soforth, impinge. Well, that leads me to alternative III. I think wedo need wide ranges because it's simply impossible to target severalaggregates and make them consistent using anything like a singlenumber. I would place a great deal of weight on M2 for the reasons Ihave given. I think [alternative III] is consistent with financing [anominal] GNP increase of about 8 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just couldn'tdisagree more with some of the comments I have heard and I agreeentirely with some others. Chuck and I have this running discussionabout how we finance nominal GNP. He has his view. My view is that-50-2/4-5/80if you try to do [it his way], you just chase your tail. If in factthere is a relationship between money and inflation, by persistentlytrying to finance nominal GNP we end up generating more inflation--even at an accelerating rate--which therefore we have to finance andso on. So I would hope we would not take that [route].MR. PARTEE. Oh, I don't disagree with that. It's a questionof whether one thinks this [degree] of weakness in the economy isreasonable.MR. WILLES. That's right. Now, what I find most puzzling--and I will copy one of Fred Schultz's lines, which I always thoughtwas mine, and that is that I have a very simple mind--MR. SCHULTZ. Well, some of us will agree with that!MR. WILLES. I would think, if we agree that the outlook isvery uncertain, that rather than arguing for more flexibility we wouldargue for less. That's because if the time pattern of the economy isvery unpredictable, then there's no way we can respond to change it ina predictable way and, therefore, we ought not to be responding. Weought to respond less rather than more, the greater the uncertaintyabout the outlook. As a consequence, unlike Nancy's and John'searlier suggestion that we do all we can to preserve our flexibility,I would say just the opposite. I think we ought to pick a path thatwe want to follow for the long term and stick to that path as long aswe can unless we receive major information that suggests we're way outof [line] for one reason or another. Of course, rational expectationswould say that even if we got such information, it's not clear wecould do anything about it and, therefore, we ought not to respond.Having said all that, obviously, I would much prefer thespecifications of alternative III. That looks like a very large dropfor M-1B from [growth of] 8 percent in 1979 to [a range with an upperlimit of] 6-1/2 percent in 1980. But the Bluebook says on theprevious page that for the last six months M-1B growth has only been6.1 percent, so the drop isn't as big as it might appear from the[table] on page 6. So, I would go with alternative III. I must say Iam in the group that thinks the range is too wide. I would beconcerned if money [growth] dropped, assuming we are measuringanything corresponding to money, down to 3 percent. On the otherhand, I would certainly hate to see it above 6 percent. So, I'dprefer a narrower range but would not want growth to go above 6percent on M-1A or 6-1/2 percent on M-1B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a [trickiness] of these figures.I think it's fair to say that M-1A was artificially high last yearbecause we did get some transition [flows] into NOW and ATS accounts,part of which came out of M2. Mr. Kimbrell.MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, one specific thing I would liketo see is that the 1980 targets be related to the 1979 targets and notthe 1979 results. We are all [talking about] the uncertainties. Ofcourse, there does not seem to be much uncertainty about [the risks ofa] recession and all of us are accepting that there are going to beinflationary tendencies and expectations. And I feel that our actionsshould attempt not to provide any unnecessary opportunities for strongmoney growth. I would hope that we indeed will begin to lower thesemonetary goals gradually. For that reason I also accept the thesis of-51-2/4-5/80narrower ranges, not more than 2 percentage points, and frankly with astrong determination to achieve them and control [money growth]. So Iwould [narrow] the alternative III ranges and I end up with 3-1/2 to5-1/2 percent on M-1A, 4 to 6 percent on M-1B, and 6 to 8 percent forM2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Smoot.MR. SMOOT. Governor Partee argued for alternative I, basedon the higher anticipated nominal GNP. Looking at my own staff'sprojections, our nominal GNP figures would be somewhat higher than theBoard's. But they also encompass a money supply growth rate in the4-1/2 to 5 percent range. Depending on which one of those I pick, Iam indifferent between alternative II and alternative III, which Ithink is where you were, Chairman Volcker. If I had to choose, Iwould choose alternative II based on the observation, which is madequite clearly in the Bluebook, that all of these alternatives suggesta lower rate of growth in money than occurred last year. And if wepay any attention to the long-term trend in money growth, then we arecoming down from a higher trend level. I must say that I have faith,as you do, that the staff's ranges are consistent; at least thenumbers for M-1B, M2, etc., appear to be consistent, and I wouldn'tquibble with those. So, based on that, we would be agreeable toalternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, unlike the humility of Mr. Schultzand Mr. Willes about being somewhat simple-minded, I must be humble insaying that my mind finds things very complicated. I have tried hardto move toward being simple-minded on some of these things. We havedifferent approaches to some of these problems. However, I find thatthe factors are so complicated and have such a margin of error that Imust stick to the 3-point range. Some people might accuse the Fed ofbeing a bit cowardly because the range is so wide. But the factorsthat we are dealing with are indeed so complicated that we must allowourselves this flexibility. I feel, if anything, even more stronglythan John Balles put it that we are [making this] unduly complicated.Again, I am striving toward being a little simpler. We are making ithard, and even harder for you, Mr. Chairman, when you try to explainto your audience on Thursday why we have decided to use both M-1A andM-1B when both of them will need adjustment when we get NOW accounts.And I agree we will get them nationwide. I think we'd look a lot moresensible to forget M-1A--as I said last time and I'll say it againthis time--and call it Ml, show some change, and not give theimpression by stressing M-1A that the lion has labored and hasproduced a mouse. There's too little change from the old M1 in whatwe are proposing, and I would rather see us stick with M-1B and givethe explanation of the adjustment in NOW accounts in a simple-mindedfashion rather than try to adjust both M-1A and M-1B to NOW accountswhen they come. This is the way in which my attempt to be simple-minded would direct us. I'd prefer alternative II with the 3-pointrange. I'd obviously prefer to concentrate just on M-1B and call itM1, [with a range of] 4 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.-52-2/4-5/80MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chuck Partee has movedfrom one recommendation to another from last month to this month andI will also, but going the other way. Last month we were looking at asomewhat weaker economy and it seemed that perhaps the inflation ratewould fall off a bit through 1980. Also, the deceleration from whatactually happened in 1979 to what I would like to consider our target--the midpoint [of any of] the ranges [we select]--from about 7percent [growth] to 5 percent for M-1A, for example, seemed fairlyfast. And that is the reason last month that I would have opted forwhat now appears to be alternative I. But things have changed, atleast to my mind. We're now looking at a bit stronger economy through1980, as I tried to outline earlier today. Secondly, and moreimportantly, inflation quite likely will stay at the present level oreven accelerate as we get into the latter part of next year. As aresult, what we do on the monetary side seems extremely important.That leads me to say that I would go to alternative II, which has amidpoint--what I [consider] the target--of 5 percent. Whatever we'vesaid about ranges, they are unimportant to me except in how the publicperceives them. I would hope whatever targets this Committee sets,whether on the long run or the short run, that the Desk at least inits month-to-month or day-to-day operations will look at themidpoints. So, I am looking at 5 percent for M-1A or 5-1/2 percentfor M-1B. And I share Bob Mayo's view on going to M1 and doing awaywith M-1A and M-1B. I think they will confuse more than we will beable to explain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I consider myself neither simple-minded nor complicated-minded, but just poorly educated for thisforum. Having said that, I would have some preference on thetechnical side for the wider 3-point range shown. In terms of theaggregates to focus on, my preferences would be M-1A and M2. We havecommented around the table about growth in bank credit and I do thinkthe Desk should be asked to keep an eye on that number, which haslooked so high the past year. My position is no different than it waslast month. I look forward to having the yearly goals show a gradualreduction in the aggregates. I am most impressed by the commentsPeter Sternlight made yesterday about inflationary expectations in themarket. I think there will be a great focus on these goals as youannounce them later this month; people will be looking for anindication of the posture of the Federal Reserve at this particularpoint in time. I might say, too, that as they look at our long-termgoals, they will [do so with] the immediate impression of economicdevelopments at the start of the year. January, I believe, will lookstrong. It may have an impact on the entire first quarter; people maynot discount it, as Fred Schultz has suggested, as being all due togood weather. So, my preference is alternative III as stated in theBluebook. And I would pick up the thought that Nancy Teeters notedearlier: That we will have opportunities to change the ranges atmidyear in the event that some of the gloomy prospects do actuallycome to fruition. But I don't share the gloomy prospects personally.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we have beentalking here about a series of figures which, quite frankly, I don'tcompletely understand and in which I have a great lack of confidence.-53-2/4-5/80The redefinitions seem to have added about 2 percentage points tothese past figures. We are questioning the function; we arequestioning the seasonals. I think the expectations have shifted onus. And if we are talking about supporting nominal GNP growth, Iwould observe that we had a 6.8 percent growth in M-1A last year and,if I read the correct line on this table, it supported an 11.3 percentincrease in nominal GNP.MR. PARTEE. With a 300 to 400 basis point increase ininterest rates.MR. COLDWELL. Yes, that's quite correct. In the coming yearit looks to me as if we're talking about a GNP increase anywhere inthe 8 to 10 percent range and maybe up to as high as 11 percent--thatencompasses most of the forecasts I heard this morning--and makingsome progress in reducing the stimulation that both monetary andfiscal policy have added these past few years. I have to come out infavor of a much tighter monetary policy. And I would pick up on somepeople's comments in that I would hate to see another 6 percentincrease in the monetary growth. So, I would put the target at 3 to 5percent, centered on 4 percent with a 2-point spread.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's [alternative] III plus.MR. BLACK. Is that for M-1A, Phil?MR. COLDWELL. M-lA.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. Well, I am looking at where we want to be atthe end of the year. I can't conceive of our ending up at 11 percentbill rates and a 7 to 8 percent unemployment rate. I would [beinclined toward] an M1 target of 5 percent, but that implies 11percent on the T-bill and that's only a drop of one percentage pointin that rate. So, I come out somewhere between alternatives I and II.I also think that our primary problem this year is going to be keepingabove the minimum rather than going over the top of the monetarygrowth [ranges]. So, I would prefer alternative I but I could settlefor alternative II.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're out of names.MR. WINN. Paul, we have talked about the kind of minds wehave. I think we can all claim to have confused minds. And it'sclear that that's going to be the problem you face in yourpresentation. I would urge that we be sure to have the contrastbetween last year's targets and this year's targets on a similar basisso that people can understand whether the policy formulation is anincrease or decrease or remains the same.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I happen to agree with that. I amconfused. Were we going to present the comparable figures on the oldbasis? Was that your intention, Mr. Axilrod, if I may interrupt?MR. AXILROD. We hadn't intended to but we can.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I missed that in the Bluebook.-54-2/4-5/80MR. AXILROD. We presented them in an appendix in theBluebook, giving the comparable figures to alternative II. That willbe a decision for someone to [make]. That does run the risk of addingto the confusion, I might add.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand. I think you have to leavethat to us, but I personally have some sympathy for doing it thisparticular time and then maybe forgetting about it.MR. WINN. Those would be the figures on the same basis? Wewon't present last year's on last year's basis and this year's on thisyear's basis--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I think we will do is present lastyear on last year's basis and on this year's basis. The question iswhether to present this year's target on this year's basis and on lastyear's basis, [showing] what the equivalent target is.MR. WINN. It seems to me that we have to get this intoperspective.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no difference for M-1A.MR. PARTEE. It sounds complicated, but it's just twocolumns.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right. There's no differencefor M-1A. That's the same as the old Ml, as I recall, for the year asa whole.MR. WINN. I have a tendency to want to eliminate theconfusion [caused] by too many numbers. We only add to the confusion.So, I would be inclined to use M-1B at the moment as being the mostmeaningful, although I share Henry's feeling that it's not a very goodmeasure still in terms of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I could just interject a comment: Iunderstand the longing for simplicity, but I am afraid the reality iscomplicated. And M-1B is the figure that is going to be most thrownoff by the uncertainty about NOW accounts. It is just a fact of life.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, just as a response to that: Iassume from the Bluebook, Steve, that these different alternativeswere set forth on the assumption that we would not get nationwide NOWaccounts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, at this point.MR. BALLES. If we do get them, we'll obviously have to goback to the drawing board.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd have to make an estimate, andthe estimate that is likely to be most different is for M-1B.MS. TEETERS. I think you should emphasize in the pressbriefing that we are quite possibly going to have to change thespecifications.-55-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we'd have to change the targets, notthe definitions. You see, the danger is that we could get a bigtransfer from savings accounts into M-1B, and that's going to makethat figure look very peculiar. And we won't know it in advance.MR. WINN. I think the admonition that we are not castingthese in concrete forever is a very important one at this stage. Wehave a chance to look at these again based on [unintelligible]. Theinflation problem still dominates the public's attitude both towardour policy and what we are trying to achieve, and I would certainlywant those numbers to look lower than last year's in terms of how theyare set up. I think I'd probably come out with alternative III.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative II with a rangeof 3 percentage points. Given the outlook for inflation over the nextyear, I think we're really going to have to show some reduction in therate of growth in the aggregates. While I agree with Governor Parteethat we want to be mindful of the amount of tension that we create inthe economy with respect to what we expect on nominal GNP growth, onthe other hand I also agree with Governor Wallich that we want to lookat this point at M2 with regard to the provision for nominal GNP.That brings me to alternative II, with the range remaining at thewider 3-point spread.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, last month I argued foralternative III, but on further reflection that seems a bit too tight,so I would move to alternative II. I would keep the 3-point range,however, because I think it is important for our credibility that weend up with a result that's within the range. I think the experienceof the last few months may have led us to believe that we can controlthe money supply much more finely than in fact is going to be thecase. We have been very lucky, you know, in the last few months. Inthis last month all of the misses in our estimates offset each othernicely; that is, the deposit mix estimates were offset by the excessreserve estimate. Furthermore, even though we came in low on M1, wesolved that problem by revising the seasonals. We're going to runinto times when we find we are not going to be able to control themoney supply quite as readily; and if we move to a very narrow range,we may regret it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I am not opposed to some degree ofconfusion. Last meeting it seems to me that we had a pretty hard timebeing very precise about these things. At the last meeting, I mademention of Heisenberg's theory of uncertainty, which in physics is atheory that when you try to observe sub-atomic particles the act ofobservation changes the way they act so you never know exactly wherethey are. I think that some of the same principles apply here and itseems to me that we should not try to be too precise at this point intime. These numbers are going to be revised. That's clear. Sometime during the year, for some reason, we're going to have to engagein some revision. So, I would agree with Mr. Winn that there is some-56-2/4-5/80considerable impact in terms of [reactions to] the numbers we announceand I would come down on alternative III.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I am inclined pretty much alongthe line on which Bob Black started this discussion in that narrowerranges would seem desirable. And if we take a narrower range, then itseems to me that alternative II is appropriate. If we retain the widerange as stated in the Bluebook, which I am characterizing as wide,then I would be inclined to alternative III so as to get the ceilingsdown a bit. I am impressed also with Governor Wallich's comments. Infact, I have been inclined to postulate that the pace at which moneysubstitutes or near monies are developed is quite possibly a functionof the degree of restraint that we are attempting to impose upon thesystem. Consequently, the system may have substantial leakage or,alternatively, substantial elasticity. And that would tend to arguein favor of moving to pretty low numbers for the growth rates of theitems reported here. I rather expect that is what we will experienceas we move through the next two or three years and that we will haveto move to growth rates in these conventional measures well below anythat are currently contemplated if, in fact, we are going to make muchimpact on inflation. In presenting your views, I would think you aregoing to have to say something about 1981 as well as 1980. And itseems to me some rationalization along that line may be required interms of fitting the growth rate numbers projected for 1980 with theidea that we need to have an annual reduction in the growth ratenumbers until we do get to a non-inflationary environment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I am a little at a loss tounderstand why some of our colleagues, who I know are much moreeconomically sophisticated and learned than I am, express confusionand concern as to whether or not we have a fundamental policy mandateand whether or not we can accomplish that. If one looks at this in asimplistic fashion, [one thing is] certain: We have told the worldthat our primary objective is a reduction in inflation accomplished ona gradual basis so as to avoid, if possible, drastic recessionaryconsequences. And we have said we're going to accomplish thatobjective by gradually reducing the rate of growth of the monetaryaggregates. It seems to me that there has been overwhelming approval,both in the press and the public, and very little expression ofdisapproval of this basic policy objective. To me the biggest problemfacing us, as I hear from people in our community, is a broad doubt orskepticism as to our willingness or ability to accomplish theseobjectives. I vehemently disagree with those of you who say that itis questionable whether or not we can gradually reduce the growth ofthe monetary aggregates. We can do it. We can do it either bycontrolling the path of total reserves or controlling the monetarybase or a combination of both. I am a little concerned about the factthat we don't spend more time reflecting on what the monetary base andnonborrowed reserves and total reserves have done, as described onpage 2 [of the Bluebook], because these are specific ways whereby wecan accomplish our monetary aggregate growth [objectives]. In orderto do what we've said we're going to do, we have to strive for a 5 or5-1/2 percent rate of growth in M-1A or M-1B over the next year. Idon't think we can react to short-term shortfalls or overruns on these-57-2/4-5/80[aggregates]. Anybody who says what has happened in the last two orthree weeks is a cause for alarm just doesn't understand how thisprocess works. We have to set long-term targets and we have to stickwith those long-term targets unless and until there are fundamentalchanges in public thinking and fundamental changes in our policy thatwould [point] toward our retreating from these longer-term targets.I would agree with Mark and others that it would bepreferable, if we could possibly swallow this enormous step, to narrowour ranges so that we indeed can accomplish a 5 or 5-1/2 percentgrowth. I don't think it's our job to try to position ourselves sothat our targets are so broad that we can always say we accomplishedour targets if the world [falls apart] while we're protecting our ownreputations. Our reputation is on the line. People totally andbroadly subscribe to what the Chairman has announced and I don't thinkwe can enjoy the luxury anymore of vacillating. The fat is in thefire and I think a narrow range under either alternative II or IIIaround 5 percent for the M-1A and M-1B targets would be the best wayto accomplish this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's obviously a majority for retaininga 3-point range, as there was last month. I would defend that in myown mind by the uncertainty of the figures that Frank Morris andothers have referred to and the real uncertainty in the economy, whichgoes in the direction of [our needing] a little leeway. I would notein that regard that I don't know of another central bank in the world,however monetarist oriented, that has a narrower target than 3percentage points.MR. PARTEE. The Bank of England?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. They have a 5 percentage point range,as I recall, 4 or 5. Four, I guess.MR. TRUMAN. The Swiss have just a point or two.MR. BLACK. And a pretty good inflation record.MR. WALLICH. But [their target] varies with the rate ofinflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do the Swiss have a pretty good record?They had something like a 15 percent increase in the money supply insome recent year, and they abandoned the target.MR. WALLICH. I mean the range has to be seen relative to therate of inflation. At 10 percent inflation, 3 percent [growth inmoney] isn't much. At 2 percent [inflation] it would be a great deal.MR. SCHULTZ. I think we can get off this subject.MR. ROOS. The Swiss did that on a contrived basis, though,to make their goods more competitive. It wasn't because the mechanismis not workable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Be that as it may, the greatest singleview is for alternative III. There is a certain amount of clusteringat alternative II, and one for alternative I. And there are some in-58-2/4-5/80between alternatives II and III and between II and I. One possibleapproach would be to adopt the Balles approach, which he justified inpart in terms of the desirability of getting all the upper limits nohigher than the growth we had last year. He [suggested] a combinationbetween alternatives II and III, using the alternative II ranges onthe Mls and something like the ranges in alternative III on M2 and M3,if I understood him correctly. I assume the staff judgment as to theinternal consistencies of these ranges is not so precise that thatbecomes an impossible [combination].MR. AXILROD. No, it doesn't become impossible, Mr. Chairman.But I remember last year that the old M2 ran above the projection, andthat is the aggregate the Committee has come closest to cutting downto just about the lowest that is economically sustainable. I wouldjust add that point. I think we gave very low, or conservative,estimates for M2. So there is some danger in it.MR. PARTEE. Remember, you have money--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which way is the risk more? If interestrates decline, do you think M2 would balloon or not?MR. AXILROD. Well, in the old days, I would have said itwould have ballooned. Nowadays, with interest rates so far aboveceiling rates, we don't have that effect. We have put the moneymarket funds into M2 and there is going to be a lot ofsubstitutability between the money market funds and other elements ofM2. The risk is for higher growth if interest rates decline, but Idon't think it is nearly as great a risk as it used to be.MR. PARTEE. I might just point out that M2 [growth in 1979]was very close to the upper limit on alternative II, John, and for M3[actual growth] was the same as the upper limit on alternative II.The aggregate that is really low is bank credit. I don't quiteunderstand that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these are in my judgment very narrowdifferences. Let me just try, after everybody has listened to all ofthis, two alternatives: alternative III straight and alternative IIstraight. I might say it didn't make much difference in clarifyingany strong preference to add the views of nonvoting members onto thoseof the members; they're split in about the same way. So just for thevoting members, after hearing each other, how many would wantalternative III?MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, this will just be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am just talking about a flat "III."MR. BALLES. Really, between the one or the other--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now let me try "II." Who would findalternative II "acceptable"? Four. Let me try the Balles alternativeand see how many would find that acceptable.SPEAKER(?). Read it.-59-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's alternative II for M-1A and M-1B, ifI understand it correctly, and alternative III for M2 and M3. Maybethat would be the nicest, if we could achieve a consensus on that.MR. PARTEE. What about bank credit? Is that alternativeIII?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I've been implicitly assuming that bankcredit takes a subsidiary role in this as it indeed has in the past.MR. PARTEE. It is, of course, one of the figures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One could argue about that, I suppose.MR. COLDWELL. It's so violently different from [the actualexperience in] 1978 and 1979.MR. SCHULTZ. I would like to have somebody explain theBalles approach to me. I find Steve's comments important here. Whyshouldn't it be alternative III on M-1A and M-1B and alternative II onM2 and M3? That would seem to me more consistent with what actuallyhappens in the economy. Am I looking at it the wrong way?MR. BLACK. I would prefer that.MR. PARTEE. John wants the top of the range below lastyear's [actual].MR. BALLES. I want the top of the range at least moderatelybelow.MR. SCHULTZ. I understand what he proposed. He's justtaking a somewhat mechanistic approach. But I am thinking of whatactually happens in the economy. It seems to me that if we're goingto go away from alternative III, which is the alternative I continueto prefer, where we should ease is in M2 and M3 rather than the otherway around. Is that the wrong way to look at it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that seems to be a bit in line withMr. Axilrod's suspicions, for whatever that's worth. On the otherhand, it doesn't achieve Mr. Balles's visual purpose.MR. SCHULTZ. I don't understand that there's any particularreason to ease on M-1A and M-1B because I have some real questionsabout velocity. But if Mr. Axilrod is right, the figures on M2 and M3are likely to be more stringent than those on M-1A and M-1B.MS. TEETERS. Do you all realize that alternative III meansessentially no decline in interest rates this year?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what the staff says. I have alittle uncertainty about what that figure--MR. RICE. Is that a proposal, Mr. Chairman?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't have too many proposals onthe table at the same time. I don't know whether Mr. Balles wants to-60-2/4-5/80retreat to Mr. Schultz. I am willing to try your original one andjust see [what support it commands].MR. BALLES. I would be interested in the vote on myproposal. I didn't see a show of hands yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we're talking about now is what isacceptable to the biggest group we can get, I think. I can try theSchultz alternative, too, to confuse the issue further, but let me trythe Balles alternative at this stage.MR. COLDWELL. You got 3-1/2 votes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's try the Schultz alternative.This is exactly the opposite. Alternative III on M-1A and M-1B andalternative II and M2 and M3.MR. BLACK. This just means acceptable, not necessarilypreferable?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This means acceptable. That is preciselyright. Are we really saying nothing is acceptable here?MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I got more than he did!SPEAKER(?). No, you didn't.MR. SCHULTZ. I got 5 votes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only thing I am convinced of is thatwe are in a range where the differences are very difficult toperceive.MR. BLACK. It's [as if we] perceive more [differences] thanthere really are.MR. GUFFEY. You had 8 for alternative III, Mr. Chairman.MR. BLACK. You sure did. And that was a preference, notjust acceptable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am a little reluctant to go toalternative III. It is clear that that has a plurality, but whetherit is the one that maximizes the satisfaction around the table isanother question.MR. PARTEE. Well, I can't really offer a compromise since Iwas for alternative I.MR. SCHULTZ. You were the only one. Maybe you're the onlyone who can offer a compromise.MR. COLDWELL. We can't possibly get close.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just looking at what maximizessatisfaction for all, I urge again the Balles approach with a moresympathetic attitude by people around the table.-61-2/4-5/80MR. PARTEE. Maybe somehow it will work out.MR. TIMLEN. Is there any understanding as to where in therange the Desk would be shooting for?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, theoretically, we are shooting forthe midpoint, based on what we know now. We may modify that in theshort-run decision; we haven't gotten there. But for the year as awhole the implication is that the best judgment we can make is thatwe're shooting at the middle of all of these, which gives us someleeway on [M2 and M3] presumably, if we're really shooting at themiddle of the [target for Ml].MR. BALLES. My presumption, Mr. Chairman, is that of coursewe would aim for the midpoint, but I would also very quickly add thatin view of all the uncertainty we would want to be able to move eitherway, including to the top of the range. I think we ought to keep thatflexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would agree with that. But as of now Ithink we are saying the central tendency is the midpoints of theseranges, which gives us some potential leeway in deliberately movingaway from the midpoint and also gives us some leeway in thereconciliation among these various numbers. I suppose the implicationof that, to sell [this] alternative now, is that if we were literallyaiming for the midpoints throughout the year and M2 and M3 prove to bea little tight relative to the Mls, we would end up with a slightlylower M1 and a slightly higher M2 and M3, relative to the midpoints.If the staff estimate is correct and everything went perfectly, that'spresumably the way [it would turn out]. We would end up with themidpoint, theoretically, halfway between alternative II andalternative III.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if the Committee is willing toaccept a range of 2-1/2 points, an almost perfect compromise is totake the bottoms of alternative II and the tops of alternative III.MR. BLACK. That's not a bad idea.MR. SCHULTZ. I'd feel more comfortable with that than withthe Balles approach.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you say leave these where they are?MR. ALTMANN. 3-1/2 to 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're narrowing all the ranges.MR. ALTMANN. The bottoms are from alternative II and thetops are those in alternative III.MR. BALLES. That runs counter to a clear majority view aboutkeeping a wide range.MR. MAYO. Yes, it does.MR. BLACK. But it appeases some of the rest of us.-62-2/4-5/80MR. PARTEE. That results in odd midpoints.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You obviously know [the area we're in]. Ireally am resistant to getting down to 1/4 points. If what we'reaiming at for M-1A is halfway between [the midpoints of] alternativesII and III, [that difference is] 1/4 of a percentage point and I thinkwe're really there with the Balles approach as a practical matter.MR. SCHULTZ. Are we not likely, though, to end up with asituation in which we're going to miss on both sides with the Ballesapproach? M2 and M3 may be strong and M-1A and M-1B could be prettyweak.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably these are the best estimates wehave. I will not vouch for the inter-relationships between them.[They represent] an unbiased estimate of the consistent--MR. AXILROD. We rounded these to 1/2 points, by the way.For M2 and M3 I think the [actual] differences are 1/4 points amongthe alternatives.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're now unrounding them. Let me urgeupon you at this point the Balles alternative. How many find thatacceptable after this further [discussion]?MR. SCHULTZ. To show you how weak I am, I'll vote for it.As I do so, I am being dragged kicking and screaming into this. Iwould much prefer the other.MR. BALLES. How many was that, sir?SPEAKER(?). Six.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I [add my vote], it's a majority. ButI can't believe that when we get down to a 1/4 point there is nocombination of numbers that does not provide a happier situation.MR. TIMLEN. Could you try Steve's range, because its widthis 2-1/2 points as opposed to 3?MR. ALTMANN. And not emphasize midpoints?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But there's no substantive differencebetween them.MR. BLACK. But it's the way it is perceived.SPEAKER(?). It is the way it is perceived by the public,Paul, that's important. I agree there isn't all that much differencebut the perception by the public--SPEAKER(?). It's the top of the ranges that scares me todeath.MR. COLDWELL. We could widen the range to 3 to 6-1/2.-63-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we want to go in thedirection of widening the range. There are all sorts of ways we canget a quarter peoint difference between the averages.MR. WILLES. But the problem, Mr. Chairman, is not thequarter point difference on the midpoint. Where people separate is onwhere they think the bottom ought to be or where the top ought to be.And that's why Steve's proposal, I think, will get most of the votes.It's not the quarter point difference; it's where one is willing tolet it go on one side or the other.MR. BLACK. I think that's a correct appraisal. I think themarket will look at it that way, too.MR. PARTEE. We have a tremendous amount riding on ourability to be within these ranges--SEVERAL. Yes.MR. PARTEE. --and to cut the range to 2-1/2 points makes itrough. And the possibility of inconsistencies here, even though weare within the staff's ranges--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are we talking about specifically?MR. ALTMANN. 3-1/2 to 6 percent.MR. MAYO. Why don't we just see what the vote is, Mr.Chairman, on the bottom of alternative III and the top of alternativeII, widening the range by 1/2 percentage point.MR. COLDWELL. That's what I suggested, but he--MR. MAYO. It has some merit.MS. TEETERS. If we want to compromise, we should go to 3-1/4to 6-1/4 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the straightforward compromise, butI think we look foolish if we get into quarter points.MR. PARTEE. We would bill the 3-1/2 percent [as appropriate]on the grounds of the great uncertainty in the year ahead.MR. WALLICH. We could accept Steve's [suggestion] as long aswe don't focus on the midpoint. The midpoint gives us a quarter pointand looks foolish. A narrower range, other things equal, looksbetter. I see the risks; we might miss. We're much more likely tomiss on the up side than on the down side.MR. PARTEE. What I foresee is the possibility of misses ifthe relationships aren't right here. We may be within on M1 and outon M2 and M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we do it the other way, we have abetter chance of being within something.-64-2/4-5/80MR. WILLES. But that's precisely why people care so muchabout either the bottom or the top. Even though we may miss, if we'regoing over the top, that raises the flag a lot faster than if we'restill within all the ranges.MS. TEETERS. I have noticed that people worry less when wego under than when we go over.MR. MAYO. It depends on one's point of view.MR. WINN. Well, I'll go back to my original question. Whatare you going to say about last year's ranges?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. About last year's ranges?MR. WINN. People are going to compare ranges and ranges,not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we're going to tell them isthat on M1, depending upon how you look at it, we were somewherearound 5.5 or 6.8 percent.MR. WINN. That's what we hit, but [the question is]: Are wesetting our objectives lower or higher?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All of these objectives, properlyinterpreted, will be lower. It may take some interpretation.MR. WINN. But didn't we say 3 to 6 percent last year on Ml?Sure it has changed, and so forth--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we said 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent byone interpretation, with 1-1/2 percent ATS--MR. BLACK. That's really what it was, when you come rightdown to it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't like this way of skinningthe cat, but do you want to do these 2-1/2 percentage point ranges?Let's see who finds the 3-1/2--MR. MAYO. What are we talking about? The 2-1/2 points?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.SPEAKER(?). John, I assume you'll go with this proposal.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we get no more votes for that onethan the other one.MR. SCHULTZ. Straight alternative III got the most votes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think so.MR. WILLES. Take an acceptable vote on alternative III; Ithink you'll get 9 out of 12.-65-2/4-5/80MR. HOLMES. Mr. Chairman, another compromise would be totake a flexible midpoint. Take the [average of the] midpoints fromalternatives II and III and say you expect variations around that of1-1/2 percentage points on either side, as we have in the past.MR. BLACK. That would be 3-3/4 to [6-3/4 for M-1B].MR. SCHULTZ. It gets us to quarters.MR. COLDWELL. Would it help, Mr Chairman, if we used M-1B asopposed to M-1A as the starting point?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the figures are supposed to be thesame. I don't know how to--MS. TEETERS. Yes, but M-1B has the most potential forfluctuation.MR. COLDWELL. But M-1B has the most long-run potential.M-1A, if you read it as "MIA," is "missing in action."MR. BLACK. M-1B is "misinformed bunch."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me that the logical thing,without getting into tiny fractions, is either to do the Ballesapproach or the reverse of the Balles approach, which is about as muchof a compromise as one can get, retaining the wider ranges. Now,that avoids quarter percents on either the midpoints or the outside[limits of the] ranges. Who do we have reconsidering? Or who wantsto make another proposal?MR. MAYO. In the interest of simplicity, I am prepared toshift my vote to alternative III.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with alternative III--frankly,I have no particular problem with it--is that it's going to make somepeople more unhappy than any of the other alternatives.MR. MORRIS. But only 1/2 of 1 percent were unhappy!MR. MAYO. There's a multiplier here, Paul.MR. RICE. Let me put it this way: It makes me unhappy butin the spirit of unanimity I would change my vote and go withalternative III.MS. TEETERS. It's a full percentage point drop in the growthrates from last year. Doesn't it mean that we're going to have anincrease of 2 percentage points in the unemployment rate and no changein interest rates?MR. PARTEE. That's probably right.MS. TEETERS. Where are interest rates in [that scenario]?MR. RICE. Well, I surely share [that concern] with you.-66-2/4-5/80MS. TEETERS. Even taking all the probabilities in the staffestimate, the likely rate of [GNP] growth is between .8 and -2.2percent. That is just not a very good economy, gentlemen, to have 12percent interest rates.MR. WALLICH. But, Nancy, on the other hand, we'd get a risein the rate of inflation.MS. TEETERS. We're going to get that anyway, Henry, fromOPEC over the first three months of this year.MR. COLDWELL. If we're going to get it anyway, you better bedown where I am.MR. SCHULTZ. Actually, alternative III, you have toremember, is much more lenient than where Governor Coldwell would liketo be. So that--MR. KIMBREL. Associate me with that, too.MR. PARTEE. Of course, he won't be here to--MR. COLDWELL. No, I am going to be out in the ranks of theunemployed with fixed incomes to pay the price--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would recommend to you the Ballesposition. But if you're bound and determined to go to alternativeIII, we'll go to alternative III. Let's try Balles once more.SPEAKER(?). I'm not going to vote for it this time.MR. SCHULTZ. Things are coming my way!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many did you get? What was the count?MR. ALTMANN. Five.MR. PARTEE & MR. TIMLEN. Five; we've lost one!MR. BALLES. Well, I tried, Mr. Chairman.MR. BLACK. That's the end of Balles, et al.MR. MAYO. The "et als" are still around.MR. BALLES. My next move would be to alternative III.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With great reluctance, I will try "III."MR. ALTMANN. Nine, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is a mistake.MR. COLDWELL. Why, Paul? What's your principal reservationabout it?-67-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My reservation is not the substance of it,but that I don't think it correctly gets to the midpoint of the rangeof opinion.MR. COLDWELL. Well, go back and try the Schultz approachagain. That looks to me as if it buys a good share of those of us whoare concerned about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By the Schultz approach you mean justreversing--MR. COLDWELL. Reversing the Balles points.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I am perfectly happy to do that.Let's try that one.MR. COLDWELL. Take M-1A and M-1B of "III" and M2 and M3 of"II."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's see whether that captures--MR. ALTMANN. Seven.MR. BLACK. Seven? Doesn't it make you two even a littlehappier?MS. TEETERS. A 4-1/2 percent rate of growth for Ml? No.MR. COLDWELL. Well, if that's the case, we better stay withalternative III.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think everyone is stuck on III; that'sokay.MR. ALTMANN. So, it's alternative III?MR. TIMLEN. How would the chair vote?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.SPEAKER(?). You would vote for it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll vote for alternative III ifthat's what everybody wants to vote for. I don't see the significancein the 1/2 percentage point difference that some other peopleapparently see.MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't either, but it takes me a wholepoint [lower].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I understand.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, is the staff to assume that inmaking its GNP projections, it should take the 4-1/2 percent rate ofgrowth for M-1A as a center point? That is a lower rate of growththan we had.-68-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presume that in some sense that must bethe implication.MS. TEETERS. You realize we're already in trouble in termsof being in conformity with the Administration's forecast. At leastyou have to do the testifying on Humphrey-Hawkins. We're alreadyinconsistent; this is making it worse.MR. COLDWELL. The President has given up on Humphrey-Hawkinsfor this coming year anyway. He moved out [the time period in whichto reach the objectives].MS. TEETERS. He may have moved it out but theAdministration's forecast is markedly different. And we will have togo up to the Hill and say we're going to keep money so tight thatthere is no way that the Administration's forecast can be realized.That's about what it comes down to.MR. SCHULTZ. I am really much more concerned about M2 and M3than I am M-1A or M-1B because at these interest rates and theseinflation rates I am very unsure of the connection between the two.And I think there is going to be a demand shift this year. The staffindicates that they can see no indication yet, but--MR. PARTEE. [It can] hardly be bigger than it was last year.We already had a great big demand shift in the recorded figures forlast year. For M-1B, which I think a lot of people would support asthe better redefined money, our midpoint will be 3 points below whatwe realized last year. Three points!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that figure is a little artificialbecause we had the shift into ATS and NOW accounts.MR. BALLES. This is a question of fact, Mr. Chairman. Whatimpressions do you have as to whether the Congressional Committeeconsiders the ranges as having a very strong implication that we'llmove toward the midpoint? I haven't gathered that that was true inthe past; we have ranges with the precise idea of being flexible. In-house we may well aim for a midpoint. But in terms of the Congress,is my impression wrong that they look on these as ranges we feel freeto utilize fully depending on unfolding conditions?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't answer that question. It probablyimplies a degree of sophistication on the part of Congress that isbeyond any generalization.MR. BALLES. There seems to be a feeling around the tablehere that if we adopt alternative III, we're struck with themidpoints. I don't think we are, frankly.MS. TEETERS. What else is the Desk going to aim for?MR. BALLES. What's the purpose of having the range?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd certainly have a tendency right nowto aim for the midpoint, not knowing anything else. That's pendingfurther information.-69-2/4-5/80MR. MAYO. That is true in the short run, Paul, but as theyear moves on, we have that flexibility. We just finished using itthe last time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, in the short run.SPEAKER(?). We sure did.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I don't know if this will behelpful, but one possibility--in the spirit of what has been discussed--is to take the 3-point ranges for M-1A and M-1B of alternative IIand to lower the top ends of M2 and M3 by 1/2 point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was going to suggest the opposite.If there's more of a concern about M2 and M3, maybe we should take a1/2 percentage point off the top of the M1 ranges.MR. AXILROD. Then you have more substitutability among thedeposits?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it leaves us a little more leeway onM2 and M3.MR. PARTEE. I'd go for that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably they are, theoretically, alittle more volatile anyway.MR. COLDWELL. 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent on M-1A?SPEAKER(?). No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [For M-1A] 3-1/2 to 6 percent--acompromise between alternatives II and III on both the Mls.MR. SCHULTZ. All right. I'd go for that.MR. ALTMANN. And 4 to 6-1/2--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 4 to 6-1/2 percent on M-1B, which isprobably going to have to be revised anyway.MR. PARTEE. I'd be happy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And leave the 6 to 9 percent and 6-1/2 to9-1/2 percent [for M2 and M3, respectively].MR. BALLES. What was M-1A, please?MR. ALTMANN. 3-1/2 to 6 percent. And M-1B is 4 to 6-1/2.MR. COLDWELL. What about M2 and M3?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're the same as in alternative II.SPEAKER(?). There's something wrong.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a bit of logic in it, I think.-70-2/4-5/80MR. SCHULTZ. That's logical, and I like that.MR. BALLES. Just a comment on that, Mr. Chairman: Thereason I was turned off by alternative II for M2 and M3 is that if wewent for the upper end of that range, which I presume we could, thatwould result in no decrease at all in the growth rates of those twomagnitudes for 1980 from what we experienced in 1979.MR. PARTEE. If we go right to the top.SPEAKER(?). We also have to recognize that they're ratheruncontrollable by us with money market funds and Eurodollars andCaribbean dollars and RPs in there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We lose that visual effect, but it'sgetting argued that the economics are a little against us in terms ofthe uncertainty and it gives wider ranges. I think there's a certainsense in doing that. It has the disadvantage that--MR. COLDWELL. So the midpoint on M-1A would be 4-3/4percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. [Unintelligible] misleadwith that quarter percent.MR. WALLICH. That's just raising it, on average, because thelower ends don't really mean anything.MR. PARTEE. Well, they could.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's raising depending upon where webegin.MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems that we'd very likely dosomething if it came out there. Even I would be prepared to do that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say raising on average. Depending onwhat one is looking at, it's accepting the upper constraint ofalternative III on M1. That's the one you're worried about.MR. WALLICH. Well, I was more worried about M2, and there wehave an increase. Raising the lower constraints on M-1A and M-1Bdoesn't really accomplish anything.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's try this one. I appeal toyou: Anyone around this table who is good enough to know thedifference between 1/2 point, with great [conviction], is pretty good.MR. TIMLEN. Is that for simple or complicated minds?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does it have any appeal?MR. SCHULTZ. I'd vote for it.MS. TEETERS. Want another straw vote?MR. KIMBREL. Just to be sure I am with you, read thosenumbers one more time.-71-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are: 3-1/2 to 6 on M-1A; 4 to 6-1/2on M-1B; 6 to 9 on M2; and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 on M3. Who finds thatacceptable?SPEAKER(?). Here we go!MR. ALTMANN. Eight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I make nine.MR. COLDWELL. What did we finally get on the vote forstraight alternative III?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think about the same.MR. ALTMANN. I had seven, not counting--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Seven, not counting me. So we got onemore vote out of this one, right? Let's go with that one then. Allthe people who like narrow ranges ought to be enchanted by that 1/2percent [reduction in the ranges for M-1A and M-1B].MR. PARTEE. The narrower M1 range.MR. GUFFEY. Which one did you go with, the last one?SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. GUFFEY. I thought we had more votes for alternative III.MR. TIMLEN. I thought so, too.SPEAKER(?). Try again.MR. ALTMANN. No, I had seven not counting the Chairman.Want to try it again?MR. BALLES. What was the vote on the last one, Murray?MR. ALTMANN. Eight plus the Chairman.MR. SCHULTZ. I think the Chairman is saying that we may havehad more votes on that, but those who are the unhappiest would findthis last one acceptable. Is that your reasoning, Mr. Chairman?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know quite what I will find atthis point, frankly.MR. SCHULTZ. I can go either way.MR. RICE. In light of this vote, I'll shift from my lastvote and make it even. I voted for alternative III in the spirit ofcompromise, but now that I know we can get 8 votes for this, which ismore acceptable to me, I would like to switch my vote and make it [9].SPEAKER(?). Let's have a vote on this compromise and seewhat we get.-72-2/4-5/80MR. BLACK. Maybe I ought to reactivate my proposal?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take a vote on the latest proposal.Is everybody clear about what we are voting on?MR. MAYO. The same thing that we just voted on.MR. ALTMANN. That's right, the 3-1/2 to 6, 4 to 6-1/2, 6 to9, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2.MR. BLACK. What about bank credit? Are we going to have toput that in?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bank credit, I guess, is 6 to 9 percent.MR. ALTMANN. 6 to 9.SPEAKER(?). What about M2?MR. SCHULTZ. Henry thinks it's too high.MR. PARTEE. If we expect to get it, we're going to have toraise marginal reserves.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman VolckerPresident BallesPresident BlackGovernor ColdwellPresident KimbrelPresident MayoGovernor ParteeGovernor RiceGovernor SchultzGovernor TeetersFirst Vice President TimlenGovernor WallichYesYesYesYesIt's mighty hard, but I voteyes, too.YesYesYesYesYesYesIn the spirit of compromise,yesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I appreciate your swallowing allthese 1/2 percentage point differences! I think it's probably moreimportant to swallow the 1/2 point differences than to achieve the 1/2point.MR. WALLICH. Well, can we swallow something real now?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. After all this time, we have a greatdecision. How much problem are we going to have with our evennarrower differences on the short-run ranges? Do you want to try todo this [before lunch]?SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. BLACK. Maybe we can just vote without any statement fromanybody. It might be better.MS. TEETERS. Yes.-73-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's see where we are without goingaround the table. Do you want to say a few words, Mr. Axilrod--veryfew?MR. AXILROD. I will skip the introductory part, a page and ahalf, which says that interest rates aren't projected to come down asmuch as they used to be because the economy is projected to bestronger. [Secretary's note: For the full text of Mr. Axilrod'sstatement, see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand this precisely, youralternative B, at least for M1, reiterates the target we already setat the last meeting.MR. AXILROD. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And this can viewed as kind of a mid-quarter relook at that.MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But M2 is a little below, right?MR. AXILROD. The [new] M2 is a totally different concept.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We didn't set a target for that.MR. AXILROD. That's right. It was the old M2--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That target was 7 percent; that's whatconfused me.MR. AXILROD. That's right. And it is in fact running alittle low relative to the target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you think this 6-1/2 percent that youhave here for the new M2 is roughly consistent with the 7 percent thatwe had on the old M2?MR. AXILROD. I would guess it's a shade lower because theold M2 is running a shade lower. It's either consistent or a shadelower. I haven't worked it out in detail month by month on moneymarket funds.MR. WALLICH. But it contains very different components.MR. AXILROD. Oh yes, that's right. That's why. It hasmoney market funds--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it has been running higher than 6-1/2percent, apparently, because you have the implied growth for Januaryto March of 5-3/4 percent.MR. AXILROD. Yes. The actual growth in M2 is 8.3 percentbecause, among other reasons, we had this very sharp expansion inmoney market funds in January, which we've been expecting to slow.-74-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a question of procedure we have todecide upon, which is whether to reiterate or change the targets thatwe had for the first quarter. [We can comment on] any tentativefeeling that we have about the second quarter but we don't have to putthe second quarter into the directive, and I think it's probablyinappropriate to put the second quarter in the directive at thispoint. So, if people agree with this, the only thing we have to havein the directive is a number for the first quarter.MR. AXILROD. To be clear, Mr. Chairman, alternative B, as weconstrue it, is simply reiterating the Committee's policy of last timewith respect to M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.MR. AXILROD. That's in new terms and takes account of theactual growth that occurred in January.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And in both cases--just slightly in thecase of Ml and a little more than slightly in the case of M2--the rateof growth in January was above our targets [for the quarter].MR. AXILROD. Yes. But, again, this is a totally differentM2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, after we translate them.MR. AXILROD. But the old M2 is running a little lowerrelative to target than we had expected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So if we take alternative B, conceivablywe could shade it a bit in the light of our earlier discussion. But Ithink we're talking--MR. PARTEE. I think what we'd shade is the second quarter.After all, the first quarter--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that would be my inclination.Looking at this in view of what we just decided, the second quarterfigures may be a little high. But we don't have to decide upon thatnow. Otherwise, what you're saying is that "B" is basicallyreiterating what we said before, which does imply a little slowergrowth rate in February and March than we in fact had in January.That's because January was high in M2--and M1 came out a little bit onthe high side, but not very much--because of the money market fundbulge. I would suggest to you, but I don't want to hasten you ifthere's some vital question that I am missing, that just for the firstquarter "B" is reasonable. I think it's not only in line with what wedecided last time, but what we want to continue to decide.MR. MAYO. Are we content with a point target here? Is thatthe way we should read this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the central tendency, obviously.Last time we worded it 4 to 5 percent on Ml. We could raise thequestion again of whether we want to continue with that wording. Wesaid 4 to 5 percent on M1 and about 7 percent on M2. I suppose whatwe'd be saying here is that the Committee reiterated--if you want to-75-2/4-5/80word it that way--the 4 to 5 percent range on Ml. And on the new M2basis, we'd shave the target a half point.MR. MAYO. There could be some argument, Paul, that we'refarther along in the quarter and should narrow that range. Or wecould say 4-3/4 percent, which is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't feel strongly about that.Even on the new technique we're not that close. This is a pure matterof preference; we can word it either way. I don't have any--MS. TEETERS. I would prefer to word it "4 to 5 percent."MR. MORRIS. I think there's a lot to be said for stabilityfrom month to month in these directives, unless there's a major reasonto change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Particularly if we keep that same wording,we'd be a little hard pressed to [rationalize] changing it by aquarter percentage point, which one could argue we might want to do onthe basis of the long-term range, all else being equal. But that'ssuch a fine adjustment. More substantively one could argue, givenwhat's going on, that we might want to be tighter or easier.MR. COLDWELL. I would argue for alternative C with aborrowing level of $1.6 billion.MR. PARTEE. 1.6?MR. COLDWELL. That is about what they had, $1.5 billion, foralternative C.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think "C" is clearly saying, given whatwe know now that we didn't know last time, that you want to be alittle tighter.MS. TEETERS. I think we should stick to where we were.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "B" says that we want to play it aboutwhere we've been playing it; "A" says we distinctly want to be alittle easier. I think those are the choices here.SPEAKER(?). I'd keep "B."MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think we ought to stay where we wereuntil we go off in a big way, which we'll do soon.MR. TIMLEN. While I prefer what Phil Coldwell said, I wouldvote for "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments? I reallydon't want to rush this, but I think we ought to go to lunch if wedon't have a consensus here. If there's a lot of argument that weshould be distinctly tighter or if the differences are massive, [maybewe should break for lunch]. In fact if we took "C," I think we wouldhave to raise the targeted level of borrowing. I don't know what isconsistent, but I---76-2/4-5/80MR. COLDWELL. They have $1.5 billion in the Bluebook.MR. WALLICH. The measure of tightness in the face of higherinflation is not the money supply. It is really the interest rate, orthe real interest rate. I see that as having come down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon whether you're looking atthe long-term or the short-term rates.MR. WALLICH. It doesn't bother me to tighten the moneysupply, not because I think that's the proper response but because Ithink it will have the desired result.MR. SCHULTZ. It will have a result all right. It willreally knock housing and autos in the head!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Willis.MR. WINN. Paul, there's another question. Maybe this is notrelevant, but in view of our unwillingness to come to terms with thelagged reserve question and in view of my nervousness with respect toour luck in holding out on this setup, is this perhaps the appropriatetime to raise the question, given the fluctuations in borrowings andthe growing differential between market rates and the discount rate,about changing the rate as part of this picture of [unintelligible]?MR. SCHULTZ. You mean the discount rate?MR. WINN. The discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's always a relevant policy variable.But to some degree there's a choice. We can be easier on the reserveprovision and raise the discount rate. We can be tighter on thereserve provision and not raise the discount rate.MR. WINN. But the danger is that we will lose control in thelatter case.MR. WALLICH. I think we should be clear on what overallresponse we want and to me that is expressed in the funds rate.MR. COLDWELL. I think we have a chance here to make a nibbleinto that long-term range; and if we give that up now, we may not havea chance later on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the funds rate is theoretically notpredictable under what we're doing. But if we go toward "C," we arebiasing it, presumably--MR. COLDWELL. On the upper part of the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --on the upper part or for an increasefrom where we are. Not knowing anything else, I don't know what wouldactually happen. But presumably we would push the level of borrowingsup a bit, which might or might not push the funds rate up. In "B," wewould not push the borrowings up, which might or might not beaccompanied by stability in the funds rate.-77-2/4-5/80MR. AXILROD. Initially.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Initially. And it's all going to belooked at--. The last money supply figures we have are weak, right?MR. AXILROD. I am a little hesitant because I haven't seenthe last [figures] on the new basis. On the old basis they were weak,but I haven't seen the new ones on the new weekly seasonal patternyet. The old figures were weak, but we had expected a considerablerebound.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Unintelligible] foreign deposits.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how to [interpret] thesilence of most people. But Governor Coldwell has expressed himselffor wanting to tighten up a little here.MS. TEETERS. I would prefer alternative B.MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that we might very well get abulge in money as we get into the spring, for one thing because ofthose [tax] refunds. Isn't that the time to do the tightening ifthere's going to be a tightening--when we have a demonstrated increasein the money supply?MR. WALLICH. It raises a problem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given the most recent behavior of thepublished money supply and given the value in some continuity and notwanting a feeling of too much fine-tuning when nothing is clearlygoing wrong, I would suggest that we reiterate the directive that wehad last time which says 4 to 5 percent [on Ml]. I think we have tochange the M2 figure because of the change in the definition of M2.MR. AXILROD. Do you want to add M-1B into the directivealso?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could add M-1B into the directive, butI think it ought to be done the same way, with a range, whatever theconsistent number is.MR. AXILROD. In our view it's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think it's 3/4 of a point higher. Iam surprised there's that much difference.MR. AXILROD. In that period it was 3/4 of a point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we could say 4 to 5 percent for M-1Aand 1/2 point higher for M-lB.MR. AXILROD. About 1/2 point more.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And 6-1/2 percent for M2. That looks alittle--MR. PARTEE. As newly defined.-78-2/4-5/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we'd make it clear that these are thenewly defined numbers.MR. COLDWELL. Your borrowing level for "B" would be $1billion?MR. AXILROD. The average borrowing for January was $1.2billion, and that's what we were suggesting as the initial level. Iwould add that, following that very sharp spurt in borrowing lastweek, partly because the Desk is aiming at [a lower level], borrowinghas been running much lower this week; it's averaging about $892million so far.MR. COLDWELL. But consistent with "B," you're talking $1billion?MR. AXILROD. We mentioned $1.2 billion in the Bluebook.Previously, at the last meeting, $1 billion was discussed; butborrowing seemed to be running higher than that. So it's a fuzzyquestion as to where precisely borrowing is going to want to end up.But we suggested $1.2 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The borrowing figure has been very fuzzyrecently, to say the least. Whatever figure we think about now mightbe adjusted fairly promptly in the light of whatever numbers come in.What I am saying, partly in the interest of consistency, is that weare looking for M-1A between 4 and 5 percent and M-1B between 4-1/2and 5-1/2--or we could say 1/2 point higher. I don't know if there'sany preference between those. Then there is somewhat of a technicalproblem in that we don't get the M2 figure as early, but I think itcould be said that we believe this is consistent with an M2 figure, asnewly defined, of about 6-1/2 percent.MR. COLDWELL. That says that nothing has happened since thelast time we discussed this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Basically, I think it does. That's theissue: Whether we want to take this opportunity to make a change inwhat we laid down a month ago.MR. WALLICH. Well, I think there has been a distinctperception of a higher rate of inflation by the public. And there hasbeen a challenge on whether or not we are still hanging in tough.MR. SCHULTZ. I think alternative B represents somerestraint. Restraint is continuing and we're beginning to see it inthe things that I called attention to. I would not like to see uschange from alternative B.MR. PARTEE. The only reason we don't have a considerableshortfall is because of that seasonal adjustment. Otherwise, we arehanging with a policy that gives us a shortfall.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is the issue. It involves notjust what we want to do now but has some future implications as to howmuch we want to fine-tune these numbers at monthly intervals or theintervals at which we meet. Sometimes we are going to want to change-79-2/4-5/80them, I think, so I am not completely allergic to it. This would be avery small change between "B" and "C."MR. COLDWELL. It's also partly a perception of front-endloading.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Consistent with the decision we just madefor the long run, "B" has a very slight amount of front-end loading,if you mean by front-end loading going below the--MR. COLDWELL. More restraint.MS. TEETERS. Well the January-to-March growth implied by "B"is well below what happened in January. So, by definition, we'regoing to get some tightening.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, we will get a slight amountif these numbers come out that precisely. All these numbers imply aslightly slower rate of growth than what we actually had in January.And I think we could say in the policy record at the very least thatthat implication exists.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, if it's your preference to statethis as ranges of 4 to 5 percent and 4-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, is theimplication that the Desk would aim for the midpoint?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that is true for this period.I have a slight preference for a range just because we are never goingto hit the exact figure anyway--we're not that good--and it justindicates that there's a little [flexibility]. But the implicationclearly is that for now we aim for the midpoint. Now, what we do asthe period [progresses] if we get outside it in either direction andwhether it's practical to get all the way back to the midpoint [is thequestion]. There is some flexibility [with a range], but I don't feelstrongly as to whether it's stated as a midpoint or--MR. BALLES. With the understanding, whether it's in therecord or not, that we would in fact [aim] for the midpoint, I for onewould find it acceptable. My preference would be to be a little moreprecise in the instructions to the Desk as to what to aim for andrecognize that we might not be able to hit it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's separate these two questions.Let me just get a show of hands. Who basically wants to keep themidpoint where we had it, with the modification that means [given] achange in the [M2] definition, but does not want to say that we want adifferent basic [objective for] money growth in the first quarter?This recognizes that that means a slightly lower rate of growth inFebruary and March than we in fact had in January.MR. ALTMANN. Nine, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that seems to be the preference.The subsidiary question--I think it is distinctly subsidiary--iswhether you want to word it the way we did last time, as I suggestedwith the new definitions, or do you want to word it as 4-1/2 percent?-80-2/4-5/80MS. TEETERS. I would prefer to word it the way we did lasttime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Could we have a show of hands on that?MR. ALTMANN. Five.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we want to word it the other waythen. It's about evenly split, but I--MR. PARTEE. I think we're better off stating them all as"abouts"--"about 5" and I guess "about 6-1/2."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. The alternative is sayingabout 4-1/2 percent and--. Well, I think the 6-1/2 percent ought tobe worded differently because we don't have that number right away andwe can't have the implication that we're following that week by weekbecause we just don't have it. So, with that change in language, it's4-1/2 percent for M-1A and 5 percent for M-1B, which I notice ishalfway between "B" and "C." And then "The Committee believes that isconsistent with about 6-1/2 percent for M2 as newly defined."MR. MAYO. How do you explain, Paul, why we have a pointtarget even with the "about" in front of it for the short run and wehave a range for the long run?MR. PARTEE. Because that's the way the Manager [operates].MR. STERNLIGHT. We run on a reserve path. What we're aimingfor is a reserve path that's built on the midpoint if you pick a rangeor the approximate point if you pick an approximate point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hate to introduce this again, but whatwe did once was to say 4-1/2 percent--it happened to be 4-1/2[unintelligible]--and it was clear in the record, though I forget justhow, that lower was better than higher.MR. PARTEE. But that still seems to me an instruction to theManager.MR. MAYO. It's an instruction to the Desk. Okay, I buythat.MR. PARTEE. The last paragraph still has [unintelligible]but in the second [to last] paragraph the instruction is to run hisreserve [operations] so as to be consistent with growth of about 4-1/2percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right.MR. PARTEE. He's going to miss--maybe or probably.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I don't really think it makes anydifference what instruction will be given to the Manager [initially].The [question] is whether or not to put people on notice that nobodyis good enough to meet [a precise] target, and we may imply that byusing a small range. But I don't think it's a very significant-81-2/4-5/80question. Shall we vote? It's 4-1/2, 5, and 6-1/2 percent stated as"abouts."MR. PARTEE. Initial borrowing is at $1.2 billion or about$1-1/4 billion?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Borrowing is at $1-1/4 billion, let's say.Okay.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesPresident Balles YesPresident Black YesGovernor Coldwell NoPresident Kimbrel YesPresident Mayo YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesFirst Vice President Timlen YesGovernor Wallich NoNine for, two against.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will take up the scheduling at lunch.Thank you.END OF MEETING-82-