TRANSCRIPTFEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETINGSeptember 16, 1980Prefatory NoteThis transcript has been produced from the original rawtranscript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat haslightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding.Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription,the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances,words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought orto correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement.Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fullyedited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it wasintended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record ofthe Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not beenreviewed by present or past members of the Committee.Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader'sunderstanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount ofconfidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses,and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages areindicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manneris exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedomof Information Act.Staff Statements Appended to the TranscriptMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign OperationsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic OperationsMr. Kichline, Associate EconomistMr. Axilrod, EconomistMeeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 16, 1980A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee washeld in the offices of the Board of Governors of the FederalReserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 16,1980, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT:Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RoosMr. SchultzMr. SolomonMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMr. WinnMessrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Mayo,Alternate Members of the Federal OpenMarket CommitteeMessrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Minneapolis, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Altmann, SecretaryBernard, Assistant SecretaryPetersen, General CounselOltman, Deputy General CounselAxilrod, EconomistHolmes, Adviser for Market OperationsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis,Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Kichline,and Truman, Associate EconomistsMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for DomesticOperations, System Open Market Account9/16/80Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board ofGovernorsMr. Prell, Associate Director, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Boardof GovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Divisionof International Finance, Board ofGovernorsMr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMrs. Steele, Economist, Open MarketSecretariat, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Boehne,Brandt, Burns, Fousek,Keran, Parthemos, and Scheld, SeniorVice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,Dallas, New York, San Francisco,Richmond, and Chicago, respectivelyMs. Nichols and Mr. Sandberg, VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Chicago and New York, respectivelyMr. Miller, Assistant Vice President,Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofSeptember 16, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can come to order and approve theminutes if somebody will make a motion to approve. Without objectionwe will approve the minutes. Mr. Pardee.MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or discussion? We have toratify the transactions.MS. TEETERS. So moved.MR. PARTEE. Seconded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are ratified. Doyou have any recommendations, Mr. Pardee?MR. PARDEE. Yes, in terms of first renewals on swapdrawings, there are six drawings on the Bundesbank for a total of$301.2 million. And there are three drawings on the Bank of Francefor a total of $85 million, one of which is a second renewal for $24million. The second renewal will require authorization by theCommittee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume that if we have to renew these,we will do that without any objection. I don't think it takes anyformal action. I might say that Mr. Pardee raised with me thequestion of whether we want to change the terms on the swapagreements. We can consider that perhaps next month; I'll talk to theTreasury first. The Committee discussed making the terms moresymmetrical a year ago or two years ago--well, maybe both--MR. PARDEE. Both; [the first discussion was] about two yearsago.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Most of the swap agreements now say thatwhen we are in debt, we share the loss or share the gain with theother central bank; when they are in debt, they take all the risk. Soit's an asymmetrical arrangement and the Germans have raised the issuein the past. They didn't raise it again this year, did they?MR. PARDEE. They are prepared to at any moment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They probably will raise it again. Theyhave raised it in the past and we have had some discussion of it. Thearrangement looks peculiar the way it is [structured] now. Whether wegain or lose on the operation depends not only on the gain or loss buton the interest rate differential, because the other side of thebargain would be to shift to the foreign rate rather than [use] ourrate on the interest rate dimension on the swap. We, this Committee,if I am accurate, arrived at a consensus either two years ago or oneyear ago or both that it would be a good idea to change this and [makeit] more symmetrical. The Treasury agreed in principle but didn'twant to raise the issue at that time for a variety of reasons. Iforget just what the reasons were.9/16/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My reason was very simple. At thatpoint Proxmire was opposed to intervention and so was Henry Reuss.And the Exchange Stabilization Fund of the Treasury, because of payingoff the Roosa bond guarantees, was beginning to run in the red--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To put it mildly.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's finally back in the blackbecause the IMF drawing added to the resources, and the extra interesthas helped on that. But at that time we were in the red and we wouldhave gotten a major reaction from the Congress plus a very high levelof unhappiness being expressed by both Proxmire and Reuss onintervention as opposed to free floating. So I said the timing wasbad even though I agreed in principle. I think the conditions havechanged now. Proxmire and Reuss are much more reconciled to a managedfloat and are not that unhappy with it, and the Exchange StabilizationFund balance sheet has moved back into the black. Under thosecircumstances, I assume the Treasury would not object.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that for a fact; Ihaven't talked with them. And I don't mean to debate the issue today.I just want to warn you that it will probably come up [at our meeting]next month and we will provide a little more explanation and have somematerials for the Committee. A logical time to bring it up isprobably next month as we get ready for the [annual] renewal [of theswap agreements] in December. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?MR. ROOS. Yes sir. May I start, Mr. Chairman? Peter, wedid an analysis of the direction of interest rates in the period fromJune 13 through September 5. That's about a three-month period. Andit's rather amazing, as you pointed out, that most short-term rateswere up [significantly]--90-day certificates were up 239 basis points,4-month commercial paper was up 236 points, and 6-month bill rateswere up even more than that--and yet the fed funds rate increased byonly 79 basis points according to our computation. Why would there bethat enormous disparity? Why would the fed funds rate have risen somuch less than other short-term interest rates?MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure. It depends somewhat on thetime period one takes. Mid-June was just about the low point in themarket rates. The funds rate had come down in June, I believe, to the9 percent area.MR. ROOS. Doesn't the funds rate normally track these otherrates?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'm not sure which follows which.Normally, some of these other rates tend to build on the funds rate oron dealer financing costs, [which] tend to track fairly close to thefunds rate. As one goes out in the maturity spectrum, there is adescending degree of tracking to the dealer financing costs.MR. ROOS. You mentioned in your report the sense of thetelephone conference, which caused you to intervene in the fed funds9/16/80market. Did you have a feeling from that call that you had someconstraints on--MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it was a serious inhibition.I would not say that it was something that caused us to intervene; Iwould say that it was something that modified in some modest degreethe form of intervention. We had some reserves to drain to meet ourpaths. We undertook those draining operations rather gingerly; for afew days, we got some help from the Treasury by getting them to raisetheir balance so that reserves could be taken out without the Deskhaving to enter the market in an overt way and be seen taking reservesout aggressively.MR. ROOS. But you don't feel that--MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it stopped us at any point,really, from reaching our paths.MR. ROOS. That wouldn't have been a major contributingfactor to the fed funds rate moving up only 80 basis points, whereaseverything else was going up 250 to 300 basis points? We weren'tholding the funds rate down, were we?MR. STERNLIGHT. We were not holding down the funds rate; wewere seeking in late August to reach our reserve paths in a way thatavoided putting aggressive new upward pressure on it. In any event,the funds rate at one point touched the lower bound of 8-1/2 percentin July, around mid-July, and was up to nearly 11 percent in August.So it may be to some extent just a choice of the time period in yourcomparison.MR. MORRIS. Early in the period, Larry, the market wasleading the funds rate in anticipation. And I think that's the baseperiod pattern.MR. AXILROD. Well, the dating might change your results. Itis true that recently other short-term rates have risen more than thefunds rate. But I don't think that is terribly unusual. After all,you are talking about 3- and 6-month rates as against a 1-day rate.There are times when people begin to expect a rise in rates, and the3-month or the 6-month rate will move a little more than the fundsrate under those conditions. In August we had a big resurgence inbank credit demand and large CD issues, which pulled up the CD rate inparticular. I don't think that is extremely unusual, although thoserates have moved up closer to the funds rate than had been theexperience over the past two or three years.MR. ROOS. Those figures in that period did seem to be[unintelligible].MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, if you used something like the past5-week interval, the funds rate would be up something like 1-3/4percentage points--from around 9 to, say, 10-3/4 percent--which isroughly [comparable to the move on] other short-term rates.MR. ROOS. Thanks, Peter.9/16/80MR. BLACK. If we hadn't overshot our targets, [the fundsrate] would have been up more, too, more than likely. I wonder ifthat didn't contribute to some of the rise in the other rates.MR. STERNLIGHT. Total reserves were [above the path]; wewere about on target on the nonborrowed reserves. If the aggregateshad not overshot the target, yes, that surely would have made--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Peter, based upon nothing more thanreading the newspaper, I have the sense that the market is a littleless hypersensitive to our daily operations than they were two monthsago. Is that true or not true?MR. STERNLIGHT. Just in the last week or two, I would sharethat sense. There was one incident during the period, which Imentioned, when we did some RPs and the markets really took off; butthey just may have been reacting because they had overdone their sell-off during August. I wouldn't want to bet a lot of money that theyhave really matured to the point where they will take our operationsas fully in stride as we'd like from day to day.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though you're right that ithasn't been [the case] in the current [period], I still think there isa residue of misunderstanding about the Desk's operations. I hearthat from all of my visitors--that the Fed is giving conflictingsignals. They don't understand [our new procedures] completely nomatter how much Paul has said on this. That's why we were thinkingthat a technical explanation by Peter and his people to the dealers,with the press listening in, might make a lot of sense. But it mightbe wise to wait on the timing of that until we sense that concernincreasing again. At the moment things are quiescent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think The New York Times has a differentguy writing the articles now, don't they?MR. STERNLIGHT. That's true, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That fellow seems to have gone out of hisway a couple of times to say that these operations are just to providereserves or to withdraw reserves and they have no implication forinterest rates.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But he's quoting dealers, too. Andsome of the dealers who were critical a couple years ago are morerelaxed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It wasn't quite clear to me whom he wasquoting. I thought maybe he was quoting Peter or you; I'm not sayingthat was so but I think--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible].MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, with the Times change, there is abetter man on the bond market. But this period of misunderstandingdid not involve just that one paper or just the press, Mr. Chairman.I think it was people in the market, too.9/16/80MR. ROOS. The Wall Street Journal has changed its team. Inoticed that Mr. Foldesse, or whatever his name is, who used to write--or used to misinterpret this--is no longer on that column in theWall Street Journal. Is that his name?MR. STERNLIGHT. It's Foldesse. He is writing it sometimes,I think.MR. ROOS. Is he?MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe he's on vacation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments?MR. EASTBURN. I have questions, Peter, about the discountrate. First, has the rate level been a problem for you in theseasonal targets and so on? Second, what is the market sentimentabout the discount rate and the changes in it?MR. STERNLIGHT. As to whether the rate level has been aproblem, it has [made it] difficult in these last couple of weeks interms of aiming for nonborrowed reserves in that we expected somegreater borrowing. It has been hard to gauge just how much thatborrowing would be. I think one of the factors was that the fundsrate was 1/2 or 3/4 or sometimes even a point above the discount rateand there was an attraction to the discount window, which makes itharder to judge. I wouldn't say that it is a serious problem for usat this point nor do I get the sense that it has been that serious--some of you [from the Reserve Banks] probably know better--in theadministration of the window. As to market expectations, there wassome feeling around late August that there might be a move on thediscount rate. That has died down some. Possibly it has begun tocrop up again lately, but I have not heard too many comments on that.MR. EASTBURN. Would a change be a substantial shock to themarket?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think at the moment it would be somethingof a surprise, yes.MR. MAYO. Would it make your job easier if there were achange, or is that an unfair question?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't see it making the job easier.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Peter, when you made that adjustment of $150million to the nonborrowed reserves target, what determined thedecision to make it that amount and not $100 million or $200 millionor some other number? This had to do with the overrun on the totalreserves so, of course, by that decision you were determining thelevel of borrowing. The level of borrowing again determines the fundsrate. So I'm trying to understand the structure of this reasoning.MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure we have a closely reasonedrationale for just how we arrive at those [adjustments]. This is donein consultation with Mr. Axilrod and his staff, but it was with Ed9/16/80Ettin at the time I believe. Were you there, Steve? We have closeconsultation with the Chairman as well. On this occasion and in otherinstances when that kind of adjustment was made, it was typically forsome fraction--often roughly but not precisely half--of the overage orunderage of total reserves from the path. I must say that on thisparticular occasion it was also because we had had a bulge inborrowing in the Labor Day week. And if no such adjustment had beenmade--if we had not reduced the nonborrowed path--it would have leftus in a position of expecting almost no adjustment borrowing for thebalance of the period. In a way one might say we backed into it bysaying, in effect, that we probably wanted to keep adjustmentborrowing in the $400 to $500 million area. And that contributed in amajor way to that $150 million decision.MR. WALLICH. Do you use a monthly model or do you use somerelationship between the funds rate and the level of borrowing?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it's that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have that pseudo-precision.MR. ROOS. Well, if the level of borrowing comes in higherthan we would anticipate, [can't] you reduce the level of thenonborrowed reserves path accordingly? Can't you adjust your openmarket operations for the unexpected bulge in borrowing or theunexpectedly low borrowing if you ignore the effect on the fed fundsmarket? Can't you just supply or withdraw reserves to compensate forwhat has happened?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, we could. There's always that questionof how much we want to compensate for that high borrowing. We facedthat kind of decision in [this statement] week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Desk can't [adjust] in the short run.It's fixed. In a sense they could do it over time if people areborrowing more, as they may be now. They seem to be borrowing morethan we would expect, given the differential from the discount rate.But in any particular week it is fixed.MR. ROOS. Do we have to supply the reserves?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to supply the reserves.MR. ROOS. [Why] do we have to supply the reserves? If wedid not supply those reserves, we'd force the commercial banks toborrow or to buy fed funds, which would move the fed funds rate up.What is lurking in the back of my mind is this: Are we, in effect,frustrating our ability to achieve what we want with the aggregatesand with reserves because of possible concern about fluctuations inthe fed funds market? In other words, do we accommodate that problem?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can force [the depository institutions]to borrow more in a given week, but we can't force the level ofreserves lower.MR. WALLICH. Yes, but by forcing them to borrow more, we areraising the funds rate. And the question here is: Are we in thatmore distant sense back on a funds rate target?9/16/80MR. ROOS. You said it, Henry!MR. AXILROD. Governor Wallich, as you know, with laggedreserve accounting there is simply nothing we can do in the currentweek other than determine the level of free reserves in the bankingsystem with open market operations, given required reserves. And tothe degree that there is a relationship--and it's pretty loose thesedays--between free reserves and interest rates, we are in some sensein the short run determining the funds rate. But in the longer run,of course, it's the market movement in the money supply relative toour target that will determine the funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this affects the funds rate, but Idon't think one can say that doing what we did, which was a compromisein that one week, was aimed to affect the funds rate. You could arguethat if we were pulling back the nonborrowed reserves, that would[imply] a funds rate objective--that we were forcing a higher fundsrate.MR. AXILROD. I was trying to say that, inevitably, doingthat in one week would have an effect on the funds rate relative tonot doing it in that week because required reserves are fixed. Butover the longer run--though I don't know what the funds rate would bebecause of the looseness in the relationship between free reserves andthe funds rate--it does not. That little [effect] passes away.MR. WALLICH. I'm not saying that this was not the best wayof coping with it. But conceptually, for instance, one could say thatfor every dollar of overrun on total reserves we will reduce thenonborrowed not by $.50, not by $1.50, but by $10. Well, that wouldhave produced massive borrowing and the funds rate would have shot up.Presumably that wouldn't have been a very good decision with thereason being that one shouldn't disturb the markets unnecessarily.It's a question of how much of a disturbance to markets one is willingto accept in order to get closer to the total reserves path.MR. AXILROD. Well, as Peter mentioned, this was done in thefourth week of a 5-week period. So one could ask: Should it havebeen done in the third week or the second week? It was delayed untilthe fourth week because there was some hope that what was in train inthe first and second weeks, in terms of tightening, would show someevidence of bringing down required reserves. Then, by the fourth weekwe were still running well above our total reserve path, so by thattime it seemed only reasonable, in view of past experience and pastoperations with this technique, to make an adjustment of roughly half.As Peter mentioned, if that adjustment hadn't been made at that time--and I would say maybe we should have done it earlier--then we wouldhave had a very sharp drop in borrowing and maybe some drop in thefunds rate in the short run, but I'm not sure. We had a large bulgein borrowing earlier without a lot of rise in the funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have been in one of these periods,which seem to be recurrent or almost perpetual, [where the incomingdata on the aggregates seem to move] in one direction or another.It's not always in the same direction. But all of the actualpreliminary figures and the estimates keep showing lower money supplyfigures than eventually materializes. We have had runs either of this9/16/80sort or precisely the reverse before. But it doesn't seem to berandom. It does--MR. PARTEE. It's a [long-running] characteristic. I've seenit--MR. MORRIS. Well, I think it's because the economy isstronger than we are projecting, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be, but I [don't] see why thatwould affect the actual estimates that are made. Why thesepreliminary numbers run low or high when they are supposed to be akind of random sample is beyond me. But it seems to happen for weeksin a row.MR. MORRIS. Nonetheless, I think the system is working,Henry, in the sense that the Desk has pushed the funds rate up 200basis points, which I suspect is more than this Committee would havedone if we had made an overt decision on it.MR. WALLICH. That's for certain.MR. ROOS. I hate to belabor this, but if we look at thequarterly average rates of money growth on page 7 [of the Bluebook],for example, we see that in the first quarter M-1B grew at 6 percent,in the second quarter it declined at minus 2-1/2 percent--[the numberin the column labeled "Alt. B"] is a misprint, I think--and in thethird quarter its growth has skyrocketed to 12-1/4 percent. One can'tfeel that our basic objective is being met with those violentfluctuations. And I don't think those rates of growth in any wayreflect any action that this group agreed upon or any policy ordirective that we gave. They're just all over the lot. And whatworries me is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand those numbers, frankly.Just stop for a second. That second quarter has a misprint in it?MR. ROOS. Yes, that's minus 2-1/2 percent, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It should be minus 2-1/2 percent in bothof those columns.MR. ROOS. But what worries me is that we will agree onsomething today for the next three months, or whatever period, andthen we will hope like mad that somehow or other something out in thewild blue yonder will occur to enable us to meet that. I don't havethe feeling that we really are causing the events to occur through ouroperations that we on the Committee have agreed upon from time totime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's quite true. But thequestion is whether we have control in the short run, and I'm afraidthis recent pattern that you point to shows that we don't. Most ofthis increase in the third quarter came in one week!MR. WALLICH. But we really do have to look at what FrankMorris pointed to, the behavior of interest rates. You don't like thebehavior of aggregates. Interest rates have been the one thing that9/16/80have been even more volatile. And I think that since the mechanismworks through these interest rates, we really have had more leveragein what we have done.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we got criticized by the bankerswhen they were here the other day for having too much volatility inthe money supply growth and too much volatility in interest rates. Itold them they could criticize us for one or the other but not both atthe same time.MR. FORD. Did you offer them interest rate controls!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have had volatility in both. Whycan't they criticize us for both?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what mechanism gets rid ofthe volatility in the one without increasing [the volatility in] theother.MR. ROOS. Well, Paul, maybe we ought to do some work to tryto see whether we're approaching this in the most effective manner interms of accomplishing what we have all agreed we ought to accomplishand whether the mechanism [we're using] is really the best one or not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's always a fair question.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, if we do that, we ought to besure we understand what our long-run objective is. As I view it, itis not to make the money supply grow by a steady amount quarter byquarter but to achieve a longer-run path of monetary and creditexpansion that is conducive both to healthy economic growth and areduction of inflation. I don't see the system as working outunfavorably just because the quarterly pattern is so erratic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are all matters that we have to lookat as time passes. I don't particularly like what has been happeningin the sense that we have put all this money in the money supply andhave had these quarterly fluctuations which don't seem to beparticularly controllable. What is the significance of that? Themost optimistic view is that these quarterly movements are not verysignificant. We had a decline in the second quarter and we have [now]made up for it. We will see what happens in the fourth quarter, butthe jury is still out. We may have had a short-run bounceback here.MR. WALLICH. But by having interest rates collapse asdramatically as they did, don't you think that we did a good deal toshorten the recession? Housing must have come back somewhat earlierand some other things may have come back earlier than they would havehad we let interest rates go down gradually the way we otherwisenormally would have done.MR. PARTEE. And then as the economy [rebounded], the demandfor money increased again and we found ourselves reacting againstthat. There is a demand side, Larry, and it has shown sharp shiftsthis year. We've worked against them and, of course, it's a questionof judgment as to how strongly to work against the demand factors inthe market. But by [historical] standards, we worked against them agood deal harder than we did in the past. We have had both a sharper9/16/80decline in rates and a sharper, earlier recovery in rates than everbefore in my recollection. And that is because of the change inpolicy announced last October.MR. ROOS. Chuck, I think we've made great progress. All I'masking is whether from time to time we shouldn't review what we aredoing and try to make it even better.MR. WALLICH. If we do something along those lines, I wouldurge that it include an effort to see if we can't systemize theperiodic adjustments in the path and find some way to appraise whatthe likely effect will be of [making adjustments of] $100 million or$200 million or whatever.MR. SCHULTZ. I would call to your attention that Mr. Axilrodand Mr. Lindsey recently wrote a paper for the American EconomicAssociation which addressed some of these questions. You might findit interesting reading. I suspect that you will not agree with itvery much, President Roos, because the indication is that we need tocontinue to exercise some judgment and that we need to continue tolook at interest rates to some degree. I also felt that it arguedvery strongly for keeping fairly wide target ranges, which I think isconsistent with that as well. But there has been some thinking andsome writing on that subject, and you might find that articleinteresting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Paul, I wonder if the October 6th anniversary datedoesn't give us an opportunity to make some educational efforts thatare unrelated to the current market scene to reaffirm some of thesethings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have been considering how best todo that. I have a public appearance tomorrow; I may or may not takethe opportunity to do that. But it is a matter that continues toconcern me and we will find an opportunity. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, my point is related to the one thatI believe Henry was making. It seems to me that we may have held offmaking the adjustments to the nonborrowed reserve target too longbecause we expected, on the basis of our projections of the demand formoney, that we would get certain behavior. That's very hard to[predict], as all of us know. It's almost next to impossible to do, Ithink, so I would favor a little more prompt adjustments to the harddata we have in terms of setting our nonborrowed reserve targets.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could I differ with that? I seeproblems with that. There are times when, given the unpredictabilityof the markets, if we are in there too quickly making adjustments, wecould be whipsawing the markets. And we will get all kinds ofcomplaints about the unpredictability of Fed policy. I don't thinkthere's any across-the-board rule of thumb that we can adopt on thefrequency of adjustments. I think we have to leave it to the judgmentof the people who are [tracking] this on the Board staff and at theDesk, regarding the chances that a certain movement will get reversedand whether we should move [immediately] or wait a day. I just don'tsee any other way of playing this.-10-9/16/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we probably ought to find some timeto discuss this at greater length. But following up on Mr. Solomon'scomment, there is a danger [in making adjustments too promptly].Let's take March, when the aggregates were running a little high. Wewere pretty tough then, but suppose we had followed this procedure andhad made even sharper adjustments to the aggregates when they wererunning high in March. What would have happened in April? We in facthad a 16 percent [rate of] decline; one just doesn't know lookingahead. The problem is that this process apparently runs, likeeverything else in economics, with some lagged effect. And it's thoselags that give us 90 percent of the problem.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I just make a briefstatement? I think Tony is right that we would get a lot of criticismfrom the market for more movement in interest rates, but I believe wewould smooth out some of these abberations in the money supply.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a question of what is important.Now, we can't answer these questions this morning, but I have begun tohear a lot of comments from people who say the volatility of interestrates in and of itself is a bad thing.MR. BLACK. Most people believe that, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not just talking about market people.I've had a complaint from automobile companies that their dealers willnot hold inventory because, while they perhaps can afford presentinterest rates, they're not going to get stuck with a big inventory ofcars [with] the risk that the interest rate will go up to 20 percenton them and they can't get rid of the inventory. It's that kind ofproblem, which I don't think is irrelevant. I hear the same thingfrom the homebuilding industry. I don't know how justified that[complaint] is, but--MR. BAUGHMAN. It's not necessarily bad.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know.MR. PARTEE. It depends on what your economic objective is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's hard to say. The housing people, ofcourse, argue the same thing: That they'd go ahead at currentinterest rates, but they are afraid of getting caught in an upswing[in rates] before the house gets completed. So, I don't know whetherit's good or bad. But there are a lot of problems here that are--MR. BAUGHMAN. Capital goods can be built to order.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if I may just take one minute ofthe Committee's time: It's a little difficult to think of what isgoing on with the money supply in a vacuum, independent of what isgoing on in the rest of the economy. In the spring we had ratherstrange events: We had the introduction of a credit control program,which was rather unique in our history; we had interest rates going tolevels that were unique in our history; and we had responses in therest of the economy that were rather unique. Among those responseswere that people chose to get out of debt rapidly and to get alongwith less cash by a huge amount. And the mechanism that the Committee-11-9/16/80put in place, as I would see it, was flexible enough--it could be alot more rigid with certain institutional changes--to be responsive tothose changes. I believe it's wrong to think that in the short runthe money supply will behave only in the way the Committee a prioriwants it to behave, Rather, in the short run it will behave inresponse to what is going on in the economy, only toned up in certainways by what the Committee wants. It's an awfully big thing theCommittee is confronting and in the short run it's very hard toinfluence it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there is a range of issues to whichwe will be returning continually and maybe in a more orderly fashionthan this morning. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In view of the questions about the presenteconomic situation and the discussion of a turning point and all therest, let's just pause here for questions and comments on the businesssituation. And if anybody wants to volunteer attitudes toward taxreduction, I would be interested in hearing them. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might ask Jim: Whatwas the selling rate for automobiles in the first ten days ofSeptember?MR. KICHLINE. It was 7.3 million units using our seasonals,and in both July and August it was 6.4 million at an annual rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When do the leading indicators come out?MR. KICHLINE. I don't know.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not very soon.MR. MORRIS. It's usually at the end of the month.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Am I correct in associating theincrease in employment with the reduced rate of decline in realoutput? I get an impression that probably no productivity gains aregoing on.MR. KICHLINE. We have a significant decline in productivityin our forecast for the third quarter. The decline in the secondquarter was revised since the last Committee meeting. The earlynumbers showed a decline of 4 percent; it's now roughly 3 percent andwe have forecast a further decline. That is, the increase in outputis not sufficient to offset the substantial change in hours worked,and our productivity number in the current quarter is down aboutanother 2 percent at an annual rate. So the productivity performancethat is associated with this forecast is a distinctly poor one.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. When people talk about the underlyingrate of inflation corresponding to the average hourly increase inlabor costs in the industrial sector are they assuming flatproductivity?-12-9/16/80MR. KICHLINE. Well, people refer to different things. Astandard approach is to use a cyclically adjusted productivity number,and those estimates range all over the lot. Our own is something like3/4 of a percentage point. And it's assumed that businesses tend torespond to changes in productivity over a longer period of time andare not influenced by the quarterly changes. So, taking those kindsof productivity numbers on average, they would dispense with [thequarterly fluctuations] and say that the underlying trend is somethinglike [a rise of] 1/2 to 1 percentage point. Using that kind of numbergives us unit labor costs running about 9 percent. Compensation is 10percent, and with 1 percent or so productivity you get unit laborcosts of 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Aren't hours worked going to be down inthis coming quarter?MR. KICHLINE. Just a small amount--3 percent relative to [adecline of] 8-3/4 percent in the second quarter. So they are stilldown.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three percent down. But you have a GNPestimate down 3 percent, roughly. I just--MR. KICHLINE. Well, I am referring to the nonfarm businesssector. Nonfarm business sector output in this forecast is down 4.9percent. Nonfarm productivity is down 1.9 percent and hours workedare down 3 percent.MR. MORRIS. But you implied that if you had had the retailsales figure when you made the forecast that the forecast would showless weakness than was in the Greenbook.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we would take some of the gain inpersonal consumption expenditures out of inventory, so it wouldn't allshow up. But I think we'd have at least a percentage point lessdecline; instead of a 3 percent decline in real GNP we would now havea decline of perhaps 2 percent or a shade under.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I have a question, which I couldhave asked last time too but didn't, on the gross domestic businessproduct fixed weight price index. That is the index the staff uses inits projection as the best index of inflation. [The projection hasfor] the first quarter of '81 of [an annual rate of] 10.3 percent, forthe second quarter 9.5 percent, and for the third quarter 8.5 percent.I can't understand what causes that tremendous improvement in theinflationary outlook in those two quarters. Also, my second questionis: Why do we use this rather than the GNP deflator, particularlysince we usually respond in terms of the GNP deflator when Congress orothers ask us for figures along this line?MR. KICHLINE. With regard to the first question, the majorchange in this improved outlook is that we have assumed the increasein social security taxes in January. The employer portion will becranked directly into unit labor costs obviously, and we assume thatbusinesses will try to pass those increased costs through fairlyquickly. So, the first half of the year is importantly influenced by-13-9/16/80the social security tax increases, and that effect tends to wear off.In addition, running with slack labor markets and unutilized capacityfor an extended period of time we think will begin to make largerinroads on the level of inflation. But it's mainly social securityaffecting the first half and pretty much absent in the second half.MR. MAYO. In the 1980 pattern, though, you have a higherrate of inflation in the fourth quarter. I assume that's the CivilService [pay] increase and you don't have that for the next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a Civil Service increase in here?MR. MAYO. It's 9 percent.MR. KICHLINE. The big factor is the rapid acceleration offood prices that we have projected. On the second question you asked,on why use this one, all of the price indexes now present a[distorted] picture and we are frustrated as to which one to choose.We obviously shifted away from the implicit deflator because of theshifting weights, which give a distorted picture at times. You arequite correct that the Congress and others often refer to the implicitdeflator. My own preference, frankly, is for something like the PCEdeflator. But in a world in which we have rapid increases in energyprices, both the implicit deflator and the business fixed productdeflator tend to understate what is happening because of thesubtraction that is cranked into these numbers. So, you can put yourmoney down and take your choice. There are many indexes available.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Jim, I have noticed--and this may be graspingat straws--that the average hourly earnings series for the months ofJuly and August shows a very marked deceleration to around 4-1/2 to 5percent on top of almost 10 percent for each of the first twoquarters. Is there anything to that or is that just a statisticalaberration?MR. KICHLINE. On average hourly earnings, I don't know ofany quirky information in terms of the monthly numbers. We haveassumed, in fact, on a quarterly average basis that the hourlyearnings index will be running around 9 to 9-1/4 percent, down alittle from the second quarter. These numbers are very volatile on amonthly basis but we have not altered our view that there is adeveloping trend that's very different from what we have seen in thefirst half of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. The economy seems to be coming around muchfaster than expected. This could be for one of many reasons, whichcould be very hard to disentangle. I'd like to get your reaction.One would be that the automatic stabilizers are stronger than wethink, that the budget goes into a bigger deficit faster, and othersuch events. Another might be that our interest rate policy has beenparticularly effective. A third might be that the economy is just soinflation jittery that after people catch their breath they rush outand try to beat the game again. But in any event, we do seem to have-14-9/16/80gained a responsiveness to upward factors and lost a responsiveness todownward factors. I'd like to get your thoughts on that.Now, with respect to tax policy, I'd just say that if theeconomy is stronger than expected, interest rates presumably will behigher. Monetary policy in some sense would be tighter. A tax cutwill make fiscal policy easier. So we would be moving exactly in thewrong direction on the fiscal/monetary policy mix--toward tightermonetary policy and an easier budget stance. That's just the oppositeof what a growth-oriented economy should have.MR. KICHLINE. With respect to your question, I would linkthe second and third quarters together. If you look back at themisses in terms of actual performance relative to expectations, thesecond quarter was a big miss not only to the staff here but I thinkas a general matter. It was much weaker than before. So, I wouldthink that the rather extraordinary measures taken in late winter orearly spring had a significant impact, and in retrospect a greaterimpact than we would have judged at the time. It would not seemunusual, therefore, to find some snapback in the third quarter in someof those sectors that were sharply depressed. Now, [I don't know]whether that has occurred because interest rates are lower, consumerattitudes are different, monetary policy is different, the automaticstabilizer response is working, or fiscal policy [is easier]. I thinkin general one can say that we got off track in the second quarter andit's not unusual to see some snap-back. The critical question iswhether in fact this is the beginning of a sustained sizable expansionin real activity. And assuming the monetary policy that's in theforecast, which we perceive to be restraining--consistent with somefurther rise in interest rates--even with the tax cut we do notbelieve that we are on the verge of seeing sustained strong expansion.It's quite possible that we could have a couple of months of fairlystrong business news followed by some weakness. But I don't see that.The key issue is whether we are set up for continued strong expansion.I don't see that as a likely outcome at the present time.MR. WALLICH. This few months of weakness that you set out asa possibility: Could you visualize that going to the extent of GNPgrowth turning negative again?MR. KICHLINE. Oh, I think so. That's the double dip or theW or the extended L or any of the other exotic terms in fashion. Ithink that's quite possible. In the staff forecast, for example, weare talking about a small negative, and it doesn't take a great dealat an annual rate to find something that would flip that to positiveor [more] negative.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In our financial report for theRedbook, we included the views of some key financial experts in NewYork. And Henry Kaufman in those remarks is predicting a double-diprecession.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Are there any estimates yet as to the amountand the timing of capital expenditures associated with the energyprograms that are now apparently getting shaped up and into form for-15-9/16/80financing either directly by the government or by governmentguarantees of the interest rates?MR. KICHLINE. We do not have anything in house and I am notaware that anything is available within the government. Our ownassumption is that the program is being funded essentially withwindfall profits and [will involve] synthetic fuel and that sort ofthing. We have much longer lead times. It would not have anappreciable impact within the year 1981 but would be building overtime. The energy sector itself in our forecast is fairly strong. Weimplicitly are using the energy sector as one that is holding upbusiness fixed investment. That is, we'd have a sharper decline if itweren't for substantial energy sector investments. I can't answeryour question directly, but I'm not aware of any such numbers around.MR. BAUGHMAN. Would you anticipate, assuming the programevolved, that we would be speaking about magnitudes of capitalexpenditures that would become a significant element in the trend ofthe economy?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, over the long run. But I really do thinkwe are talking about a medium-term horizon, in the mid-1980s or so,given that these programs have long lead times. So, later on in thisdecade, if the programs continue, the dollars expended [will besignificant]. In current dollar terms, expenditures of $200 billionplus over a period of time are being talked about. That, in fact,will be a principal feature of the business investment sector later inthe decade.MR. BAUGHMAN. As to your question on the turning point, Mr.Chairman, I think the staff projection is about as good as can bedone. I see no reason why it doesn't have as high a probability ofmaterializing as any that might be made. And I certainly share theview that we don't seem to have the stage set for a sustainedrecovery. I would visualize the next year or so as an ongoing battlebetween monetary restraint and the deeply imbedded and still spreadinginflationary thrust, with the result that improvements in employmentand production may well be a casualty of the struggle betweencontinued [monetary restraint] and the surging inflation thrust.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether I should regionallyadjust that comment; I interpret it as quite bearish.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. PARTEE. That was a national comment; it wasn't a Texascomment.MR. BAUGHMAN. Now that you've provided an opening, there isa continuation of what strikes me as a rather unbelievable volume ofnew office building construction in all centers of significantpopulation size through the Southwest. It does not seem to be slowingdown. That is, new projects are being planned, funded, announced, andstarted. And the financing for them, particularly the equity money,almost without exception seems to come from foreign sources. I'm toldthat if you can't figure a project so that it looks as if it will beprofitable and viable with some debt in it, that presents noparticular problem. The suppliers of the equity simply supply more-16-9/16/80equity and are willing to take a fairly low computed return on theequity they put in. It just goes on seemingly without--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There must be some correlation between ourability to sustain office building and not do much factory buildingand the productivity figures.MR. BAUGHMAN. That could well be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. You asked about where we stand on tax policy, andthat's one of the things my staff has been looking at. We're veryconcerned about the explosive growth on the spending side that we'veseen in the last year or so. It now appears that on a year-over-yearbasis federal spending both for defense and nondefense purposes iswell up into the double digit range, well beyond earlier forecasts.I'm curious to know, Jim: In your projection and in your model of thefederal deficit on an NIA basis, I take it that $67 to $68 billionshown is without the tax cut.MR. KICHLINE. No, we have a $28 billion tax cut in ourforecast; [that is an assumption] we adopted two months ago or so. Wehave not changed it; we haven't matched it up with theAdministration's proposal. So we do have roughly a $28 billion taxcut.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Effective January 1st?MR. KICHLINE. That's right. Well, retroactive to January 1.MR. FORD. You're saying that without the tax cut there wouldbe a $40 billion deficit next year?MR. KICHLINE. Well, roughly. We'd have a somewhat weakereconomy, we would assume, so receipts would be lower. So it wouldn'tall be taken out. The Administration has a $36 billion deficit infiscal '81 with their tax proposal, which is assumed to come alonglate in the fiscal year and that affects receipts principally in thefollowing fiscal year.MR. FORD. Well, I remember the President saying just a fewweeks ago that there was going to be a zero deficit next year. So I[proceed] based on the trend in their forecast rather than theabsolute level. Looking at off-budget spending trends that are comingon stream and adding them on to a realistic estimate of the deficit, Iwould come to the conclusion that we definitely have to resist acountercyclical tax cut at this time. It would lay the groundwork, asa couple of the previous commentators have noted, for a very toughsituation for us early next year in that we would be looking at a lotof pressure in the financial markets with a possible crowding outscenario. We'll be caught in the trap of either having to create andbe given [the blame] for a credit crunch or for letting the aggregatesget away from us in the first, second, and third quarters of nextyear. And when we have already committed ourselves in public toreducing the rate of growth of the money supply I don't see how we canhope to do that if we have to do it in the context of a huge deficitdeveloping early next year. So, I think we have to fight this-17-9/16/80countercyclical tax cut. But if we wanted to add something to what wesay, I'd say it should be directed toward the need for a longer-termchange in the tax structure that would emphasize taxing consumptionmore and investment and saving less, together with some indexedreduction over a longer period of time of the inflation premium in thetax structure on incomes of all kinds. I'd be inclined to continue tofight the tax cut as a countercyclical [measure] and start to fightfor tax reform as a longer-term measure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm basically in agreement withthe staff's view on where the economy is going. In the near term Imight be even a bit more optimistic than the staff. I've felt forsome time that the recession is likely to be short and I think when welook back a couple of months from now we may find that July was thetrough of the recession and we were starting to come out of it inAugust. But the long-run growth prospects that the staff sees are notgood. And certainly the growth of 2 percent is far, far below what wehave typically seen for the first four quarters of a recovery. Ibelieve we need slow growth, and I'd be happy with 2 percent realgrowth. I do think Ernie is right that we're going to be strugglingover the next year. I think we will struggle not just over the nextyear but over the next 5 to 10 years with the question of how we tradeoff real growth against fighting inflation. We're going to have totry to find a policy that will let us stick with the long-run battleagainst inflation and not try to get it done right away.Now, I want to call attention to the fact that I can agreewith the staff's forecast for next year only if the kind of policyassumptions that underlie it [are realized]. They include asubstantial tax cut at the first of the year and a monetary policythat I don't think is properly characterized as simply saying that M1grows at the midpoint of the range we've been setting. [The reason isthat] the staff's forecast hypothesizes a substantial reduction indemand for money. I'd like to have Jim expound just a little on hisbest judgment as to what the outlook for next year would be if in factthat drop in the demand function for money doesn't occur.MR. KICHLINE. I think I've heard this question somewherebefore! As you know, we have assumed a further downward drift in themoney demand function. For 1980, from the fourth quarter of '79 tothe fourth quarter of '80, given what has happened and assuming nofurther downward drift, the drop amounts to about 3-1/2 percent. For1981 our forecast assumes [a drop of] about 4 percent. That is thedifference between the assumed actual money growth and that whichwould be predicted by the econometric model, which was estimatedthrough mid-1974. It implies that there are financial innovations orother changes. We have assumed 4 percent [based on] what has occurredin several years in the past. But it's really a matter of faith, onemight say, at this juncture. There is some basis for assuming it.MR. PARTEE. Is that for M-1A, Jim?away--MR. KICHLINE. That's M-1A, right. Now if you take that-18-9/16/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's M-1A unadjusted? You just take M-1Aat its raw value?MR. PARTEE. We've got NOW accounts--MR. KICHLINE. No, we don't. It's M-1A adjusted for ATSaccounts. It gets very messy and complicated and is best leftuntouched here. But in any event if we take that away, we have ineffect a tighter monetary policy than is assumed in our forecast. Wedid a model run which essentially limited measured money growth to4-1/4 percent and had no drift [in money demand], and we get norecovery in economic activity at all. It's flat throughout 1981 andthe deflator is .3 to .4 lower. So we're talking about nominal GNPdown 2 to 2-1/2 percent from what we have in the forecast now, but wedon't get a recovery in economic activity. And the model says that weget astronomical interest rates that are hard to believe--a bill rateof 18 percent or something like that.MR. GRAMLEY. Why are they hard to believe?MR. AXILROD. It's hard to believe they'd be sustained, Ithink.MR. KICHLINE. Yes, if we extend this to the second quarterof 1982, we can see the collapse. Bill rates are, say, 18 percent andthe deflator is 8 percent. It's hard to believe that that wouldpersist for any extended period of time.MR. GRAMLEY. But it persists unless the economy has an evenworse performance than that or unless the political pressures on us togive up are so substantial that we cannot persist.MR. KICHLINE. Right. I have no problem with that. I'm justsaying it's not a sustainable pattern. At some point you have to getback into balance, which can occur from any of a number of sides.MS. TEETERS. What is the historical record on this drift inmoney demand?MR. KICHLINE. Let me just read [the numbers]: 5-1/2 percentin 1975; 4 percent in 1976; 1-1/4 percent in 1977; 1/2 percent 1978and 1979, and we're estimating 3-1/2 percent in 1980.MS. TEETERS. It's not a steady series. It fluctuatesrather--MR. KICHLINE. Oh, it's by no means steady.MR. WALLICH. It fluctuates cyclically, doesn't it? That isto say, at the beginning of a recovery velocity increases more.MR. GRAMLEY. This is not a velocity increase; it's adownward shift in the money demand function. This takes into accountthe cyclical movement in velocity that accompanies rising interestrates. This series is one that says: What would the demand for moneybe, given both nominal income and interest rates?-19-9/16/80MR. WALLICH. I was thinking without rising interest rates.At constant interest rates, velocity tends to increase more at thebeginning of a recovery. The explanation would be that people haveaccumulated some liquidity and some idle funds.MR. AXILROD. I think what Governor Gramley is saying,Governor Wallich, is that in '75 and '76 we might have been making ananalysis that we were at the beginning of a recovery and velocitywould be increasing. That's true. But if we only said that much, wewould have been underestimating how stimulative monetary policy reallywas in 1976 because in addition we had this downward shift in moneydemand. People didn't want to hold money, so velocity was going up inpart also because of that. That's what this demand shift is; italready takes into account the impact of interest rates. And withthat impact, people want to hold even less money, so we have an evenbigger velocity. In effect, the measured growth of money in '75 and'76 of 4 or 5 percent or whatever it was in an economic sense wasreally more like 10 percent.MR. MORRIS. Yes, but what you're talking about is anunexplained residual that we can't forecast. Isn't that really--MR. KICHLINE. That's the problem with this. This is anerror in an equation in which [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know the great faith I have in theseequations in general, Mr. Kichline. But given that great faith, thenaive question that [occurs] to me is: Why do we keep talking aboutthis equation that had [an end point] of '74? Why don't we refit itthrough '79 or something?MR. KICHLINE. The period [since 1974] is one in which wehave had lots of financial innovation going on; it [leads to] veryunstable [relationships]. You can fit anything you want. We have analmost unlimited capacity to supply new equations or numbers. But youare quite correct in suggesting that one ought to be cautious in usingthis. Nevertheless, I think it is instructive in the sense that it'sa money demand function that makes some economic sense.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But when you read off those numbers itsounded as if this demand shift that Governor Gramley talks aboutwould basically disappear if you had used the last five years infitting the equation. It would be in the equation.MR. KICHLINE. No, I don't think so.MR. GRAMLEY. It would be hard to fit that for the wholeperiod and get [meaningful equations] because the co-efficients wouldbe moving. You would be averaging through them and you'd get a resultthat would be neither fish nor fowl. It wouldn't pertain to the pre-1974 period or the post-1974 period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was thinking about just fitting it forthe post-1974 period. The average shift was what, 3 percent orsomething, in those numbers you read?-20-9/16/80MR. AXILROD. If we throw out '75 and '76, it probably wouldstill fit [the rest of the period]. It depends on what one thinksreally went on in that period.MR. KICHLINE. Well, [if you throw out] '75, '76, and '80,you're right on track, but--MR. GRAMLEY. The point that I want to make is that sincewe're uncertain about this shift--and I agree with you, Mr. Chairman,that we just don't know enough to put a lot of faith in theseequations--what we're looking at is a policy course that we reallyought to be assessing in terms of a potential for real growth atsomething between 0 and 2 percent. We really don't know where[potential] falls in that interval. It may fall toward the lower endor it may fall toward the upper end. So we're looking at a forecastfor economic activity which will produce an unemployment rate that mayhold steady or may rise very substantially next year. And that is theway we need to assess what we're doing, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. Jim's answer to your question, Mr. Chairman,reminds me about a forecaster friend of mine who was quoted in thepaper recently on the outlook as saying that he had a whole pile ofnumbers in front of him and they were all useless. It is frustratingwhen one hears all the scenarios that could develop--the double-dip,the L, and so forth. But cutting through all that, if one looks backthree or four months ago and considers the divergence of opinion then,there may be a little more unanimity on what is really going on orlikely to go on than there was earlier, for whatever that may beworth. What seems to be showing through, particularly in comparisonwith the expectations of last spring, is that almost everybody wouldagree that the recession is going to be shorter than expected--that'sthe good news--and that inflation is going to be worse than expected,which is the bad news. And I know a few that I would consider to bereputable forecasters who are forecasting a boom in 1981. And thereinlies our real dilemma. As I look at the Board staff's forecast onreal GNP and the implicit price deflator and the unemployment rate--and our staff forecast is not significantly different on any one ofthose--the inflation picture is certainly discouraging, particularlyin terms of past cyclical experience. You will recall that in thelast recession the GNP deflator stood at 10.6 percent at the trough,the first quarter of '75. But a year later it was about half thatamount. We really made progress in the four quarters after the troughof the recession. If one tracks [the progress] in previousrecessions, [the pattern] is essentially the same. The real dilemmafor us on the policy side is posed by the inflation numbers we arelooking at in this forecast, where one year after the presumed troughof the recession, which is the fourth quarter of this year, we stillhave an implicit deflator of 8.8 percent, an unemployment rate of 8.3percent and a real growth rate of somewhere around 2 percent. Thequestion it poses is: How much, in fact, can demand management do tochange this? I'm not happy about what I consider a reversed mix ofmonetary and fiscal policy that seems to be shaping up; I would shareGovernor Wallich's feeling on that. But as long as we have this kindof inflation outlook, which is certainly too high to be socially oreconomically acceptable--and ditto on the unemployment rate--it wouldbe hard for me to favor a tax cut for the reasons that have already-21-9/16/80been set forth. I cannot support a tax cut in view of the outlook forpersistently high inflation unless or until the federal budget getschanged in a way I don't think it is going to get changed. I think weare stuck being the only game in town in terms of gradually bringingsome pressure to bear on the inflation problem. And as much as Iwould like to see tax reform, tax reduction net, I share your viewthat it's something we shouldn't encourage in the near future.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're estimating in New York that thefiscal year 1981 deficit, brought up to date with all the recentadjustments, is around $61 billion. Most of the people in Wall Streetare also estimating a deficit in the $60 billion area.MS. TEETERS. Does that have a tax cut in it?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That has in it a tax cut whichrepresents basically the consensus [unintelligible]. Remember, wehave the Reagan tax cut, the Carter Administration's, and the SenateFinance Committee's. [Our forecast] is based more on theAdministration's [proposed] tax cut. It also includes thecancellation of the import levy tax and the withholding tax oninterest and dividends, which revises the estimates. And there is arevision involving improved revenue because of the earlier bottomingout of the recession. I understand that the Administration hasupdated its estimate only to $41 billion so far. What they did wassimply to take the mid-session figure of $29.8 billion and add theadjustment for the economic renewal package and the failure of thebill on withholding tax on interest and dividends. Having said allthat, I don't see how we could oppose for substantive reasons, asidefrom the momentum, a moderate tax cut. I think a moderate tax cutmakes sense. I agree with what I believe is the general feeling inthe country that it ought to be focused in a more structural sense topromote investment and hopefully, although I'm not very sanguine aboutit, some improved productivity. The impression in the press, Paul,was that you took the line in your first appearance on tax mattersthat a tax cut probably would be advisable this year but was prematureto consider at the time [of your Congressional testimony] and ought tobe studied carefully. I had the impression, maybe an erroneous one,from the press that in your more recent appearance you seemed to beopposing any tax cut. There was an implication of that more than theemphasis on timing and composition in your earlier appearance. Isthat an accurate press [account]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that I meant there to be anydifference, really. Both times I conceded that they could go aheadnow if they wanted, if they didn't put the expenditures up any higherthan they are now projecting on the investment side. I don't thinkthat's possible or practical. I don't think they're going to go alongwith just the investment side alone, but there's room [for that]. Iam not ready to say that there's room for anything beyond that unlessthe expenditure trend looks better than I so elegantly expressed it inmy last appearance. And I don't know what that [will be]. TheAdministration's pro forma projection for '82--with pro forma meaningjust where current services will carry it--is for roughly an 11-1/2percent increase in budget expenditures in fiscal '82, which is whentheir tax proposal would have its full effect. That might leave us-22-9/16/80with a balanced budget if the expenditures were no higher than thattrend, if I recall these numbers correctly, at around the 6 percentunemployment rate. The full employment budget would still be insurplus, but the full employment budget assumes a lower unemploymentrate than that by a substantial margin. Now, is that adequate? Idon't know. I think it's borderline. That is where I come out.MR. WALLICH. Well, we're not looking at the substantialadditional deficits from the off-budget agencies, which are now movingtoward $20 billion. Then there's the borrowing by the sponsoredagencies, which also is on the order of $20 billion. I don't know ifit's fair to throw that one in, but surely one has to add the off-budget agencies to the $61 or $62 billion.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. But at the same time, giventhe increase in the tax burden and given the psychological attitudesin the country--and I'm not talking about politics in the narrow senseof the term--there will be an enormous loss of confidence in thiscountry's future and in the vigor of the growth of this economy ifpeople feel that they simply have to accept this increasing tax burdenwith no relief in sight. As I said earlier, I strongly support notgiving any relief in across-the-board personal income tax cuts, eventhough those [taxes] are terribly onerous. But I think we have to dosomething to show that we're working toward a tax policy orientedtoward structural improvement in the economy. I suppose it isanalogous to my feelings on productivity. It's not a question only oftangibles, things one can quantify. It gets get into social,cultural, psychological, and work ethic attitudes around the country.In an intangible way the people's perception of the tax burden andwhat government is doing about it is a very important substantivefactor in the economy. And I don't think we can just look at thenumbers and say: Well, it's $60 billion and, therefore, because weknow it's going to make monetary policy tougher we oppose it.Obviously, if we can bring down the expenditures side, that would begreat. But I don't believe it's going to happen because of thedefense component, no matter who gets [elected]. We have a choiceamong various unpalatable alternatives. If we can do something to getthe spending side down, fine; everybody agrees on that. But the issuestill is: Where do you stand on the tax cut?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to have a little difficultywith time here, if we don't move along. We have talk of a double-diprecession and we have a double-dip request to talk from Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I can't disagree with the staffprojection, although I put myself in the camp that thinks thepotential for a W shape [outcome] is very real. But we are also inanother period where I think there may an inordinate focus on what thenext quarter is going to be, whether it's going to be a little plus ora little minus. In a sense that question is academic because when welook beyond those numbers and underneath the numbers what we reallyhave to come face to face with is a rather dismal picture. We arealmost a year after October 6, 1979; and the year was by any standarda very wrenching one. Certainly, I think one can conclude that if itwere not for the role the Federal Reserve played, it would have been aheck of a lot worse. But the fact of the matter is, looking now ayear later at the price numbers, for example, one can throw a very,very small net around the annual inflation numbers for 1979, 1980, and-23-9/16/801981. And certainly the prospects for the real economy are at bestmixed. When I think about the whys of that, I am even more persuadednow than I was that the volatility and the uncertainty that we seestill reflect a fundamental fear and expectation that somehow or otherinflation is going to get worse. There is a recognition, I thinkoften subliminal, that if inflation does get worse, the result will beeven more instability.When I put that all together in the context of public policy,bypassing the tax question for a minute, it seems to me that we haveanother credibility problem to deal with. Up until now there has beena lot of discussion about credibility measured in terms of whether westick to and hit these targets for the money supply. If one looks at1981 and assumes that we stick to them and hit them, it seems to methat we are openly facing another credibility question. That is:Okay, we've done all this and we've hit these targets for two years ina row or whatever it will be, so where are the results? Thecredibility question that ultimately will arise is: Does it work, canit work, or will it work? And if we are looking at a situation at theend of 1981 that looks anything like the forecast, it's going to beeven more difficult to justify the kind of policy we are talking aboutsimply because people's frustration levels in terms of[unintelligible] and performance will have been eroded, I suspect.That's a back door way of getting to the tax question. Myinstinct is like a lot of other people's. Looking at the sheernumbers and the sensitivity of expectations and all the rest, my gutfeeling is that a tax reduction, even a well structured one, would becounterproductive at this time. But at the same time, I also feelthat there has to be a way that a tax reduction can be structured in apositive way, along the lines that Mr. Ford and Mr. Solomon spoke of.I am still very intrigued with the idea that somehow or other thereshould be a way to structure a tax cut that helps us get at the wagequestion. And I think the pressures are going to be enormous in thatdirection. I wish I could figure out a way to make some more senseout of it. But my bottom line on the tax cut again comes down to itsstructure and how it is done. If it's just a straight traditionalkind of tax cut, then I would have to resist it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black. And I urge succinct commentsby all.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we have no serious disagreementwith the Greenbook forecast for the remainder of 1980. As for whetherthis flurry of favorable news we have seen constitutes an upturn thatis already in progress or near, we are inclined to doubt that. Wethink it might be, as Jim Kichline suggested, in part a bouncebackfrom the abandonment of the special credit restraint program. And Idon't think we have yet seen the full reaction to the deceleration inthe aggregates that we have brought about and that we have committedourselves to doing. So the main difference we see from the staff'sviewpoint is that we have more damping of inflationary expectationsand less inflation than they do. As for the reasons, I'd just have tosummarize by saying that we have more faith in our post-October 6thactions than I believe the staff does. It's easy to forget, as JohnBalles reminded us awhile ago, that we had a pretty significantdeceleration in inflation as late as the '75 downturn before theaggregates got away from us. I'm also a bit encouraged by the flurry-24-9/16/80of indicators in the Redbook that we have had some weakening of pricepressures at both the retail and the commodity levels. Finally, ifthe staff is right on its forecast of inflation, as most people seemto think--which I guess is more likely in some ways to be right thanours--then I would be very skeptical that we would have as muchstrength in the real economy as the staff projects.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. My view is very simplistic. I have been onthis Board a little over a year now and my attitude has changed fairlyconsiderably. I've come to believe that inflation is intractable,dangerous, and overwhelms all other problems that we have. I think weare going to have a very slow recovery; I think we need a slowrecovery. I don't see how prices and wages are going to come downunless there is pressure on them over a considerable period of time.I hope whatever Administration we have understands the luxury ofhaving the first year of its Administration be one which follows arecession, which hasn't happened in a long time in the past. I hopethey understand that they can do something next year that they may nothave the opportunity to do any other time. My attitude on a tax cutis that it ought to be geared with inflation in mind. We shouldignore questions of equity; we should ignore questions of stimulus.Our policy should be geared entirely to attempting to do somethingabout inflation. I like the idea of doing something aboutdepreciation. I like the idea of trying to offset somehow the socialsecurity [tax] increase. I think we have to have some considerationof a tax-based incomes policy. I don't know how that would work. Ihaven't been able to figure out anything that is practical. Ourexperience with credit controls leads me to believe that it's hard asthe devil to have that kind of situation, so I'm not very sanguineabout [devising] one that can work. But I believe some kind of anincomes policy is necessary because I think every single thing we dohas to be geared to that one fact that inflation is the most seriousproblem we face. It's bigger than everything else put together andwe've got to begin to get it down over time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey. Welcome back.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm delighted to behere. Let me just start by saying that we would not differ greatlyfrom the staff's projection on the economy. We think the comingquarter might be a bit stronger than their projection because we startfrom the premise, regardless of what the Chairman or others around thetable may say about a tax cut, that a cut is in train and we are goingto get one. We should be talking about the structure of that tax cutrather than whether or not we will or will not have one. Having saidthat, it also seems to me that we have not made any real progressagainst inflation as a result of the fact that people are nowprojecting a very short recession. Historically it's true that wedon't see any movement on prices until well after the recovery isunder way. What I'm afraid of is that our new procedures have donenothing more than shorten the cycle and that they will not produce anatmosphere that will permit any movement against prices this time. Ifwe indeed have the kind of growth that the staff is projecting, whichis modest to be sure, and if we have gone through 3 or 6 months ofdecline albeit very steep and we get no movement on the price side,then I think it will all have been for naught. That says to me that-25-9/16/80in the period ahead, since we are the only [game in town], monetarypolicy is going to have to be fairly restrictive. And we are going tohave to face the criticism that Jerry just mentioned, but that's ayear down the road. So I'd rather get something working now, eventhough we could have negative growth in the period ahead because ofthe tight monetary policy, given that we will get a tax break, andtake that heat a year from now. Otherwise, we have will gone througha period that has netted us nothing and we are going to have to startagain, whether it's incomes policy or some other type of governmentalpolicy. Maybe that will come to pass, but I would like this Committeeat least to put the kind of monetary policy in train that suggeststhat we may not have positive growth in the period ahead--that we maybe looking for a W or a little longer [before recovery].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos. I assume you are going to havea statement of faith.MR. ROOS. Succinctly, I would say that at a time when bothmajor political candidates seem to be competing for what they canpromise in the way of a tax cut, I would strongly support what youhave said, even if you have to overkill, in terms of opposing a taxcut until we get through the November [drama].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that conclude comments on thisgeneral subject? Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Paul, personally, I have been surprised at thebounceback. I don't know how many more months it will take toconvince me that I'm wrong on that score, but I still have a questionmark. But I think we have lost our benchmarks regarding the impact ofcertain things on economic activity. Take interest rates, forexample, and the changes in financing practices that have taken placeto offset [the effects of changes in interest rates]. There is allthis building being done now with different kinds of financing wherethe interest rate per se is not as high, but a 10 percent gross kickeris established on top of any interest rate so that whenever we raisethe level of rates it doesn't necessarily change the outlook in the[usual] sense of the term. [Lenders] have gone to financing that isnot long-term; it's a 30-year commitment with a rollover every fiveyears and a 2-1/2 percentage point change in interest rates either wayadjusted over that [5-year] period of time. So there has been a lotof adaptability--in terms financing structures--to changes in rates,just as we have had adaptability in terms of money. I'm impressed asI watch the checks on the money funds flow through our office. Whenyou see a check for $12 million drawn against balances that don'texist, you wake up to what is being measured and what velocity means.There was an announcement this morning by Master Charge about theirintroduction of new check concepts and plastic money to replace someof our measures [of money]. So, again, I think our benchmarks interms of what we do [and the impact on] economic activity need to bereexamined.On the other side, I'm impressed with the sociologicalchanges that are taking place in our society. Part of this goes backto the inflation issue. We ought not miss the polarization that istaking place in society between those who are being pinched byinflation and those who are not. It's no longer just a racial issue;it's showing up in a variety of ways. And that scares me, frankly, as-26-9/16/80I ponder what it means down the road. When one talks to doctors andpsychologists and others about what complaints they hear [frompatients], one finds that finance has suddenly become the biggestfactor in their consultations. Personal bankruptcies in Ohio are thethird or fourth largest in the nation and they are growing. Again, ourbenchmarks are lacking in terms of our ability to appraise what ishappening on that score. There is a certain segment of our societythat is really being squeezed by inflationary developments, and foodprices are only going to add to this. So the pressure for a tax cutis going to be very real. The problem is that it won't really addressthe problem. It will just bail out a few people and the issue willcome back again down the road.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are being squeezed for time, I keepsaying. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I would say first that I think the bottom of therecession has been reached or is very close to being reached and thatthe economy is probably turning up right now. Secondly, I think itwill be a sluggish recovery. The price increases will be so largethat there won't be available income to spur more than just a verygradual recovery. We could get a month or two of good retail salesbut then I think we will have a relapse and we won't have much of agrowth rate. Basically that is what the staff is forecasting. Third,I do believe in the W [scenario], but it's likely to be a W that is alittle more extended. I believe that 1982 will be the year ofrecession, similar to 1958 and 1960-61 when we had two rapidrecessions in a period of great concern about inflation and a periodof restrained policy in the late 1950s. And fourth, I think thesecond recession will bring the decline in income growth and,therefore, the decline in inflation. We have to get through this nextyear, and next year we will have a lot of inflation because of foodprices. The years 1960 and 1964 and the 1974-76 period were affectedquite a bit by a very favorable bump in agriculture. This year wewill not be getting a favorable bump; it's going to go the other way.Therefore, the inflation rate will remain high so long as incomegrowth remains high. But in the '82 recession I think income growthwill slow considerably and the rate of inflation will slowconsiderably. So if we just sort of float along with this and try notto be too expansive or too restrictive and bring about some kind ofchange in the structure of the system over the next year or so, Ithink in time what Fred hopes for will be accomplished.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Gee, I hope this room isn't bugged!The Federal Reserve predicts a second recession [after] next year.MR. PARTEE. That's just my own personal view.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I can be very brief. I mainly wantto get on record on the tax cut question. I don't disagree in anymajor way with the staff forecast. The only reservation I would haveon the staff forecast is the qualitative amendment that was made onthe basis of the most recent retail sales numbers. I don't see anybasis for a sustained expansion in retail sales, and I don't seeanything in the personal income data or wage and salary numbers thatwould lead me to expect a strong or even a moderately strong-27-9/16/80resurgence in consumption expenditures. Like most people, I think weare seeing the signs of the early stages of the recovery, a very weakrecovery. And anticipating the discussion that is coming up, I don'tthink we ought to do anything to choke off this weak recovery in itsearly stages.With regard to the tax cut question, I'm pleased for thefirst time to agree completely with what Tony Solomon said, especiallyhis comments on the intangibles. I think that was a very perceptivestatement of our situation. So briefly, my position would be thatit's simply too late to think in terms of a countercyclical tax cut.But we have to think in terms of tax reform--tax reform in thedirection of increasing incentives to invest, incentives to save, andincentives to improve effort. And once an effective rational taxreform program has been developed, I think it would be very importantto announce the intent to reduce taxes over a given period in thefuture. In short, I have a great deal of sympathy for the Feldsteinproposal of announcing in advance what the government intends to dowith respect to taxes and the tax structure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I only have two quick questions. If we have nochange in tax laws, what is the increase in the tax burden from thefourth quarter to the first quarter?MR. KICHLINE. If we have no change in taxes?MS. TEETERS. No, if we have the tax increases that havealready been been legislated. How much of the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As a percent of GNP or something?MS. TEETERS. No, just what the dollar volume is. We havethe social security [tax increase] and something else.MR. KICHLINE. The social security [increase] is worth $18billion for the year; part of it is the [higher] rate and part of itis the [higher] base. The windfall profits tax next year I believe isworth $16 billion and bracket creep is worth about $10 billion. Sothe first digit is a 4; it's about $44 or $45 billion. We have a $28billion tax cut in our proposal here, so we still have the tax burdenrising in 1981.MS. TEETERS. Suppose we don't have a tax cut? What happensto your economic projection?MR. KICHLINE. The impact is a decline in real GNP of about1-1/4 percent fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter and that would mean inthat period maybe a tenth or two off the deflator.MS. TEETERS. So your growth in calendar 1981 would beessentially zero? Is that correct?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. It may be 1/2 or 3/4 percent--but small,very small.-28-9/16/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod, why don't you introduce thenext subject and then we will [break for coffee].MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.][Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we can come to order, let's see whetherwe can resolve our business after our lengthy discussion, which hasperhaps had some discouraging tinges to it. I was struck in listeningthat it is quite conceivable, given what one senses is going on rightat the moment, that when some of these August-September figures comeout they will look a little better [than expected]. I don't thinkthat has any great significance. In terms of the sluggish outlook--nobody mentioned this so I will just mention it--apart from all theother conclusions which were quite general about having to have afairly sluggish recovery by historical standards because of theinflationary problem and longer-term needs of the economy, I thinkstatistically when we don't have productivity growing we don't havethe room for the same kind of recovery that we traditionally have had.If we have a recession, the economy can grow by 4 or 5 percent, even 6percent, for a few quarters. It doesn't bring us as far up theemployment curve as it does when we don't have any productivitygrowth. And for that reason alone one wouldn't look for the same kindof numbers, sustained very long, that we typically have had in earlierrecoveries. But we have problems. I did not detect from the earliercomments that anybody thinks he or she has any totally satisfactorysolutions, if I may put it that way. But this Committee does have toproceed on [making] some decisions, and presumably in the framework ofour established operating procedures.At this point, you have two [Bluebook] alternatives beforeyou. That does not exhaust all the possibilities, obviously. I maybe wrong, but ordinarily the alternatives we have before us haven'thad a gap [between them] that is quite this wide, for M-1A anyway.The reason may be that [the intermeeting period] is a little longer[than usual]. It is probably realistic to have it that wide to makethe decision meaningful since the reality does not obey the verynarrow differences that we typically are presented with. I would drawyour attention to these charts, which I'm sure you have already lookedat, that look backwards from the fourth quarter [to] early next yearif we do follow one or the other of these paths. They show how [theresults] would look against the targets that we have set and reset forourselves. I was a little surprised when I saw these. I just hadn'tquite caught up with the fact that M3 apparently was stronger inAugust than I had thought earlier. So while I had thought we wererather comfortably in the middle of the M3 range, M3 is within theboundaries but is relatively high [in its range]. And that is oneproblem, [that we are] testing the high side of our ranges in allthree measures except M-1A. That's the situation in which we findourselves. Would anyone want to take off from Steve's comments orotherwise suggest a course?MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure.-29-9/16/80MS. TEETERS. I might qualitatively expect interest rates tobe higher. Specifically, where would the federal funds rate be in thethird and fourth quarters under "A" and "B"?MR. AXILROD. Under alternative A we would expect an averagelevel of the funds rate by the fourth quarter of something like 11-1/4percent, give or take a little. So it may be higher than the level ofthe last few days by about 1/2 point or a little less.MR. PARTEE. That's on average for the whole quarter, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Yes, and we'd expect a further rise--MR. PARTEE. It would be turning up as the quarter went on?MR. AXILROD. Yes. And under alternative B the average forthe quarter would probably be around 12-1/2 percent. That's assumingthat the move toward that level doesn't somehow affect economicactivity in the fourth quarter [very] promptly.MS. TEETERS. And that would produce a mortgage rate of what,about 14 percent?MR. AXILROD. The mortgage rate we have under "A" would bearound 13-1/8 percent, which is not far from where it is now. But ifthat were wrong, I suspect the rate would be higher. And under "B" Icould easily see the mortgage rate moving up between now and year-end-- this is my view and others maybe differ--to around 14 or 14-1/2percent, depending in part on the degree of concern institutions haveon whether rates are going to move up even further.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say that we are in a [difficult]position, and maybe we will always be in this position--certainly wewere when we met last month and we carefully set the level ofborrowings, which is a critical factor and one we have to considertoday. But [last month] within two days or something like that themoney supply exploded in a way that made that a nominal assumption--I'll call it nominal--because it was clear that the money supply inthe space of two days was way above the path we were talking about andthe real decision we made on borrowing quickly became nominal.Obviously, I don't know what is going to happen this time. Theassumption is--or as Steve said, "indications are" that money growthin September is going to be weak. "Indications" sounds to me like apretty strong word. I don't know what indication he has other than apreliminary figure for next week, and these preliminary figures havebeen notoriously unreliable. But the figure that he is assuming is adecline of $1-1/2 billion in M-1A.MR. AXILROD. In the week of the 10th we had a $1-1/2 billiondecline and [we expect] very little increase in the current week.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I am noting is that if that did notmaterialize, whatever we talk about here in terms of the borrowingassumption can change rather quickly. Nonetheless, I think it issignificant to focus on that variable. It's a little difficult justin a technical sense in that I think it is fair to say that thefederal funds rate that seems to be associated with current borrowinglevels is less than one might have expected. So in that sense there-30-9/16/80seems to a little less restraint with a given level of borrowings thanwe were assuming last time we were in a borrowing phase, six monthsago or whenever.MR. PARTEE. What is the borrowing level, Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the staff is estimating it this weekat around $1.1 billion or so.MR. STERNLIGHT. This week could average about $1.1 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, actually, it has been well abovethat. It has been averaging $1.4 billion or something like that.MR. STERNLIGHT. It was $1.3 billion through yesterday.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the federal funds rate has been about10-3/4 percent.MR. STERNLIGHT. 10.80 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that is not the relationship that weordinarily would have thought--MS. TEETERS. How much of that is a result of the banks beingout of the [discount] window?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it may just be that; we don't know.MS. TEETERS. Everybody has been gone from the window forwhat, three months?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may be that or it may just be a gradualchange in attitude. Under the new operating technique they haven'tbeen chastised all that much when they are in as they were before. Idon't know. It may be that with the passage of time, when they havebeen in a little more, that the relationship will tighten up a bit.Maybe it's a more fundamental easing; I just don't know.MR. MORRIS. Well, it's the first time that the funds ratehas been above the discount rate for a long time.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The discount officers tell me thatthey are reluctant, since the banks have been away for so long, to getright back to the same level of disciplined access.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody has a senseof what may be going on in that area, but it's a rather significantvariable in terms of the way we now operate. Maybe we ought toconsider whether--. Well, is it a fair assumption to say that if youhaven't been talking to the banks in New York, that probably meansnobody has been saying anything to any of the banks? Now, this hasonly been going on for a month or so or less, so you haven't had muchchance to get after repetitive borrowers, I'm sure.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I can't change my mind set thatquickly. First of all, the volume of New York borrowing isn't thatbig. My impression, without remembering the numbers, is that it's not-31-9/16/80the usual proportion of nationwide borrowing. But we have been inrecession. And it hadn't even occurred to me, Paul, that we shouldstart using moral suasion other than the normal level of trying todiscourage--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question is: What is the normallevel? I wouldn't think anything more than normal [is appropriate],but I--MR. PARTEE. We have that table that shows banks about tocome under administrative pressure and [the number] is virtually zeroas I recall, using the normal standards. There just hasn't beenenough borrowing for a long enough time for anybody except the onebank in Philadelphia.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we should watch this for a whilelonger and see--I'm not suggesting any new departure here--whetherattitudes either in the Reserve Banks or in the banking world havesuddenly changed. But then, it's very hard to know.MS. TEETERS. The one week that we had very high borrowingswe also had very high excess reserves, didn't we?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was true for one week. It happenedin some week in August, I think.MR. AXILROD. The borrowing was high in the week ending[September] third; and excess reserves were originally extremely high,on the order of $650 million. That was revised down to about $489million a week later, but that is above average. I might add, Mr.Chairman, that I don't have the borrowing by Federal Reserve Districtbut I do have it broken down by money market banks, which are the 46largest, and others. In the week of the third, when borrowing was$1.3 billion, money market banks borrowed $800 million. And in theweek of the tenth, when borrowing was around $600 million, moneymarket banks borrowed around $400 million. I don't have any breakdownfor this week, but that indicates a fairly active use by the largebanks, which probably fits with the hypothesis that they don't feelvery reluctant to borrow, not having been in for ages.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that additional element, it'san inevitable uncertainty I suppose. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I just wanted to ask Steve a question, followingup on an observation you made a little earlier, Mr. Chairman. As youknow, Steve, there have been some pretty large underforecasts in theBluebooks we had at the time versus how things turned out for June,July, and August. I just wondered what makes you so optimistic, as itwere, that we are going to get very slow money growth in September?MR. AXILROD. I don't think we are going to get slow moneygrowth over the rest of the year. And whether that [more] rapidgrowth is going to occur in September, October, November, or DecemberI'd be the first one to say I couldn't really tell you because thereis a lot of noise in the month-to-month fluctuations of money growth.The only basis for saying slow growth in September is that we havemodestly firm data for the first three days of the month andpreliminary data for the next seven, so we have data for something-32-9/16/80like a third of the month. Those data show an average level for themonth below the level in August. So allowing for some rise over thebalance of the month--I think there will be some rise--we'd get a verylow growth rate. Now, if we get a revision in the preliminary datafor the week of the 10th of plus $1-1/2 to $2 billion, like we gotlast week, and if the week of the 17th shows no coming down from thatbut remains strong, then it's quite possible that September could bemoving up again to very high growth rates. Similarly, we could getdownward revisions and get very low growth rates. What I'm saying isthat all we have is the first 10 days, of which seven of those daysare partial data.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Recent revisions all have been upward, butat some point that pattern will change. So, who knows?MR. PARTEE. One could also say, Steve, that having had avery big month, which might represent some degree of stock adjustment,the odds are for a period of relative calm the following month.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that happens often. [I feel fairlycomfortable] predicting what is going to occur--that there will bestrength sometime in the fall. But in which particular month isalmost impossible to tell.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. May I ask: On this anticipated fluctuation in thefunds rate for alternative B, let's say that in the model it wouldaverage 12 percent. Do you also estimate what the peak pressures arelikely to be? In other words, are you anticipating that at times itis likely to hit the 14 percent ceiling [of our current range] andthat we'll have to react accordingly?MR. AXILROD. No, on the assumption that the Committeeretained a 14 percent ceiling, we wouldn't see that as an impedimentbecause it's largely been interpreted as an average over the days ofthe statement week. Therefore, if it were at 13 or 14 percent or evena little above 14 percent on some days, I wouldn't presume [theceiling] would be an impediment. If we were wrong and there was a lotmore demand for money and we are much closer to the ceiling, then itcould in fact become an impediment.MR. FORD. My feeling is in line with what John Balles said.I'm worried that the forecast may once again underestimate thepressures on monetary expansion. And given the fact that we arerapidly approaching the first anniversary of our new policy and aregoing to be scrutinized very carefully on the fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter performance, I would think we definitely have to get focusedon taking a conservative course of action, which would be moving tosomething like alternative B, possibly even widening the band ofallowable interest rates rather than narrowing it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I don't want to get into a debate asto whether the New York staff makes better estimates than the Boardstaff, but I'm fascinated--if I have my figures right--that for thefourth quarter New York has expansion in M-1A of 3.2 percent and the-33-9/16/80Board staff has 7-1/2 percent. The same [pattern] is true for M-1B;it's a little less so on M2. If I am reading these right, thedifferences seem unusually large. I'm wondering if anyone from NewYork or the Board would want to say anything about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're not operating in a very fastleague either.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I didn't know that those estimateswere circulated. You're right about the New York numbers. But thedifference is not in real GNP estimates. It's almost entirely in ourassumption that there will be a reversal in the shift in money demand,wholly for transactions balances--that as people become increasinglysensitized to inflation they will reduce their holdings of non-interest bearing or low interest bearing transactions balances.MR. MAYO. I find myself much more comfortable with the NewYork figure. That doesn't mean--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the other hand, let me point outthat the Washington figures have been more correct than New York's forthe last two months. This difference in assumption has been there fortwo months now.MR. AXILROD. I'm not sure exactly how that 7-1/4 percent gotin there, but I probably ought to explain, President Mayo, that it issometimes difficult to make a distinction between projections andtargets.MR. MAYO. It may be a derivative figure.MR. AXILROD. And what we have in alternative A is 7-1/4percent growth in the fourth quarter, which would be the implicittarget if you were going to hit 4-1/2 percent for the year.MR. MAYO. I see.MR. AXILROD. We would expect that; that's very close to aprojection because we like to make projections assuming no changes ininterest rates. But we expect some rise in interest rates as Iexplained even with that. So in the Bluebook where we have the 7-1/4percent [growth rate], that is the target necessary to hit aparticular level over the year.MR. MAYO. Okay. Well, the fact that they are so differentdoesn't influence my own opinion, which is that alternative B is theright way to go. I think it's a much more prudent approach, but Ifound I was covered with curiosity.MR. AXILROD. I should add that if New York is right and theCommittee adopts either "A" or "B," there will be a sharp drop ininterest rates.MR. MAYO. A sharp drop in interest rates?MR. AXILROD. If money demand is going to be that low, thereought to be a drop in interest rates.-34-9/16/80MR. FORD. Let's pray for New York [to be right]!MR. PARTEE. Sometimes that's what it takes, prayer.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have an opinion, Mr. Mayo, that youare going to give us as to why you have a [unintelligible].MR. MAYO. My opinion is in favor of alternative B. I doquestion why there should be any difference in the fed funds rangeunder either "A" or "B." I think [the current range is] sufficientlybroad to encompass both of them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.MR. EASTBURN. Mr. Chairman, I didn't comment in the go-around about the business outlook because I really don't know what isgoing to happen. So it seems to me that what we need to ask ourselvesis: Where can we make the biggest mistake? To me the biggest mistakewould be to underestimate the possible vigor of the recovery. That'sthe mistake we have made so far and I think it would be a greatermistake to underestimate than to overestimate. The other mistake isto be too liberal with monetary growth. Given that kind of approach,I think alternative A is unacceptable. Alternative B is just barelyacceptable, as far as I'm concerned; I would prefer something lessthan that. An alternative C of 4-1/4 percent for M-1B would providemore insurance for the year's growth; it would put growth for the yeara little above the midpoint, which would give us greater assurancethat if we miss, it would still be under the ceiling. That, I think,would require us to set a higher range for the federal funds rate of 9to 15 percent. If we do that, we should feel free to use the range asnecessary to accomplish those goals. That would be my preferredsolution. Another less acceptable alternative would be a "B-minus,"somewhere between "B" and "C." But I think we ought to go for "C" andwatch in the next couple of months to see if these biases that Iexpressed are being borne out. We do need to do something about thediscount rate. It may be too soon right now and [the current rate]may not complicate Peter's life very greatly, but we are in a newenvironment and I just don't know how the rate figures into thethinking of the banks [about] borrowing. So we might as well startgetting that in alignment and keep it there as much as we can. So Ithink we need to get that up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just translating your comments: You'reprepared to see a big increase in interest rates right now?MR. EASTBURN. Yes, I think so.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, to me alternative B defines themaximum growth paths for the aggregates that we can be satisfied with.I'm perfectly willing to accept that. I think the economy in thefourth quarter is likely to be stronger than projected and, therefore,we may see bigger rate increases than the Bluebook is contemplating,but I think we simply have to accept that. However, I wouldn't go asfar as Dave and shoot for something more stringent than "B."-35-9/16/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether it's becausedifferent people are talking, but the business outlook suddenly soundsmore ebullient than the impression I was left with earlier. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I share the concern over the changein the funds rate range in alternative B and I would prefer to see itat 8 to 14 percent. Or, if we are going to move it, I would move thetop range as a signal without an intent to use it. But it seems to methat is the wrong way to signal what the staff had in mind. Secondly,I'd remind us of the considerable literature that we have created thatis less than three months old on the shortfall and its desirabilityand so on and so forth and the feeling that we need to perform thistime if we are ever going to. I would favor alternative B orsomething even a little less with a chance to review it afterexperience. I do not feel that this [decision] is carved in graniteand can't be changed, but I'd set out on that course because certainlywe have underestimated more often than we have overestimated.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. Well, we had the luxury, relatively speaking,of moving back on track at an even faster rate than we had decidedsome months ago. Now we face the question of whether we want toovershoot the track or take the wrench of getting back on it firmly.I think we ought to get on it firmly. The economy once more is givingus less unemployment and more inflation. It's painful to think thatwe are going to move to a mortgage rate of 13-1/2 or 14-1/2 percent,but in an economy with 10, 11, 12 percent inflation, we are going tohave to get adjusted to that, bad as it may seem. The economyprobably will adjust more easily to it than [we expect] in our gutreactions. So, I wouldn't be too worried about letting rates rise.Alternative B seems about right to me. I would like to see the fundsrate move a little higher toward the upper end, [though] notimmediately; we need to pause before it goes to 14 percent. And Iwould like to place more emphasis on M-1B. When M-1A and M-1B divergeas much as they do now, that indicates to me that the factors thatdifferentiate them have gained in importance. And one is in somedanger of losing sight of that if one thinks more in terms of M-1A,with its seemingly rather low growth values. If one thinks in termsof M-1B, one gets to fairly respectable rates of growth even underalternative B. So I would like to stress M-1B, at least in ourthinking if not in the directive, instead of M-1A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. The comments so far have been [for a course thatis] tougher than I would like to be. I did indicate that I thoughtthe recession had bottomed out; but, of course, it's incorrect to saythe recession is over. It just means that the downward movement isover and we are at the low end of the range. And we have seen apretty considerable increase in interest rates, one that could beginto threaten even a moderate recovery in housing. So it seems to me alittle early to blithely expect to see interest rates go materiallyhigher. If one thinks of these numbers for the aggregates as beingtargets--and I believe that's how we should think of them--and theactual comes out differently, then we should modify our operations.Interest rates go higher than the median here if the aggregates arestrong, and they go lower if the aggregates are weak relative to the-36-9/16/80targets. If one thinks of these as target numbers for the 3-monthperiod of October, November, and December and looks at the charts,alternative A isn't that bad. It's a little high, I think, mainlybecause I don't like to see M-1B running as high in the range as it isthere. So, I would like to suggest an alternative between "A" and"B." I would say, for example, 4 percent for M-1A, 6-1/2 percent forM-1B, and 8-1/2 percent for M2; the latter would be the same as thealternative B number and is more a hope than anything that we woulddo, actually.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just give me those numbers again.MR. PARTEE. I said 4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent. I do thinkit's probably time to make a little movement in our broad funds raterange, and I would raise it a point on the bottom and top and make it9 to 15 percent. Chances are that even under the staff presumption itwill be at about 11 percent and probably drifting up, so 9 to 15percent is not so a bad as an outer limit kind of range. And I woulddo that on the presumption that these are targets. If the aggregatescome in stronger than this, we will move up in that range; and if theyare weaker, we will move down in that range from our current 10-3/4 to11 percent. So, that's what I would prefer. As far as borrowings areconcerned, I don't think we should use a figure as high as the onethat Peter mentioned as the base, $1.1 billion or something like that.But it probably needs to be quite a bit higher than we talked aboutlast time. I was thinking of something around $600 or $700 million asthe base we would start from on the borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I really only find alternative A acceptable.As Chuck says, we are probably at the bottom of the recession. Totake the few indications of reviving growth and use that as an excuseto tighten monetary policy seems to me totally unacceptable. We willcreate a double-dip recession if we start taking interest rates up ashigh as we would get them in alternative B. Last fall, which is notvery far behind us, mortgage rates in the 14 to 14-1/2 percent areaalmost completely closed down the housing market. It wasn't anavailability problem; it was lack of demand. So, I would stronglysupport alternative A, and I would keep the funds rate approximatelywhere it is. This just doesn't seem to me the proper time to rock theboat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, all of us are deeply concernedabout the inflation problem; I don't think any of us is more concernedthan the others about it. And we are trying to find a way to dealwith it. But we just have to recognize that if we turn this economyaround again and promote another decline in economic activity once thebottom has been reached, this country and the Congress may not havethe tolerance to let us continue. I don't think it will. Now, thefinancial conditions that would emerge under "B" are no longerconsistent with the staff forecast. The staff's forecast has mortgagerates reaching 13-1/4 percent by the middle of 1981 and [underalternative B] we are talking about a mortgage rate of 14 to 14-1/2percent in the fourth quarter. I just think we ought to move slowerthan this. We will be in real trouble if we push so hard that we-37-9/16/80choke off any possibility of recovery. I want a slow recovery; Ithink we all do. But I don't want one that is so slow that theeconomy ends up turning back down again. So, I'm with GovernorTeeters. I would support alternative A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would opt foralternative B, but with the caveat that the [monetary growth] figureslisted in "B" would be the maximum we would accept; we'd acceptsomewhat slower growth during the period ahead, if indeed the economyor other factors would dictate that. On the other hand, I see noreason to raise the lower bound of the federal funds range from 8 to 9percent, as suggested under alternative B. I would leave the fundsrange at 8 to 14 percent. In part my feeling about this stems fromthe fact that M-1B is more acceptable to me as an aggregate to measurewhat we should be doing with monetary policy in the period ahead.Looking at the quarterly average for M-1B under "B," for example, weare still talking about a [quarterly average] rate of 7-3/4 percentfor the fourth quarter, and that is a fairly high rate of growth.Anything that would exceed that would be troublesome to me. Just torestate my position: I would take "B" but as the maximum; I wouldaccept somewhat lower growth if it did indeed come about. I'd leavethe federal funds rate range at 8 to 14 percent because I don't thinkit makes that much difference. If the rate gets up to around 14percent, we ought to be talking; we can do that in a telephone callrather than at this time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I pretty much share the feelings expressed byGovernor Wallich and Messrs. Guffey and Morris in that "B" is themaximum that I would like to see us go. We are all torn between therisk on the one hand of choking off recovery with too great a rise ininterest rates and the danger on the other hand that we will make nosignificant progress on inflation. My first preference would be tolean against the inflation problem a bit harder by what I would call a"B-minus." I wouldn't be unhappy if the specifications of "B" werereduced somewhat to avoid overshooting for the year as a whole, whichI think we could come pretty close to given the range of error and howthings go. Dave Eastburn mentioned 4-1/4 percent for M-1B. I hadjotted down 4-1/2 percent for the August-to-December target. Thatwould give us growth of 5.6 percent in M-1B for the year as a whole,pretty close to the upper end of the range. I think somewhere between"B" and "B-minus" is the lesser of the evils, considering the twodifferent evils we have to avoid.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.MR. ROOS. I would prefer Dave Eastburn's alternative C. Iwould be pleased with John Balles's alternative B-minus. I wouldbegrudgingly support alternative B if that's the best we can get. Iwouldn't go with anything more expansive than that. For those who areconcerned about higher mortgage rates, if we do anything that wouldimply the possibility of an explosion in the aggregates, I thinkmortgage lenders in response to heightened inflationary expectationswould increase their rates anyway. If we cut this by having a controlon aggregate expansion on the down side, if you will, I think we won't-38-9/16/80get any higher mortgage rates than we would going the other way. Andwe would be consistent with our stated determination to give toppriority to our concern about future inflation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I think the target in Mr.Eastburn's suggestion is probably the appropriate one. We are at astage where we should make a small move on the discount rate. I havethe impression that there is something of a last gasp with respect tothe credibility of the Federal Reserve out there in terms of comingwithin our targets by the fourth quarter. I realize that the rangesare such that we probably can't get all [of the aggregates] into them,but we have to get some of them in and I would suggest that, forwhatever reason, those be the important ones. I think GovernorGramley is probably right that if we don't come out about there, weare going to get more specific instructions [from Congress] on wherewe should come out and we may have less freedom of choice in thefuture.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did Governor Gramley say that?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think I said something a bit different.MR. BAUGHMAN. For different reasons.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think he had rather the opposite inmind.MR. BAUGHMAN. He had different reasons, but wound up in thesame place. I would like to note also that when we reported to ourboard of directors last week on the new Regulation A and what weanticipate the guidelines coming along with that will be, we got quitea strong negative reaction. They felt it was a significantretrenchment in our posture at the window. They have been engagedaggressively in the last couple of years in trying to build betterrapport between the institutions in the District and the FederalReserve and feel they have been making considerable progress. Theyare persuaded that the institutions will see this as a more stringentface at the discount window and that they will have lost credibilitywith what they view as their clients in that respect.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. I'm delighted to hear that there's so muchcommitment to our targets and that we're going to have the strength tomake sure we get growth within them. I'm a little surprised to hearso many people feel that the fourth quarter is going to be so strong.I would remind you that interest rates have already gotten to thepoint where they are having some impact on economic activity. Mr.Kichline, for instance, has housing starts for August at 1.4 millionbut then dropping to 1.2 million in September. And that's just withmortgage rates where they are right now. I don't know how sensitiveautomobiles are going to be to interest rates, but it seems to me thatwe don't have very much chance of a big strong recovery in the fourthquarter, yet that is what I hear influencing the [policy preferences]around the table. I'm afraid that alternative B or something evenmore conservative than that risks putting us in a more difficult-39-9/16/80position than a path that is a bit more expansive. I don't want to goto alternative A; that may put us in some danger of going out of therange on the upper end. But, you know, New York may be right one ofthese days. I'm afraid that if we go to "B" or something even moreconservative than that, we may get ourselves in the difficult positionof having to be too expansive in the fourth quarter. And we will getthis stop-start pattern again. With these forecasts being all overthe lot, I think we're much better off somewhere between "A" and "B,"which gives us much more flexibility. And I really think it iscrucial that we retain as much flexibility as we can. So that makesmore sense to me than anything else. That will give us an opportunityto look at September and will give us the kind of flexibility we needto get where we want to go through the end of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative A for thereasons set forth by Governors Teeters, Gramley, Partee, and Schultz.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. End of statement?MR. RICE. End of statement.MR. PARTEE. I didn't support alternative A.MR. RICE. I know you didn't, but you gave reasons forfavoring alternative A.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'll try to be almost as brief asGovernor Rice. I think we can best hit the balance we're looking for,in terms of both the credibility of policy as perceived by the marketsand the country on one hand and our concern about aborting the modestrecovery, by an intermediate solution. I'd like to suggest somethingthat isn't too different from what Chuck Partee suggested. I think weought to have borrowing of $700 million, 4-1/4 percent for M-1A, 6-1/2percent for M-1B, and 8-3/4 percent for M2.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was that last one?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 8-3/4 percent. Even though I'mindifferent on whether we have 8 to 14 percent on the fed funds rangeor the extended one, I think it's unnecessary to extend it, and we maybe giving some policy signals unintentionally. I don't really seemuch advantage [to changing it]. On balance, I would say we ought tostick with 8 to 14 percent.Let me say a word about my feelings on credibility. I'msorry to take longer than I intended but [let me say a few] moresentences on this. When I talk to people in the markets, they are notquestioning our credibility or the steadiness of our policy at themoment. There is a vast underlying skepticism that we will stick tothis policy later in the year or early next year, but at the moment Ithink they are impressed. They have seen a very substantial rise ininterest rates as the aggregates have moved up and they have not seenus try to stop that. So I don't think we have a credibility problemat the moment. We have the constant suspicion that we will buckle at-40-9/16/80some point but [market participants] don't feel we have done so or arein the process of doing so at this point. If the projections turn outto be anywhere close to accurate and we take these intermediatetargets and and the borrowing level we've talked about, I think wewill end up with interest rates somewhere in this range in the shortrun. And if necessary, we can tighten up later in the year when thepressure comes on. So that is what I would [do].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's everybody, isn't it? I confess Iam a little struck by what seems to me a contrast in some of thepolicy judgments, or aggregates judgments, and what I took to be thetone of the earlier discussion, which was highly restrained in termsof a forecast of ebullience in the business world and somewhatskeptical of full faith in short-term movements in the aggregates. Iapproach this with a feeling of some concern about [how we will] comeout of this meeting right at this stage. We've had a very highAugust, to be sure. We've had several months that were very high, butAugust was particularly high. There is some hope that September willshow a leveling and a possible turn in the business situation. Ithink it's probably [going to be] a real turn, if a real turnencompasses the idea of a W, with a rather weak middle of the W.I was somewhat concerned that we would come out and say, ineffect, that we're throwing down the gauntlet and that we would makedamn sure that we would meet our targets in a very acceptable way andtake all the risks on the side of interest rates and the economy. Ithink that's a real implication of "B." I don't think we can inhonesty adopt "B" without saying: Okay, beginning tomorrow orwhenever we will go out and in effect force interest rates up. And Iwould have great reservations about that kind of approach. On theother hand, I don't feel quite comfortable with "A," given the waythose charts look, particularly the M-1B chart, which a number ofother people have mentioned. I think Governor Partee's comments arecorrect. We look at these as targets--and God knows what's going tohappen--but we haven't got the short-term control mechanism thatguarantees we're going to meet the targets. That much has beendemonstrated by recent experience. But we do bias the [decision in aneffort to meet the targets]. I would pick up in Governor Partee'scomment, which has been seconded by the comments of a number ofothers, that the best thing we can do is to aim someplace in between"A" and "B." I think that's consistent with not taking much of anovert step at the moment. We'll see how the money supply figuresdevelop. That may be as early as when we get a revision in thepreliminary [M-1A] figure. But certainly we keep getting surprised bythese [numbers] in one direction or another as time passes. I don'tknow what projection is right. But if the number comes out high, Ithink any of these alternatives imply that [market conditions] couldget tighter and borrowing would go up. If it comes out as favorablyas New York suggests, I suppose it would go the other way. If itcomes out as favorably as New York suggests, it probably means aweaker business picture than many people have in mind and we might geta rally in the markets. In those circumstances, with that kind ofaggregates picture, I'm not sure that would be undesirable.So, consistent with what a number of people have said, butcertainly not everybody, I would play it neutrally at the moment.That's what we did last time. It lasted for about two days until themoney supply figure came out high [unintelligible]. I hope another $9-41-9/16/80billion increase doesn't come along and throw us off course quite soquickly as last time. But [ongoing developments] are what we would beguided by to a considerable extent. I don't know what neutralitymeans precisely, given this borrowing discussion we just had. Ibelieve you've assumed $800 million with alternative B, Steve, andthat seems to me low if we really wanted to get to alternative B.MR. WINN(?). Don't we have to have a discount rateassumption, though, to make that borrowing assumption?MR. AXILROD. We assume the present discount rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, at the moment, we assume the presentdiscount rate. That doesn't say the discount rate wouldn't go up ifthe funds rate moved significantly higher. Presumably, we wouldmaintain some relationship [between them]. I'm not saying the presentrelationship is all that bad--I don't think it is all that bad--but if[the spread] got substantially wider, the discount rate question wouldcertainly arise. As I say, I don't quite know what neutrality is. Ithink a figure as high as $800 million or perhaps $700 to $800 millionor someplace in that area might be consistent with neutrality in theshort run. In that way I am picking up something Steve associatedmore with "B" than with "A." But in terms of the targets, thisimplies amid all the uncertainty a change in trend, and if there'sanything to the longer range interest rate forecast, I'm not sure wewant to go quite that far. By the longer range interest rate forecastI'm talking about the quarter. That's not a very long range, but it'sbeyond the next two weeks. I don't know what it really does imply; wehave these different estimates.MR. AXILROD. I might add, Mr. Chairman, that when we werewriting "B," which was Friday afternoon, we were not aware that bankswere going to be quite as willing borrowers as they were.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm obviously affected by the mostrecent evidence, which may be false evidence. But it sounds to me asthough right at the moment anyway a little higher level of borrowing--MR. PARTEE. It's very temporary, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's some evidence for it. Idon't think it's just a phenomenon this week. What are thoseborrowing figures in the recent week? You just had them.MR. SCHULTZ. But they are going to be distorted by LaborDay, I think.MR. AXILROD. The borrowing has run--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was over $1 billion in the week ofSeptember 3 and I don't remember what the funds rate was then.MR. AXILROD. It was 10-1/2 percent and then it dropped to10.22 percent and borrowing to around $600 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My impression is that, more often thannot, these borrowing figures have been higher than what we normallyassociate with the equivalent federal funds rate.-42-9/16/80MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But obviously there's an area ofuncertainty.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, may I make asuggestion, building on what you've said? If we go for what you calla "neutral" or what some of us have called an "intermediate" solution,we might take a leaf out of what we did earlier in the year but on theopposite side. We might say that if the aggregates come in somewhatlower than the intermediate targets, we won't adjust the reserve pathaccordingly but would accept that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We wouldn't adjust the path] quite soquickly anyway.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Yes, not] quite so quickly. Wewould accept them. So if the opportunity offers itself, we'd err onthe side of not pushing in reserves.MR. WALLICH. Do you mean that we should then reduce thenonborrowed reserve path or not reduce it? If the aggregates areweak, I think the analogue to our earlier action would be to reducethe path.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right.SPEAKER(?). That's what he said.MR. PARTEE. Without limit? That's rather wide open; itcould mean zero, -5, -10.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, it brings us out to somewhere[unintelligible] than if in that situation we had put in "B."MR. MORRIS. We would be tolerant of errors on the lowerside. That's--MR. PARTEE. Remember, we did say last October and throughoutthe next several meetings--as I recall, the number was 4-1/2 percent--"or somewhat less." But it was only somewhat less; if it weresignificantly less, we would move against it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we obviously have some difference ofopinion and I am proposing that we come out someplace in between.These numbers do not lend themselves to easy averaging without comingup with rather small fractions. And when we get down to the lastquarter, I think it becomes fairly irrelevant. We have heard twoaveraging proposals. Mr. Solomon was a 1/4 percentage point higherthan Mr. Partee on two of the numbers. Have we ever used a numberwith 1/4 for a period this long?MR. ALTMANN. I don't recall that we have; I'm not sure.Steve might know.MR. GRAMLEY. May I ask, Mr. Chairman, to what specificperiods Mr. Solomon's and Governor Partee's numbers refer? I wasn'tquite sure. August-December?-43-9/16/80SPEAKER(?). August-December.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're all talking about theAugust-December figures.MR. PARTEE. No, mine is September-December.MR. GRAMLEY. No, Governor Partee says his was September toDecember.MR. PARTEE. The base month is August and the last month isDecember. That means we're talking about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume we're all talking about the same[period as in the Bluebook alternatives], which is August to December.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think a very good case can bemade for using quarterly averages for two reasons. One is that ourtargets are set in terms of quarterly averages, and the second is thatthe figures look a little better in a sense. If, for example, we wereto hit the 5-1/4 percent midpoint that we originally had, it wouldrequire a rate of growth in M-1B of only 3 percent between August andDecember. But it would require 4.9 percent between the third and thefourth quarters because August was very high. If we take the 5-3/4percent midpoint that we talked about earlier, that would involve 4.8percent growth between August and December but 6.8 percent between thethird and the fourth quarters. That is, what I'm doing is assuming asteady progression from August to December.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure what the significance of thatis.MR. BLACK. Well, we set our targets in quarterly figures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We set the annual targets that way, but--MR. BLACK. Yes, but it's difficult to know what to do withAugust to December because we don't know what the configuration of thelast quarter will be. And the figures I use just assume an equalprogression.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll let Mr. Axilrod comment. But itseems to me a lot more convenient operationally to talk about amonthly target than a quarterly target that is so much affected bywhat has already happened.MR. AXILROD. We tried to blend this in some sense by havingthe operational target go from month to month, but trying to get it sothat it results in the quarter-over-quarter growth that the Committeewants.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, one can express it either way.MR. AXILROD. In general I have a little trouble with thequarterly average because if one took that quarterly average extremelyseriously, whatever we put in there for the fourth quarter implies onereal wrench to hit it. If we go off [target] very early in thequarter--if the pattern month to month varies from what we have in-44-9/16/80here--in the last part of the quarter we really have to wrench itaround to hit the target. It is true that the quarter over quarterwill vary, but it makes for a much more orderly procedure in relationto markets to do it that way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we're stuck, unless we make an extremeassumption, with the fact that the quarterly jump is going to befairly sizable because August went way up. Even if growth is levelfrom now on, we'd get an increase of some magnitude in the fourthquarter. That's a fact of life. But if we were concentrating solelyon quarterly figures--while mechanically we can rationalize one withthe other--I think we'd tend to get more abrupt changes than we reallycontemplated in setting the target.MR. BLACK. But that assumes we don't do anything about abulge that appeared early. Then we'd have to wrench it later. But ifwe take action promptly, we don't necessarily have to wrench it later.MS. TEETERS. But we have taken action. After all, billrates are up quite a bit.MR. BLACK. I'm talking about in the future, Nancy. Mypersonal feeling is that we're not going to have as much upwardpressure on rates as people think because I don't see that muchstrength in the economy. But that's a guess. We really can'tforecast that with any degree of certainty.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we took these--if I may so termthem--more hawkish views and if we were honest with ourselves giventhe range of probabilities, we would be saying that we've got to goout this week and take a rather overt step to tighten up the market.That may not be necessary, for sure. That's what we don't know. Now,[doing] that may turn out to be wrong if the economy is very weak, andwe might have to retrace the step. And that's one of the things thatI think we would be better advised to avoid.MR. GUFFEY. There's an alternative for that, Mr. Chairman,is there not? [We could adopt] the alternative B [growth] rates anddrop the borrowing assumption from $800 million to perhaps $700million, thus increasing the nonborrowed reserves to make up thetotal. That would not push up interest rates early in the periodnecessarily. It would give us a bit of time to view what is happeningto the aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may just be talking about a gut feeling,but I tend to share the view that Steve first expressed: That ifthere's a risk here, it's going to be on the high side rather than thelow side. I'm just going by recent experience; that's the way it hasbeen. That could well be wrong. I have no problem with starting outwith $700 million or something in that range. But I do have a feelingthat starting out in that range and putting a lot of weight on [growthrates] as low as those in "B" may delay for two weeks what you'retalking about. I think the odds are that at some point we're going tohave to put [interest rates] up quite overtly and strongly. We mayhave to do that even if we went with "A." If we went to an "A+" wemight have to do it. I can't guarantee [anything]. All I'm saying isthat we have a stronger case if [growth in the aggregates] did gethigh. Obviously the higher the monetary numbers are, the more-45-9/16/80protection one has in a sense--the more explanation one has for whythe market is reacting the way it has and why we have reacted the waywe have under those circumstances. I don't think we have much[protection] if we're demanding that September be practically flat,which is what the staff is projecting. And I hope that's what it is.But we're also demanding that October and November be [almost] thoughnot quite as flat. Obviously there's an arithmetic difference betweenthese, and the way one falls in the spectrum is what we're talkingabout. But I would want a little more justification, in terms of theaggregates, for the kind of interest rates some of you are talkingabout before I saw those interest rates in the market. We are talkingabout an M-1B that I quite agree is a little higher than I'd like tosee ideally. Just rationalizing, M-1A doesn't look so bad under thesealternatives. M2 we think is going to be a little high. There's notmuch we can do about it. M3 is a little higher than I'd like to seeit. But just weighing the risks, and against the background of thebusiness [conditions] discussion that we had, I would like to have alittle more evidence that the aggregates are fully running in excessof reasonable targets before very overt moves are forced. That's whatit comes down to. Mr. Corrigan, did you comment? You didn't.MR. CORRIGAN. Since I got penalized for my double-dippingbefore--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought I counted and we had everybody.MR. PARTEE. Well, you thought he'd used up his turn.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I miss anybody else?MR. BLACK. I didn't say anything, Mr. Chairman, but I will--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sorry. I deprived all our double-dippers. I added up wrong. There are more people here than Ithought.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I'm not sure I can add anything much towhat has already been said. This is a nasty dilemma. One point thathasn't been mentioned, which does loom somewhat large in my mind, isthe fact that how we end up in 1980 is going to have a bearing on howwe start 1981 as well. And that at least has led me in the directionof "B," but that's not a very powerful feeling at this time because ofthe uncertainty. The other thing that is bothering me about thisquarter is that it's a quarter in which we are probably going to haveeven more problems with numbers because of all the news reporters andeverything else. We could be a bit more in the blind than we usuallyare. I just wonder [about that] in terms of the interval we'relooking at now, if we did something like Mr. Solomon has suggested inthe very near term. If we do get continued rapid [monetary] growth inSeptember and early October, I think the credibility issue will becomevery real. Market rates are going to move up anyway, and we'll havethe worst of both worlds. Maybe there is a middle ground: Perhaps inthe context of something like Mr. Solomon has suggested, the quarteras a whole could be looked at again at the next meeting and we couldoperate more with an eye on the next month until we see where we are.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what we've been doing the lastfew months, in effect.-46-9/16/80MR. CORRIGAN. I think that's right. But as I would look atit, I tend to think we're at or near a pretty critical crossroads.All I'm suggesting, within the framework of some sort of compromise,is that maybe we can get September under our belt and keep a littlemore open position on the fourth quarter until we see where Septembercomes out. That's because if September [growth] really is modest, Idon't think we're necessarily talking about the kinds of pressuresthat people are so concerned about and that I'd be concerned about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I really made my main point. Icome out around "C," [which some speakers have proposed]. The mainpoint I want to get across is that there's a lot of repetition inthese figures. And if we say we want to hit that midpoint of 5-1/4percent, for August to December that translates to about 3 percent butfor the third quarter to the fourth quarter it's a great deal morethan that, about 4.9 percent. That doesn't sound so bad.MR. PARTEE. You're talking about M-1B, Bob?MR. BLACK. Yes, M-1B. And if we hit the 5-3/4 percentmidpoint, that would give us a quarterly growth rate of 6.8 percent,which sounds fairly high. But that translates into growth from Augustto December of 4.8 percent if you assume equal [monthly] increments.MR. PARTEE. All you're saying is that August is a big month.MR. BLACK. That's what it amounts to. And I'm saying thatwithout much growth, because August was so high, we can get a goodquarterly growth rate with figures that look scandalously low on anAugust-to-December basis. That's the point I wanted to get across.MR. PARTEE. You still have a [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right, but you're playingwith arithmetic in a sense. The question is what we want to do in asubstantive sense.MR. BLACK. The other point I was going to make is aboutcredibility. If [monetary growth] comes in as high as a lot of peopleexpect, I think we're going to have a pretty serious problem. We mayhave not only high inflation but high interest rates as well. Whereasif we [hit our target], I think we're going to see some effects oninflation and we may end up just with higher rates, without as muchinflation. But this route is going to give us both.MS. TEETERS. How would you formulate this to make it aneutral policy until the next FOMC meeting? What numbers would fit aneutral policy for the next month?MR. MORRIS. What do you mean by neutral policy--no change ininterest rates?MS. TEETERS. No, I'm just saying that I would like to seethings rather calm until we have a better idea of what is going on outthere. I agree with Jerry: Things are too uncertain to try to set apolicy at this point that's going to carry us through December. So,-47-9/16/80if we could find some way to wait a month without rocking the boat inany way and get a little better idea as to whether some of these[developments] are real or transitory, that would be the wise thing todo.MR. PARTEE. Well, I sort of disagree with Jerry. We'retrying to set a target path that we think is acceptable. If thenumbers come in high, then markets are going to have to tighten; andif the numbers come in low, markets are going to have to ease. It's atarget concept rather than a projection concept that we should thinkabout when we're specifying these. So I don't see why we can't state,as suggested in the Bluebook, the target growth rate we would like tosee for the last four months of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My comment about neutrality relates to howwe come out of this meeting right now, not for the next month. Idon't think we can ignore what is happening to the money supply forthe next month. As I said, we take a chance whatever target we set.If next week's figure comes out to something like a reduction of $1-1/2 billion it doesn't apply to anything we have said here. But if itcomes out significantly different from that, we're already beginningto diverge under any of these targets. I guess one can argue it anyway. My particular problem is that I think ["B"] is a bit unrealistic--that may not be a good word because anything can happen, includingthe New York projections, in which case it wouldn't be at allunrealistic--taking the broad range of probabilities. We probablywouldn't be neutral coming out of this meeting with alternative B.MR. WALLICH. Neutrality has many meanings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I talked abut neutrality with a veryparticular meaning: What is the level of borrowings that we start offthis track on, recognizing that it will change if within the weekthese figures begin deviating substantially from whatever target weset.MR. WALLICH. That's really the old funds rate technique inan aggregates version. That is, we immediately allow the funds rateto respond to any change in the aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would be allowing the borrowings torespond, that's right. I don't know any way of running this techniquewithout having a--. Well, let me put the question to you. Do we havea conclusion for somewhere between "A" and "B"? I will leave forlater exactly how to compromise those numbers. Does a borrowing levelof $750 million, just to take the midpoint of some that have beenmentioned, and something in between "A" and "B" attract a spectrum ofsupport?MR. ALTMANN. People could raise their hands.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess so.MR. GRAMLEY. What aggregates would you associate with this?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Between "A" and "B."-48-9/16/80MR. GRAMLEY. If you start out with "A" and then go halfwaybetween that and "B," that's $700 million on borrowing. To go alittle further to $750 million--another $50 million in borrowing--means it's so close to "B" that I am getting very uncomfortable. I'mnot at all sure that we might not end up with 14-1/2 percent mortgageinterest rates on average in the fourth quarter. And that just seemsto me to be too big a wrench.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me on the basis of theopinions that were expressed that the compromise would really be[halfway] between the [midpoints] of "A" and "B" and the midpointbetween "B" and [the proposed] "C." A lot of people expressed anopinion of wanting to go further than "B." That would bring us up to"B" at the very best in terms of the compromise.MR. PARTEE. I think you have to isolate the voting members.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would like an expression of generalopinion on a mid-course between "A" and "B."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Everybody or the voting members?MR. PARTEE. I agree with Lyle's comment, by the way, on theborrowing level. I think $750 million is too high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The voting members. I said someplacebetween $700 and $800 million. I don't feel I can judge that with anyaccuracy. I'm not so sure that $800 million couldn't turn out ex postto imply a little easing.MR. GRAMLEY. I'd agree with you if we could just get thesense of it and split it right down the middle between "A" and "B,"recognizing that we really don't know whether the recent level ofadjustment borrowing has been unusually high and will stay high orwhether it will come back down again. If we had that general sensewithout [being precise]--if we took a range for adjustment borrowingof $600 to $800 million and gave the Desk and Steve Axilrod someflexibility to deal with it depending on what actually happens--Icould live with that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you want that much flexibility,Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it's an important part of theCommittee decision. I wish we were better able to give you guidanceto know what the relationship of the funds rate and borrowings is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You referred to this borrowing levelbefore, Steve. Do you just want to repeat what you said?MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I was assuming that if theCommittee wanted to start off in a posture where in some rough sensethe pressures in the money market weren't terribly different from whatthey have been in the last week or two, I would think an average levelof borrowing of $600 million is way too low. An average level of $800million might just about be consistent, given the fact that borrowinghas been running high in the last week, with not much change in moneymarket pressures. If my interpretation of what the Committee means by-49-9/16/80neutrality to begin with is right--that is, basically money marketpressures about as they have been, taking everything relevant to thatinto account at least initially--then I would think a number between$700 and $800 million would about do it. We would technically writedown $750 million in the path, but if borrowing were coming in high,we'd adjust the nonborrowed reserves down a bit and vice versa. Wecould just as well do that with a $600 to $800 million range. We'dwrite down $700 million and if $750 million looked right, then we'dlower nonborrowed reserves in the course of the week. If $650 millionlooked right to give a money market sense as it has been, we'd raisethem a bit. We can operate with that kind of flexibility, and thatmay be best given this developing uncertainty about what particularlevel of borrowing is "right."MR. GUFFEY. Are you making those comments based upon aweekly horizon or for the five weeks?MR. AXILROD. My memory going back three or four weeks ago--well, I wasn't here but from the discussion I heard--three weeks agothere was an expectation of a rather high funds rate, say, around 11percent, with borrowing around $400 or $500 million. That didn'tdevelop. Banks were much more willing to borrow and the funds rateonly got up to 10-1/2 percent. We expected this week a funds ratebetween 10-1/2 and 11 percent, closer to 11, with borrowing around$750 million. Well, banks very promptly went in and borrowed $1.7billion when the funds rate got to around 10-7/8 percent, againindicating a greater willingness to borrow. So, therefore, we shouldprovide less nonborrowed reserves. I think there is some uncertainty.If I had known the level of borrowing on Friday when we wrote theBluebook, I would have raised both the $600 and the $800 million toget to the point where "A" was a tick toward ease and "B" a ticktoward tightening to start with.MR. GUFFEY. My question is: If the Committee decided on a"B" or "B+" target for the aggregates, would you construct the pathbased upon a borrowing assumption of $750 million for five weeks?MR. AXILROD. If the Committee decided on "B," no. I wouldassume that borrowing consistent with this discussion of somewherebetween $600 and $800 million is neutrality. I would assume [for "B"]it would be somewhat above $800 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a little confusion, I think,because Steve, if I understand it correctly, has changed his mind fromthe time that the Bluebook was written, given the extra week'sexperience of relatively heavy borrowing with relatively less pressureon the money market than would have been expected.MR. AXILROD. With uncertainty.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So I'm taking that into account in my owncomments. Let me put the issue to you again in a general way. We'dhave to focus on the borrowing level a bit more precisely and we'dhave to resolve the fractions even if this proposal for roughlyhalfway between "A" and "B" commanded enough general support. But theborrowing level is biased a bit higher than the Bluebook says isconsistent with those alternatives, based upon the comments that werejust made.-50-9/16/80MR. SCHULTZ. You want raised hands on that issue?MR. PARTEE. You want preferences or can live with?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess "can live with."MR. PARTEE. That was a wise decision, I think.MR. ALTMANN. Seven, not counting yourself.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's pretty clear, without goingthrough any other exercise, that we're not going to get a largerfeeling for any other number. Let me just bear in a little moreclosely. Halfway between is literally 4-1/4, 6-5/8, and 8-3/4 percenton the aggregates, right? The main difficulty with that, as I see it,is the 5/8ths. It looks like a half-size, as they say.SPEAKER(?). You're an awfully small person!MR. AXILROD(?). Mr. Chairman, the staff [unintelligible] ifyou adopted 6-1/2 percent [for M-1B].SPEAKER(?). And 8-3/4 percent at least [for M2].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we literally wanted to avoid quarters--it would lean a bit toward "B"--I'd take Governor Partee's numbers of4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent. Let me say a word about the funds raterange. We're right in the middle of [the current range]. As TonySolomon and some others said, why fiddle around with it at this point?SPEAKER(?). Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to say 4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2percent and $750 million. But I have no strong argument against thealternative, which I suppose is 4-1/4, 6-1/2, and 8-3/4 percent. Thatjust puts in quarters.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'll go with either.MR. PARTEE. I don't care. It seems to me that our actualexperience is usually broad enough that it looks rather funny to beputting down quarters as targets. But I would accept the quarters.MR. SCHULTZ. I think you're probably right. It looks betterwithout the quarters. And those numbers are a bit more conservative,which seemed to be where people wanted to move to a little.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's obviously closer to B. And with a$750 borrowing assumption--MS. TEETERS. We could round up instead of down, gentlemen.MR. SCHULTZ. I hope we don't lose anybody.MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I'm disturbed, not so much evenabout the figures as this: I thought we had agreed, and that allthinking that has ever been expressed about targeting aggregates[suggests], that we had to set long-term targets and stick with them.-51-9/16/80Trying to fine-tune, as I think this discussion is demonstrating thatthe majority in this Committee is dedicated to, for 30 days in orderto have some effect on interest rates I think is a reversion back tovery thing that we abandoned last October. It makes intelligentlytargeting on aggregate growth and on reserves an impossibility. Thiswhole conversation reflects, at least as of this moment, that we'vethrown in the towel on our noble expressions and intentions of lastOctober 6th. We're right back to trying to control interest rates andtrying to move from moment to moment, which is what has been happeningin this Committee as long as I've been sitting in these meetings.This is where we have gotten into trouble in the past; whenever we'vebeen faced with a difficult decision we've always said, in effect,let's wait another 30 days or another 60 days. We procrastinate. Andthat is why, I think, we are in the inflationary situation in thisnation that we find ourselves in today. I apologize for that.MR. PARTEE. Larry, we're within the targets.MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Roos, I don't want to engage in anargument, but I think we're doing exactly what we said we were goingto do on October 6th. If you recall, we announced that the formerpolicy had been that we looked at the aggregates and at interest ratesand we put more emphasis on interest rates; but now the policy wasgoing to be that we would look at the aggregates and at interest ratesbut we would put more emphasis on the aggregates. At no time did thisCommittee ever say that interest rates would be ignored.MR. ROOS. Fred, we can't do both at the same time andaccomplish both objectives if they're incompatible. I'm being--MR. SCHULTZ. You'll pardon me if I respectfully disagree.MR. PARTEE. And I would point out, Larry, that we're wellwithin the targets that we specified in January and respecified inJuly for three of four aggregates. M2 is a trifle [above]. But Idon't think the concept has been violated.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the best of all possible worlds, Icould be lowering these targets just for the sake of imagery. But letus not forget that M-1B is obviously specified too low and we chosenot to change it at midyear. But some of that discrepancy betweenM-1B and M-1A is coming out of savings deposits. We don't know howmuch, but it is. I think we can say unambiguously that it's too lowrelative to what we thought we were setting at the beginning of theyear. Well, we have a proposal of 4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent, with$750 million on borrowing and keeping 8 to 14 percent on the fundsrange.MR. GRAMLEY. Do we understand this as halfway between "A"and "B" but with the numbers just rounded to 4 percent and so on?MR. SCHULTZ. It's a bit more toward "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise one further point. It'sthe point that Mr. Solomon raised earlier, which is a point I don'tthink we can quantify. But we have operated before when we wereeither high or low in a way that implied some tolerance for shortfallsor overshoots. When we were high we said "or somewhat below,"-52-9/16/80implying more tolerance for shortfalls. During the summer, in factfor two months--maybe we shouldn't have but we did--we said if[monetary growth] comes in high, we will be tolerant of an overshoot.I could well see adding a tolerance of an undershoot to some degreehere. I don't know that we can specify that arithmetically. But whatwe would be saying is that if the numbers come in unexpectedly low--that would mean total reserves were coming in low--we would be slowerabout making any adjustment that might otherwise be made in raisingthe nonborrowed reserve path to make up for the shortfall. That'sjust the opposite of what was done--MS. TEETERS. That is moving very close to "B." You'verounded the numbers down and then tolerate shortfalls.MR. PARTEE. I think it's worse than "B" because if whatwe've seen in the economy is a little bubble, we could be very slow tohave an adjustment to it. We are not out of these ranges. I don'tsee the basis that we had last summer for doing that, when we wereclearly below the ranges, or last fall when we were very concernedabout being over the ranges. We are within them.MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but we don't have much room for error.That's my problem.MS. TEETERS. That's just a function of being in September.We've nailed ourselves down on the end of December and that's--MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but September to December is a very shortperiod in terms of controlling the aggregates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we haven't got a lot of room. We havemore room for undershoots in a purely target sense than forovershoots.MR. PARTEE. But we most recently had a big month, and that'sthe only thing you're saying: That we had a really big month. Whenwe had a small April, the shoe was on the other foot and that droppedus right below our target ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's when [we did this]; it wasfollowing that very low month that we adopted the opposite [approach].MR. PARTEE. But we were below the ranges._CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were below the ranges.MR. MORRIS. But we had a lot more time in April [to reachour annual targets] than we have in October.MS. TEETERS. The fact that there is an end point to thisshouldn't be what decides this. We could change the specifications tothe middle of next year, which I understand the Committee did when ithad a rolling base. But to over-fight to make it in the last fourmonths just for appearance sake, regardless of what happens in thereal economy, seems to me the epitome of foolishness.MR. MORRIS. If we're in a position where we don't think theguidelines make sense, I think we ought to change the guidelines.-53-9/16/80MS. TEETERS. But we're within them.MR. WALLICH. Yes, but [the aggregates have been growing] athigher rates than compatible with the guidelines. And we're withinthem because we're making up for a large shortfall. So if we continueat this rate of speed, we're going to overshoot. Our question isprecisely: Do we want to get back on track by making a slight bend ora significant bend in the rate of growth?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, my suggestion carries forwardon what Henry just said. I don't understand why you say that a veryminor nuance--that if the opportunity arises, we tolerate anundershoot--is worse than alternative B.MR. PARTEE. Because it just means that there's a very laggedresponse to an unexpected weakness in market terms. That's what itmeans. And I would point out that for these last four months of theyear we're talking about growth rates of 4, 6-1/2 and 8-1/2 percent;those aren't fast. They are within the ranges, I think.MR. WALLICH. You're not including August?MR. PARTEE. No, and I'm not including April either. Augustis water over the dam and April is water over the dam. We're talkingabout the next four months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M-1B would be right at the top of therange [for this year], I think.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But Chuck, if there is a weakness inthe figures, the markets will reflect that. Therefore, we have asmall delay in not correcting the undershoot but it isn't as thoughwe're going to be pushing up--MR. PARTEE. But we'll take out the reserves and that willmean that the money supply will be low. And there won't be a self-correcting operation.MR. WALLICH. Even though I would like the consequences ofthat action, I don't think it is a good principle. I didn't think itwas a good principle when we did it [when monetary growth was] on theway up, so I shouldn't like it on the way down. It's really gettingback to a funds rate target.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you liked those.MR. WALLICH. Okay, but [unintelligible] a given rule. Giventhat option, I'm not proposing to go back to that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can always consult, so let's not makethat part of the proposal. I, frankly, would be delighted if themoney supply comes in so weak that it provokes a consultation as towhat to do about it. We'll cross that bridge when and if we come toit.MR. WALLICH. In that case, wouldn't it be helpful if weraised the lower limit of the funds rate?-54-9/16/80VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You don't want to target on the fundsrate, you just want to raise it!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no great objection to raising thelower limit on the funds rate if that's what the Committee wants todo. It's not accomplishing anything; I'm persuaded by the point thatTony made earlier. But if that's really important to somebody and itconvinces them to join in this consensus then--MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the discount rate is 10 percent.In some sense that's a fairly effective lower limit because if[monetary growth] gets weak enough that borrowing gets to zero--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think it's very substantivewhether we--MR. AXILROD. It's going to be a problem for [a funds rateof] 8 percent.MR. PARTEE. You can bet that long before it got down to 8percent we would be consulting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For that reason, I'm not disturbed byraising [the lower limit of the funds range] to 9 percent either.It's purely a cosmetic question.MS. TEETERS. I'd like to see the range kept at 8 to 14percent. That gives us the maximum amount of range for it. I'd hateto signal by raising [the lower limit] that we were tightening policy.If it's meaningless, then why do it at this point? I think it will betaken as a signal in the market that we did some tightening.MR. PARTEE. Technically, it wouldn't be [known to thepublic] until the policy record came out since they never test eitherend of this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's virtually inconsequentialexcept that somebody is going to read the policy record a month fromnow and see that we raised the lower end of the band by 1 percentagepoint and will wonder what that means, if anything. I'm back to 4,6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent, 8 to 14 percent with a feeling of virtualindifference on my part about that, and $750 million. Are we ready tovote?MR. GRAMLEY. Can we again have some interpretation of this?This is almost "B," and I thought we were starting out with some sortof compromise between "A" and "B." Plus you were almost willing toincrease the lower end of the funds rate range and that's even furthertoward "B." And I'm just getting uncomfortable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess you're uncomfortable about theborrowing. All I'm doing is accepting--because I tend to agree withit--that the borrowing specifications in the Bluebook are a little lowbased upon what we know now. So I'm just adjusting for that.MR. AXILROD. When you asked the question, Mr. Chairman, Iwas assuming that $750 million was the midpoint around which therecould be some variation. With nothing else changed--that is, if the-55-9/16/80paths were all working about like this--if the funds rate was going upvery high and if borrowings were $750 million, there would be acertain freedom within the very first week on that interpretation suchthat borrowings would be lowered because that would be an indicationthat the demand for borrowing was not as high as we thought. So Ithink we would be interpreting it along the lines of what you weresaying, Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Okay, thank you. That helps me.MR. PARTEE. It's really a $700 to $800 million range, orsomething like that.MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. PARTEE. That's a better way to think of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ready.MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey NoPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roos NoGovernor Schultz YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich NoPresident Winn NoMR. ALTMANN. Eight for, four against, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose we ought to eat, and we're goingto eat right here. Oh, one quick thing. We need somebody to besecond in command after Governor Schultz to act on freedom ofinformation requests. Governor Coldwell used to do this and we've hadno alternate since Governor Coldwell left. We have to repair thatoversight. It has not proved to be a heavy responsibility. GovernorPartee, who serves in that function for the Board of Governors, hasagreed to serve in that function for the Open Market Committee, if theCommittee so agrees. Do I have a motion?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Seconded.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without active dissent, Governor Parteewill be the alternate.MR. ALTMANN. Now that that has been accomplished, I mightsay that I have just recently denied a request which is likely toprovoke an appeal.MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm certainly glad that Governor Schultzis here!-56-9/16/80 -57-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that doesn't get to Governor Partee.Do you have a question, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. I may have missed it, but I don't think youformally approved the Open Market Desk's [intermeeting] operations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't want to overlook that.Without objection they are approved.MR. PARTEE. What would happen if we didn't? Is it any goodfor a loss or a gain?MR. SCHULTZ. Well, we might have to talk about "Peter who?"!END OF MEETING