Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call ofApril 29, 1980CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Good morning, gentlemen. We only met aweek ago but the markets have moved and the money supply has moved.Perhaps we better have Mr. Axilrod tell us how they have moved.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, following the Committee meetingwe had a very sharp drop in the money supply numbers that were comingin. The data we published for M-1A for the week ending [April] 16thturned out to be $1.4 billion lower than the preliminary estimate wehad at the time of the Committee meeting. Also for M-1A the numberthat came in for the 23rd turned out to be $5.7 billion lower than wehad been projecting for that week; [our estimate reflected the numberneeded] in order to have a decrease in the money supply for April ofonly 4 percent. Given the data we have in hand through the 23rd--withthe 23rd being a preliminary estimate and assuming some increase but amodest increase for the 30th--our estimate for M-1A growth in April isnow minus 12 percent. Our estimate for M-1B growth for April is minus9 percent and our estimate for M2 is plus 0.2 percent.This weakness in both demand deposits and currency hasweakened required reserves and therefore [reduced] the amount of totalreserves that we would expect in this four-week intermeeting period.Given these required reserve figures for the first two weeks of thefour-week period and our projection for the last half of the four-weekperiod, our total reserves appear to be running about $400 millionbelow path, largely reflecting this decrease in required reserves.And of course, in providing the nonborrowed reserves, we would beexpecting borrowing to be dropping substantially. Our estimate isthat instead of the $1-1/2 billion of borrowing ex First Pennsylvaniathat had been indicated at the time of the Committee meeting for theweeks of April 30th and May 7th, we'd be looking at borrowing ofsomething like $910 million and declining to something like $660million in the next two weeks.Of course this week, the week ending April 30th, borrowingthus far is running higher than that $900 million--somewhere on theorder of $1.5 billion ex First Pennsylvania, as banks did borrowsubstantially earlier in the week. Given these reserve paths and theprojected levels of implied borrowing, it would seem that the federfunds rate would begin dropping below the 15 to 16 percent notionalrange mentioned at the Committee meeting. Most recently, yesterdayand thus far today, it has been in the 14 to 15 percent area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to add anything, Mr.Sternlight?healMR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't have anything to add [on theaggregates and reserves]. I'll just add the thought that as we wereaiming for the nonborrowed reserves on the path, [we have seen] alongwith those weakening aggregates a further decline in rates, especiallyshort rates. The bill rates in yesterday's auction, for example, weredown nearly 2 percentage points for the 3-month bill and about 1percentage point for the 6-month bill.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How would you characterize market gossipand attitudes?4/29/80SEVERAL. We can't hear.MR. MORRIS. We couldn't hear Peter's response to your firstquestion, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he can repeat that and answer myfurther question.MR. STERNLIGHT. I commented first to Chairman Volcker that Ididn't have anything to add to Steve's commentary on the aggregates.But with respect to interest rate moves in the past week, I noted thatat the short end there had been a further marked decline--particularlyin bill rates. In yesterday's auction, rates were down from a weekearlier by close to 2 percentage points for the 3-month bill andaround 1 percentage point for the 6-month bill.The Chairman then asked me about market attitudes. I thinkthere has been some surprise in the markets at the extent of the ratedeclines. I do not get a strong sense at this point, I must say, ofgreat concern in the markets about the extent of the declines.Nevertheless, my own inner feeling is that such a concern could buildup if we were to continue to get sizable declines and if there were amarket sense that we were permitting, with little or no resistance,substantial further declines in rates. But I would honestly have tosay that up to now I do not sense great alarm, from the domesticmarkets anyway, about the extent of the decline in rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have anything to add from theperspective of the foreign markets, Mr. Pardee?MR. PARDEE. All I can say is that since the FOMC meeting,the dollar has declined by about 3-3/4 percent against the German markand has declined against other currencies pretty much across theboard. Again that largely [reflects] the decline [in U.S. rates] inrelation to the climb of [foreign] interest rates, which has beenparticularly precipitous in the Eurodollar market. We also had theeffort to release the hostages, which when it occurred did lead tosome selling of dollars. At the moment it occurred the Bundesbankwent quickly to the market and intervened. We have not intervened inbig amounts. We've done about $150 million worth of marks and someSwiss francs. The Bundesbank has done about We havenot been in a mode of trying to resist very heavily the movement ofthe dollar, given that the market perception is that the problem isnot intervention but a decline in interest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm tempted to ask why they consider thata problem.MR. PARDEE. As I outlined at the FOMC meeting, it's a matterof timing in that interest rates have come down before there was anyindication that we were making progress on inflation or on the tradebalance. The market currently is waiting for the trade figures thisafternoon.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the dollar/mark now?MR. PARDEE. It's 179.5. It was 186 at the time of the FOMCmeeting.4/29/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only thing I have to add by way of anyinformation is that I think it's very likely that we will get anincrease in the German discount rates this week--not necessarilypresented as a great tightening of money, but there it is.As Mr. Axilrod described, we have a situation where, becausethe money supply and therefore the reserve need is even less than wethought at the time of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting, thefederal funds rate has already in the last day and a half moved belowthe range that we talked about as a checkpoint. I suppose one couldargue, if one were in that mood, that it has already gone further thanit should, on a timing basis anyway. We could leave it alone aroundthis area but say that we would be disturbed about further immediatedeclines. Or at the other extreme we could say that we would not bedisturbed about further declines. We do have an official checkpoint.It is the boundary limit in the present directive. We don't have todo anything here about changing the directive but I would appreciateany comments that members of the Committee have at this point.MR. EASTBURN. Paul, could I question Steve? This is DaveEastburn. Steve, do you have any guess about the aggregates for May?MR. AXILROD. I have our projections, Dave. They wouldsuggest a growth rate in May of 4-1/2 percent, followed by a growthrate in June of 9.3 percent. That projection assumes interest ratesroughly at current levels.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With an error range of plus or minus 10percent!MR. EASTBURN. These projections, Steve, were made with aknowledge of what was happening in April?MR. AXILROD. Yes. They assume really a very modest recoveryin the course of May from what we presume will be a slightly higherlevel in the week of April 30th. If we have a very substantialrecovery over the course of May, we could have a rather large [rate ofincrease] in May. I understand from Peter that the Federal ReserveBank of New York has a much [higher] projection for May than we nowhave.MR. STERNLIGHT. That's true. I'd say red-facedly that weobviously had a stronger April than the Board staff had--far strongerthan it turned out. We continue to be higher for May than the Boardstaff. I think we're projecting about 8 or 9 percent growth.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you waiting for reactions?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm waiting for substantive reactions,yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This is Tony Solomon. Let me say afew words about how we see it here in New York. First of all, I thinkit's important to say that the market viewed the April [money] numbersas largely reflecting technical problems endemic to April. Marketparticipants don't expect us to change our posture as a result of theApril figures and they would be very surprised--and I thinkdisappointed--if we were perceived as overreacting to these one-month4/29/80developments. The market is really looking for some resistance. Andin view of the fact that the April M-1A drop clearly goes beyondanything that can be explained by the economy, we are projecting asubstantial comeback for money growth for May and June. So it seemsto me that we've got to follow a fairly prudent policy here and notoverreact. I would like to suggest that we put a downward limit of 14or 14-1/2 percent [on the funds rate] for the next two weeks, afterwhich we could meet or confer again. This involves a borrowingassumption of no lower than about $800 million to $1 billion, which Ithink Steve would feel would be consistent. If we resist going below14 percent, the fed funds rate would average about 14-1/2 percent nextweek probably. That's all I have to say at this point, Paul.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that we've become prisoners hereof our technique. I don't think from an overall point of view that wewant such a sudden degree of easing. [I say that] not because of thedollar, which has importance but is not dominant, but because theimpression that would create is that there has been a change inpolicy. It is not going to help us to say that we haven't changedpolicy and we're following the same targets as before. People wouldperceive the big change in interest rates. And I think substantivelythey would be right; it is a change in policy if we let interest ratesdrop dramatically. So my suggestion would be to try to hold the lineat the [present rate] or a little above it and wait for furtherdevelopments.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. Well, as you might imagine, I disagree with bothTony and Henry. I think the money supply figures may well be tellingus something. The [weakness is] in currency as well as in demanddeposits, and it's associated with extraordinarily weak information onthe economy. In the last three weeks the initial claims forunemployment insurance have shot up to the level they reached in thespring of 1975. And they show no sign of turning. I just spoke a fewminutes ago to a man who operates a very large retail business, and hesaid that in the month of March he missed his projection of creditoutstandings by $20 million. That is, they were $20 million lowerthan he had [expected]. He had never before missed it by more than $1million. He said that sales have continued extraordinarily weak inthe month of April. The car dealer community is on its ear and so isthe automobile industry. There is no building going on except for thecompletion of single family units that were started earlier, and eventhere in some cases there has been a stoppage.So I think there is a fair chance that this money supply[behavior] is telling us that we're now entering into the sharpestphase of recession we've seen any time since World War II. And ifthat is the case, to maintain interest rates [at their current highlevels] and thereby destroy the reserves necessary to supportreasonable monetary growth is a grossly wrong policy for the Board orthe FOMC to follow. I wouldn't want to panic on this, because it doesseem to me that a minus 12 percent rate is just so unbelievable that Ican't believe it could continue for any length of time. But I dothink, since the Committee has in its [most recently] publisheddirective to the Manager a range for the funds rate that extends down4/29/80to 13 percent, that we have no business looking at any [lower bound]above 13 percent in terms of limiting the Manager's activity. So Iwould say that what we ought to do now is to use the full range that'savailable to us and that we specified only a week ago in thedirective--and which has yet to be made public. And we ought to talkin another week to see if it should be reduced further because I thinkwe have to react to what could be a very seriously deterioratingeconomic situation.MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos from St. Louis and I agreetotally with Chuck Partee.MR. BLACK. This is Bob Black and I agree, too, Mr. Chairman.I would be very careful in announcing that if we tried to do it. I'dsay there's no change in policy but this is a pursuit of aggregatetargets that we set out for ourselves in your recent public statement.MR. BALLES. This is John Balles, Mr. Chairman. I fullyassociate myself with Chuck's views, particularly given the fact thatthis big April decline follows hard on the heels of a March decline.In view of that, we've got to view with considerable skepticism if notalarm, the projections that call for a revival of monetary growth inMay and June. I hope it happens. But I think we've got to guardagainst it not happening at this point. And really, to come down tothe 13 percent lower limit we've set for ourselves would not disturbme since 13 percent in absolute terms is still pretty high.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey. I'd like toassociate myself with Governor Wallich and Tony Solomon. It seems tome that we should resist--not overly resist, but resist--[the fundsrate] going down too quickly. I would think that a range of 14-1/2 to15 percent for some short period of time would be very appropriate. Iwould also agree that maybe a week from now we ought to consult again.I would suggest that the numbers we are looking at in April are justas surprising as the numbers on the other side were in February, andthey may not mean a whole lot. I would hate to see us drop the fundsrate precipitously strictly to try to get back onto the somewhatartificial path for the first half of 1980. I'd rather take a bitlonger. The aggregates are coming in weak but I would not try to getback on path in one month on figures that we're not very certainabout.MR. EASTBURN. Paul, this is Dave Eastburn. I'm havingtrouble seeing what the risk is of sticking with our path. It seemsto me that there's obviously a risk in appearing to panic. On theother hand, there's a risk that we might have to back up. But I thinkthe long-term movement is so definitely in the downward direction thatI can't see much risk either way. So I'd stick with the plan that weformulated at the meeting.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that if we'rewrong, then the market will react and rates will go back up again.That happened to us in November and December and again in February.It seems to me that we should stick to the policy [we established] and[use] the full range and let the interest rate fluctuate. We tookthat approach when we were going [up on the funds rate]. And ifnecessary, the market will change [the rate] and push it up if we've4/29/80made the wrong decision. So I would stick with the 13 percent lowerlimit.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Forrestal inAtlanta. We would like to associate ourselves with Governor Wallichand the New York and Kansas City Banks. I recognize that the numbersfor April are extraordinarily low and not what we anticipated. On theother hand, I would not be overly concerned about one month's numbers.They could well be technical aberrations. Basically we're on targetwith what we intended to do last October. I think the greater risk atthis point, both domestically and internationally, would be to run therisk of underkill on inflation. Without any reduction of theinflation rate we'd be making a serious mistake if we didn't [show]some resistance at this point to a precipitous decline in interestrates. I think they've fallen enough already and I would like to seethe Committee opt for resisting [further declines] at the 14 to 14-1/2percent level, wait a week to see what happens, and consult again.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, this is Frank Morris. I agreewith Chuck Partee's analysis. I think the weakness in the aggregatesis a reflection of the dramatic and very widespread weakening in theeconomy. I'm also concerned about the Committee moving back to themanagement of interest rates. I think Peter has served us well.[This operating technique] has turned the situation around a lotfaster than would have occurred if we had been managing interest rateson the up side. For us to turn around and try to manage them on thedown side now, I think would be a mistake.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I agree with Chuck Partee almost completely. I amconcerned, though, about the speed with which interest rates fall. Ifthey fall too precipitously and we allow that to happen, I think thatruns the risk of giving misleading signals. However, I don't see muchdifference between 14-1/2 and 13 percent and, therefore, I wouldcertainly favor maintaining our present range. And if at 13 percentthere is still substantial downward pressure on the funds rate, then Iwould want to have another careful look.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. I can agree with Chuck's analysis of the economicsituation. I'm not sure that a week may cut much difference in termsof our policy moves at the moment. We may even want to reconsider the13 percent floor if we get a better reading on unfolding developments.I am concerned about having whipsawed here--allowing further rapiddeclines in rates and then having them go up very rapidly--in terms ofmarket impact and interpretation and so forth. I could see holding[rates] where they are and taking another reading next week, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a little surprised at all thesecomments that people agree with Governor Partee's analysis of thebusiness outlook. I don't, if I interpret him correctly. I think theeconomy may well be declining rapidly now; I'm not sure what thatmeans for the future. I suspect we had a decline in retail sales.The question is whether it will level off and go up again or whether4/29/80it will continue to decline and I don't see any evidence bearing onthe issue. I want to insert [that comment] here.MR. PARTEE. Our policy will have an effect on that.MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos. I'd like to point out onething. My agreement with Chuck Partee is from the point of view ofpolicy. I'd ask those who feel that we ought to resist the downwardmovement in the fed funds rate if they don't recognize that the onlyway we can do that is by pulling reserves out of the System. And thathas the effect of exacerbating the downward movement of the economy,which I don't think anybody wants at this stage of the game.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who has not been heard from here?Governor Schultz.MR. SCHULTZ. Well, like President Winn, I'm a littleconcerned about getting whipsawed and I'd like to see us hold thefunds rate at 14 percent this week and talk again next week. I loveseeing these interest rates come down; I just have some concern aboutthe speed, which has been extraordinarily rapid.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a difference of opinion obviously,if we express it in terms of interest rates, and I don't think weshould do that directly. Let me just see how this situation lies. Ithink we ought to talk about the level of borrowings--presumablythat's consistent with the way we're going about [conducting policy]--and not about a level of interest rates. What did you say the currentlevel of borrowing is?MR. AXILROD. This path, Mr. Chairman, has $900 million ofborrowing followed by $660 million; that is just what falls out ofholding to the nonborrowed [objective] that was set at the time of theCommittee meeting. I should hastily add that it makes no adjustmentfor an initial look [suggesting] that for multiplier reasons we oughtto add around $250 million [in reserves]. We did not do that thefirst week because we have found [in the past] that [the reserveinjection] might have to be reversed. So ordinarily [in such cases]we've let that go for a couple of weeks. But should that persist,borrowing would go down another couple hundred million because of theaddition. And that makes no allowance for the fact that totalreserves are running below path; in the past we have often raisednonborrowed reserves simply for that reason. So what I'm saying isthat at the moment, unless there's a big change in deposits, that[$900 million] is kind of the maximum level of borrowings that jumpsout of the path. Next week, unless the deposits change, the pathcould call for a lower level of borrowing.MS. TEETERS. Steve, with the money supply dropping and alevel of borrowings that is relatively high at the present time, whereare [the reserves] going? Do we have a massive increase in excessreserves?MR. AXILROD. No, we're mopping up the excess reserves. Whatis technically happening is that with required reserves dropping,we're kind of releasing reserves to excess and they are being moppedup. That is what literally is happening. If we supplied all thesetotal reserves, which we couldn't, we would have a massive amount of4/29/80excess reserves. So we're in effect mopping up the excess reservesthat were released by the decline in required reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't entirely follow that when thelevel of borrowings is so high this week, which I think is what Nancyis asking. Why is the level of borrowing so high?MR. AXILROD. Well, borrowings ought to drop off to almostnothing today and tomorrow. Our estimate is that they might drop offto $600 or $700 million. If we literally followed the nonborrowedpath, they would drop off to very close to zero to achieve this $900million [average]. But banks did borrow quite a lot early in theweek--more than we think is needed given the required reserves and theamount we were planning to provide by nonborrowed reserves. So at theend of this week, the funds rate would drop and the level of borrowingwould drop.MS. TEETERS. I guess what I'm really saying is that thelevel of borrowing seems inconsistent with the money supply.MR. AXILROD. Well, do you mean the $900 million we'replanning on or--MS. TEETERS. No, I mean the actual.MR. AXILROD. In terms of the actual of $2.3 billion, youhave to take out the $700 million that is First Pennsy. So that putsit down to $1.5 or $1.6 billion. Whether that is consistent orinconsistent with the money supply would depend in part on banks'response to that level of borrowing. We believe that it is high [inrelation to] this money supply, but we have been wrong before onbanks' attitudes toward borrowing. And it may be that they're quitehappy and are willing to borrow and are going to go on and expanddespite that. Our judgment is that the level of borrowing would haveto be lower to promote a very rapid rise in the money supply.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your current path is based upon $900million of borrowing?MR. AXILROD. Yes. That is simply because of the weakness inrequired reserves relative to what we had planned at the time of theCommittee meeting. It makes no allowance for multipler changes or anyeffort to compensate for the reduction in total reserves relative tothe path.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm thinking that the obvious thingmay be just to maintain--in the short run anyway--that $900 million,which is what fell out anyway. That is $600 million lower than wewere talking about a week ago. And then let's see what the nextfigures bring or whatever.MR. PARTEE. I do think, Paul, that we'd have to followpractice and look at the multiplier, if it holds up to be a shift.But it probably would be another week before we'd have thatinformation. So for the week $900 million is all right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it makes a lot of sense,Paul, to work on that borrowing assumption of $900 million.4/29/80CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about a short time periodhere. We'll get a new money supply figure shortly and we will getsome other evidence. But I think this is fully consistent with whatwe said. We're going through the checkpoint. In a sense we relaxedthe $1-1/2 billion that we started with because it falls out. Andwe're saying let it fall out. I don't see any need for any specificdecision other than that we're saying we should stay more or less onthe path. We're not leaning over backwards to push it up, along theline of reasoning that Steve suggested could be used, but we're notdeliberately pulling back either.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't it possible, even with aborrowing assumption of $900 million, that we will still have a veryprecipitous decline in the fed funds rate due to uncontrollablefactors? The question that I think we are still left with, which weshould face up to, is do we want to show some resistance in that area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the resistance still comes at 13percent, of course, in a firm way. I guess what we're saying is thatwe don't want to manage the rate in this area. But from some pointsof view--it depends upon how you want to argue--the $900 million ofborrowing could be considered to be too high if you really wanted topush the money supply with maximum force. In that sense, we're takingaccount of it.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, with that level of borrowing, the13 percent discount rate I believe is a very effective floor for thefunds rate. And so with the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By "floor" you mean [the funds rate] isnot likely to go to 13 percent.MR. AXILROD. That's right.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, not below but it could be darn closeto it.MR. AXILROD. You're talking about something like $400 or$500 million borrowing above minimal levels. So we would expect somespread of the funds rate above the discount rate--[a funds rate] inthe 13-1/2 to 14-1/2 percent area.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without allowing anything for thesurcharge.MR. AXILROD. Yes, without allowing any resistance.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a fine judgment. I don't thinkthere is any obvious answer. It will be wrong if the money supplyvery promptly goes up again in some sense. It will be wrong in theother direction, I suppose, if the economy really is weak and themoney supply turns out to be as weak as some of the more pessimisticviews. The funds rate seems to me a little high relative to othermarket rates. Is that a fair conclusion? I don't think a decline inthe funds rate in itself implies much change in other rates.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, looking at day-to-day rates, Mr.Chairman, the funds rate has come down most recently to about 144/29/80percent. I would have said a few days ago that funds had lagged alittle against some other market rates but I think it has had a fairlysubstantial decline now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon which rates one looks at,I suppose. It seems to me a little high relative to the bill rate,and some government rates. It may be not high relative to the CD rateand--MR. STERNLIGHT. I suppose that's right, but at 14 percent itwould be some 3-1/2 percentage points under last week's average. Mr.Chairman, would I be right in inferring from the approach that yousuggested that there is no great reluctance to see the funds rate movesomewhat below 14 percent or down toward the 13 percent level?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there's a reluctance by more thanhalf of the members of the Committee to see that happen. But we'resaying we're not guiding it that directly.MR. RICE. We're not going to panic.MR. STERNLIGHT. If it happened in the pursuit of our paths--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it happened in the pursuit of aconservative path, we're saying it's going to happen. But I assureyou, from my listening to the comments anyway, that more than half themembers of the Committee are not going to be joyous about it and wouldbe much happier if it stayed someplace around 14 percent. It'sroughly a 50/50 split. So I think we're reflecting that by not movingthe borrowing as rapidly as it could be moved.MR. PARTEE. Let's see how the figures develop.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Okay, as I said, I don't think thisrequires any vote. We're just confirming the [existing] directive.Thank you.END OF SESSION-10-