This passage was too long for model to process and thus had to be split: Passsage number 1
Confidential (Translation) MINUTES * OF THE 235th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 9th MAY 1989 AT 9. 30 a. m.   Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Bank of Greece and Chairman of the Committee, Mr.  Chalikias, accompanied by Mr.  Papademos, Mr.  Karamouzis and Mr.  Brissimis; the Governor of the Banque Nationale de Belgique, Mr.  Godeaux, accompanied by Mr.  Rey and Mr.  Michielsen; the Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank, Mr.  Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr.  Mikkelsen; the Presi.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the attendees of a meeting.dent of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr.  Pohl, accompanied by Mr.  Gleske and Mr.  Fischer-Erlach; the Governor of the Banco de Espana, Mr.  Rubio, accompanied by Mr.  Linde and Mr.  Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France, Mr.  de Larosiere, accompanied by Mr.  Waitzenegger and Mr.  Cappanera; the Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr.  Doyle, accompanied by Mr.  O'Grady Walshe and Mr.  Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d*Italia, Mr.  Ciampi, accompanied by Mr.  Dini and Mr.  Santini; the President of De Nederlandsche Bank, Mr.  Duisenberg, accompanied by Mr.  Szasz and Mr.  Benard; the Gover.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply lists the names of various central bank officials and the people accompanying them.nor of the Banco de Portugal, Mr.  Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr.  Pégo Marques and Mr.  Amorim; the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr.  Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied by Mr.  Crockett and Mr.  Price; the President of the Commission of the European Communities, Mr.  Delors, accompanied by Mr.  Costa, Mr.  Carré and Mr.  Dixon; the Director General of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, Mr.  Jaans; the Secretary of the Monetary Committee, Mr.  Kees.  Also present at the meeting was Mr.  Dalgaard, Chairman of the Group of Experts.  The Secretary General of the Committee, Mr.  Morelli, his Deputy, Mr..

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply lists the various individuals who were present at a meeting without giving any indication of conflict or differing opinions among them.This passage was too long for model to process and thus had to be split: Passsage number 2
 This could be explained in particular by the fact  - 4 -  that confidence in the present exchange rate relationships within the EMS was such that interest rate differentials were still sufficient to make investments in the other currencies attractive.  Special factors had also played a part, for example, in Spain, and also Germany, where political developments seemed to be weakening the Government, even though the general elections were not to be held for another year and a half.   Official German rates had been raised by 1/2 percentage point on 24th April, in order to moderate monetary growth, dampen down price increases and also support the Deutsche Mark.  Market rates had risen by only 1/4 p.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents information about the factors influencing interest rate differentials and changes in official German rates.ercentage point, and only in the case of short-term rates.  Long-term rates had even eased somewhat, perhaps as a result of the decision to abolish the withholding tax as from lst July 1989.  However, this measure and the higher interest rates had so far had no effect on the Deutsche Mark exchange rate.   Most EC countries had followed the rise in German interest rates.  In some countries it had been necessary to raise official rates, in others, such as France, market rates had increased sufficiently without a change in key rates.  Overall, there had been little change in interest rate differentials between the EC countries, and it was therefore not surprising that the impact on exchange rates h.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply explains the impact of changes in interest rates on exchange rates in various European countries.ad been limited.   The effect of abolishing the withholding tax in Germany might be felt later.  Residents might be waiting for formal abolition, on lst July 1989, or even to be sure that the tax would not be reintroduced in a Community context.  While repatriation of capital would probably be slow, new outflows should decline, and that, combined with the considerable current-account surplus, should be sufficient to strengthen the Deutsche Mark.   The experts from the EC central banks had not voiced any criticism concerning the repercussions of the increase in German interest rates, but they had felt that it would have been helpful to have been notified of the decision in advance, as it was impo.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply outlines the potential effects of abolishing the withholding tax in Germany and the impact it could have on the economy.This passage was too long for model to process and thus had to be split: Passsage number 3
 On the same subject, another Alternate had observed that, if German monetary policy was to provide the anchor for price stability in the EMS and the exchange rate was no longer available as an instrument to curb inflation, the Bundesbank had to use the remaining instruments, that is interest rates, to preserve price stability.  In addition, in view of the inappropriate policy mix in the United States and the high level of capacity utilisation, a dollar depreciation was unlikely to contribute to the adjustment .

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any signs of contention or disagreement. It simply presents the observations of two different Alternates regarding German monetary policy and the potential effects of a dollar depreciation.process but might exacerbate inflationary pressures.   Finally, the Alternates had referred to the recent sharp rise in Irish interest rates.  The limited liberalisation of long-term capital flows at the beginning of the year had led to capital outflows mainly because institutional investors had diversified their portfolios.  The official foreign exchange reserves had fallen considerably, which had reinforced the  need to increase interest rates.   C.  Discussion by the Committee  The Chairman noted that the ap.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement among the parties involved. It simply presents a series of events and decisions made.preciation of the dollar despite some slowdown in economic activity in the United States was surprising and raised the fundamental question of whether it was a case of the market "overshooting" and thus a temporary movement or rather a new and lasting upward trend that called for the Governors' close attention.  The Governors might also look at recent developments in Germany, viz.  the interest rate  increases, the abolition of the withholding tax on interest income and the sharp rise in the current-account sur.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any specific contention or disagreement. It discusses the surprising appreciation of the dollar and raises questions about whether it is a temporary movement or a new trend. It also mentions other developments for the Governors to consider.****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************
Passage number 4.
 Within the EMS exchange rate mechanism, where the Deutsche Mark was naturally the intervention and reserve currency, holdings amounted to 36 billion, which did not appear excessive; the figure for the United States was 34 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 Yes. The passage indicates disagreement or contention between the EMS exchange rate mechanism, where the Deutsche Mark was the intervention and reserve currency with holdings of 36 billion, and the United States with holdings of 34 billion. The comparison of the two figures suggests a potential point of contention or disagreement.



Passage number 5.
 These large purchases had certainly enabled the Deutsche Mark to remain the strongest EMS currency, despite relatively low interest rates, but they had not prevented its international weakness.  At all events, consideration had to be given to the possible consequences of a reversal of the situation, of massive use of these holdings, which  represented approximately 17% of global exchange reserves. Moreover, the use of the Deutsche Mark in interventions gave rise to money creation, and thus to an inflation risk depending on the extent to which it was neutralised. There were therefore limits to intervention, and in these circumstances, if the dollar continued to rise and the yen and the Deutsche Mark to depreciate, interest rate differentials would have to be widened, which meant that if  the authorities or the market failed to bring about a fall in rates in the United States, they would have to be raised further in Europe.  The Bundesbank's decision to raise its rates had caused some disappointment among its partners because of the lack of prior consultation. The German central bank was in fact a firm believer in co-operation and in monetary policy co-ordination, in particular within the exchange rate mechanism, and had furnished proof of this in the past; however, like its counterparts, it had constraints of its own, and the example of 24th April showed that, in the present statutory institutional framework, ex ante co-ordination of economic and monetary policies had its limits. This example might contribute to speeding up the establishment of a common decision-making structure in line with the report of the "Delors Committee".  Mr. de Larosiére thought that the current situation, following the decision of the Bundesbank to raise its key rates, was paradoxical in several respects. That action had been taken essentially on domestic grounds, in response to signs of tensions, but had it been effective. Certainly not as far as the Deutsche Mark exchange rate was concerned, which had depreciated vis-a-vis the dollar over the past two weeks. The dollar's strength, however, had other causes, as had been mentioned, but there was also the fact that in Europe interest rates had risen following the German decision even in those countries where official rates had not been increased. Thus there had been no real change in relative positions. The German measure might have some impact on domestic demand, but was this intended. As Mr. Pohl had said, one of the essential elements in the German economic boom was the strength of exports and thus of domestic demand in Germany's trading partners, in Europe in particular. For them, the very fact of having followed the increase in German interest rates meant that there was no fundamental change in their relative macro-economic positions, and thus no adjustment of the fundamentals in volume terms such as would enable German exports to be reduced somewhat.  It therefore seemed clear that the real problem that had to be  examined was one of more concerted management of the European and  international macro-economy. However, such management was faltering at the global level because it was always difficult to incorporate US policy, which lay outside the scope of European economic intervention and currently raised a number of concerns, in particular in the fiscal sphere. The inflationary pressures observed in several countries could ultimately only be alleviated if the slowdown in the US economy, of which there were some preliminary indications, was confirmed. The concerted management of the macro-economy was also faltering at Community level; in particular, there was no genuine discussion of the adjustment of relative macro-economic positions. In this context the Bundesbank could raise its rates following a surprise decision by its Central Bank Council, a decision which might have certain effects and no others but which rather indicated that the  EC countries were proceeding blindly. As Mr. Pohl had pointed out, this example should lead to a reflection on the quality of the decision-making process and of ex ante concertation within the Community. Such concertation had been lacking on 24th April, which was regrettable, but it was at least equally important to establish genuine concertation on the "fundamentals" than to know whether the Bundesbank was going to raise its rates ona particular Thursday or fifteen days later.  As far as interventions on the foreign exchange markets were concerned, Mr. de Larosiére recognised their limits but agreed with the criticisms expressed by Mr. Dalgaard. For several weeks now interventions had neither been vigorous enough nor sufficiently well managed. Without seeking to push the dollar into a new downward cycle, the timing of intervention during the day could be varied to secure the best effect. It would therefore be useful to review central banks' intervention techniques and procedures in the days ahead.  Mr. Ciampi agreed that the markets appeared to be accepting the large disequilibria which existed both globally and within the EMS, and that relative macro-economic positions were a major factor behind these imbalances. This accommodation or resignation on the part of the markets regarding the disequilibria meant that the authorities had to do everything, and quickly, to restore equilibrium. Adjustment policies in each country were therefore essential, and it was very important that they should be pursued within a framework of co-ordination and concertation of macro-economic policies.  In Italy the performance of the lira showed that the status quo  had become accepted; although there were clear signs of a worsening of the - 12 -  economic situation, in terms of inflation and the current-account balance, there had been no reaction on the foreign exchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a series of observations and opinions on the actions taken by the Bundesbank and the need for more coordinated macro-economic policies, without presenting conflicting views.



Passage number 6.
 On the contrary, the lira remained firm and had even appreciated in nominal and real terms vis-a-vis other EMS currencies. While this was clearly welcome from the point of view of checking inflation, it should not obscure the fact that the fundamental disequilibria were worrying and difficult to correct. Although still inadequate, Italian fiscal policy seemed to be embarking on the right path, and the measures adopted at the end of March should limit the central government deficit for 1989. Moreover, domestic demand could be restrained by the bringing forward, from November to June, of the payment of personal and corporate taxes.  The current problems observed in most countries highlighted the importance of co-ordination of macro-economic, monetary and exchange rate policies. Recent developments had shown that, within Europe, interest rate differentials had not really changed after the German decision, which, for that reason, had remained largely ineffective.  With regard to interventions on the foreign exchange markets,  Mr. Dalgaard suggested that both the method and the timing could be improved. It was true that even if they were of limited value, interventions could be made more effective, for example by operating in a procyclical direction rather than defensively, when the dollar was rising.  Mr. Duisenberg observed that De Nederlandsche Bank had immedi- ately followed the increase in interest rates by the Deutsche Bundesbank. As regards the decision-making process, there was not as powerful a Central Bank Council in Amsterdam as there was in Frankfurt. Although the German decision had been surprising, it was quite understandable given the domestic and external considerations underlying it. Similar reasons had been behind the Dutch decision. The inflation rate was low - at 0.8% the lowest in Europe - but it was influenced by the lowering of VAT, which had helped to dampen inflation. Worrying signs were emerging in other areas. For example, some acceleration in wage increases was evident; the agreements concluded recently kept just within the limits of productivity gains, and a number of agreements were due to expire at the end of the year. In addition, the duration of the agreements was becoming shorter, which was a reflection of the tensions on the labour market. In some sectors capacity limits were  being reached, and capacity utilisation overall stood at a record level.  - 13 -  The rise in import prices, in particular of raw materials, was also worrying. The main concern, however, was monetary growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement; it primarily discusses various economic aspects and policies.



Passage number 7.
 After the United Kingdon,  the Netherlands had registered the sharpest growth in M, in 1988 - a rate  of 14% - and it had persisted since the start of the year. In these circumstances De Nederlandsche Bank, which would not have taken the initiative to raise its interest rates, had taken the German decision as an opportunity to do so; it had even gone further in that it had entered into discussions with the commercial banks to conclude a gentleman's agreement aimed at moderating money creation.  The Chairman said that the increase in German interest rates had also persuaded the authorities in Greece to increase interest rates, in particular on Treasury bills.  Mr. Rubio remarked that in Spain the current difficulties were in large part due to the mix between monetary policy and fiscal policy. The aim of fiscal policy was to reduce the public deficit, which was not very high compared with the other European countries but which was nevertheless playing an expansionary role at a time when domestic demand, particularly investment demand, was very strong. It was not very likely that the Government would be able to change fiscal policy fundamentally in 1989, but certain measures might soon be taken which might alleviate the monetary policy dilemma. The peseta had for quite some time been subject to strong upward pressures and it had appreciated, for example, vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark by 11% in real terms over the last twelve months. Further appreciation was not desirable, given that the current-account deficit was increasing con- siderably; for the year as a whole it was expected to be double its 1988 level, reaching approximately US$ 7 billion, equivalent to more than 2% of GDP. However, the Banco de Espana had to follow a restrictive monetary policy and maintain high interest rates to counter domestic demand pressures and inflationary tensions.  Mr. Hoffmeyer recalled that in April he had argued that the EC countries should not automatically follow the initiatives of the Deutsche Bundesbank in respect of interest rates unless conditions really called for it. In January Danmarks Nationalbank had not followed suit and had been partly successful, but it was aware, as it had pointed out, that it could not hold back if there was a further increase in German interest rates. There had been such an increase, which was not really surprising, and it  was important that some countries had shown that it was not necessary to - 14 -  follow it. Even if market rates had risen nearly everywhere, there was a big difference if official rates had not, as they acted as a signal and had a major impact on expectations.   Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are providing information about the monetary policies and economic situations in different European countries, without expressing conflicting viewpoints.



This passage was too long for model to process and thus had to be split: Passsage number 8
 Hoffmeyer remarked that at present the Deutsche Mark was the strongest currency in the EMS and that the German economy was also expand- ing rapidly.  In these circumstances nothing could be done in a European context.  The problem lay basically in the relationship between the Deutsche Mark and the dollar.  It was, however, likely that any significant decline of the dollar would give rise to concern.  At all events, it seemed that one could not criticise Germany's growth policy and monetary policy at the same  time.   III.  Adoption of the Committee's report to the EC Ministers of Finance on developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen countries participating in the concertation procedure during April and the first few days of May 1989  The Chairman noted the Committee's adoption of the.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents Hoffmeyer's observations and the Chairman's note about the Committee's adoption of a report. There is no explicit disagreement or contention presented. "concertation report", which would be sent to the EC Ministers of Finance in the usual  way.   IV.  Organisation of the ECU clearing: criteria for extension  The Chairman recalled that this question had been touched on in April but that it had been decided to deal with it in May after further examination by the Alternates.  The Alternates had carried out their examination the previous day and Mr.  Papademos would be giving an account of it.  Before  this, however, Mr.  Lamfalussy could introduce the subject.   A.  Statement by Mr.  Lamfalussy  At their April meetings the Committee of Alternates and the Committee of Governors had discussed the problem raised by the question of accession of new banks to the private ECU clearing and settlement system.  At the close of these discussions, it had been agree.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes a process of discussing the accession of new banks to the private ECU clearing system, with various individuals providing updates and introductions on the topic. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.d that the question would be taken up again in May in order to try to reach a consensus on the desirable  form and degree of EC central bank involvement in this matter.  - 15 -  It should be recalled that in 1986, when the EC Governors and the BIS Board had decided that the BIS could agree to act as agent for the clearing and settlement system for the "private" ECU, it had been generally accepted by the Governors and the Bank, that - in particular during the system's running-in phase - the rate of increase in the number of clearing banks, and the number itself, should satisfy two fundamental objectives:  - the rate of increase should be sufficiently slow to enable the system to absorb new members without creating technical problems for the efficient operation of the system and without jeopardising its .

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It explains the decision made by the EC Governors and the BIS Board in 1986 regarding the involvement of the EC central bank in a clearing and settlement system. The passage also mentions that the topic will be revisited in the future to reach a consensus on the form and degree of involvement.financial integrity;  - yet, at the same time, it should be sufficiently fast to demonstrate that the system was not a closed one - i. e.  that it was not to be regarded as one designed to protect the commercial interests of existing members.   It had been to satisfy these objectives that the BIS had done two things.  On the one hand, it had set a minimum admission criterion of a balance-sheet total of ECU 30 billion, i. e.  six times the minimum level set by the ECU Banking Association (EBA) itself.  On the other hand, the Bank had made repeated efforts to ensure that the process of admission should not come to a halt.   It had become apparent from the outset that it would not be easy to reconcile the two objectives, but it had now become well-nigh impossible.  A number of the existing clearing banks .

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply explains the criteria for admission to the BIS and the challenges faced in maintaining financial integrity while ensuring the system remains open and not exclusive.Passage number 9.
  Finally, it should be noted that the chosen base year, 1979, was a special year for Italy because a depreciation of the lira had deliberately been engineered so as to allow it to hold its position within the EMS for a longer period without realignment. At the time, inflation differentials with the participants in the exchange rate mechanism had been very high, and the Banca d'Italia had wanted the lira to enter the grid at a fairly low level.  Mr. Hoffmeyer observed that it was interesting to review the development of effective exchange rates over a number of years; he pointed out that the theory of purchasing power parity held completely only at times of high inflation. A more subtle analysis should take account of a number of factors such as services and quality, but it was difficult to grasp the reality perfectly. Other independent measures, for instance based on profits and wages, existed and could be used. It had been found, for example, that in nearly all countries the share of wages had tended to increase until the early 1970s and had subsequently contracted.  Mr. Doyle shared Mr. Ciampi's and Mr. Hoffmeyer's reservations regarding the statistics. For instance, in Ireland, the figures based on consumer prices were very strongly influenced by the high incidence of indirect taxes, particularly since 1983. The figures calculated on the basis of unit costs were also affected by the structure of Ireland's economy and industry. The enormous importance of agriculture was not taken into account, while a large part of industry was very capital-intensive. Thus the competitiveness of Irish industry was not measured on the basis of unit labour costs but more on that of wage rates. In all such international comparisons, it was more important to compare similar economic and industrial structures than to undertake rather abstract calculations which gave the impression of being based on objective criteria but in fact did not have a  common basis.  VI. Exchange of views on recent developments in public finance and policy implications  The Chairman said he had already mentioned that the Alternates  had not had time to examine the note on developments in public finance and  - 21 -  that he had proposed that the discussion be postponed to the July meeting, at which the new report of the "Raymond Group" on monetary policies was also to be examined. Furthermore, Mr. Raymond, who had been unable to come to Basle this time for health reasons, should be present in July to take  part in the meetings.  VII. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee  There was no other business.  VIII. Date and place of the next meeting  The Committee's next meeting would be held in Basle on Monday, 12th June 1989 at 9.30 a.m., i.e. just before the BIS's Annual General Meeting. By tradition, the June meeting was confined to a few items only, such as the approval of the minutes and of the "concertation report", with the addition, since 1988, of the "monitoring" exercise. The latter would, as usual, be prepared by the experts, but only via the teleconference which took place every month on the Friday afternoon preceding the Committee meeting. So neither the "Monitoring Group" nor the Committee of Alternates would hold a meeting in June, unless of course circumstances required them to meet on the Sunday.  The "Concertation Group", on the other hand, would meet on Monday, 12th June 1989 at 8.30 a.m. in order to finalise the report to be adopted  by the Governors.  Committee of Governors of the Annex 9th May 1989 Central Banks of the Member States  of the European Economic Community Confidential  BRIEF REPORT ON DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE  APRIL 1989  This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation proce- dure. and briefly describes their interventions during April and the first  few days of May 1989.  I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS  The main features of the foreign exchange markets in April 1989 were:  - an easing of the US dollar followed by a renewed strengthening towards the end of the month; - the continued decline of the Swiss franc.  After reaching period highs on the first trading day of the month, the US dollar eased as market participants adopted a more cautious stance following the Group of Seven meeting and intervention dollar sales against both the Deutsche Mark and Japanese yen. Although investor sentiment towards the dollar remained positive, data pointing to a possible moderation in the pace of US economic growth at times tempered dollar demand. Late in the month, upward pressure re-emerged amid reports of persistent corporate and investment demand for dollars. Thus, the dollar  changed little for the month as a whole.  } The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland, Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States. In the EMS, exchange rate relations were stable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The authors are simply providing information on exchange rate developments and interventions without expressing conflicting opinions.



Passage number 10.
 A moderate increase in German interest rates towards the end of the month was followed by most other EMS countries and therefore it had little impact.  The Deutsche Mark strengthened slightly. Its weighted index vis-a-vis its eighteen most important trading partners (1972=100) rose from 173.8 at end-March to 174.4 at end-April. The strengthening occurred in the first half of the month and was due in part to the weakening of the dollar which took place during this period and in part to the debate on the abolition of the withholding tax. By contrast, the raising of the Bundesbank's discount and lombard rates on 20th April by 0.5 percentage point to 4.5% and 6.5%, respectively, had no lasting effect. During the last days of the month the Deutsche Mark weakened a little.  The French franc continued, on the whole, to hold firm during the period, benefiting from the publication of positive economic results and from the favourable orientation of the French bond market. The increase in the official rates decided by various European countries had only a very brief impact, notwithstanding the narrowing of the short-term yield differential resulting therefrom, and the franc recovered by month's end its initial position in the Community band.  During the month, the Belgian franc remained stable against the Deutsche Mark. The Banque Nationale de Belgique raised both its discount rate and its special advances rate by 0.5 percentage point in the wake of a similar move by the Bundesbank. The Bank acquired foreign currencies during the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply provides an overview of how different European currencies, such as the Deutsche Mark and the French franc, performed during the month in relation to interest rate changes and economic factors.



Passage number 11.
  The position of the Dutch guilder in the upper part of the EMS band underwent little change. Following the rise in German interest rates, effective 2lst April, the Nederlandsche Bank raised both its discount and lombard rates by 0.5 percentage point to 5.54 and 6.25%, respectively.  The Danish krone remained the weakest currency in the EMS, placed close to its lower limit. The interest rate differential against the Deutsche Mark was kept almost unchanged as the Nationalbank raised its main interest rates by 0.5 percentage point when the Bundesbank raised its official rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply describes changes in interest rates and the relative positions of the Dutch guilder and the Danish krone in the EMS.



Passage number 12.
  The Irish pound remained relatively stable in the upper half of the EMS band during April. The Central Bank responded initially to continued net commercial outflows by net sales of foreign currency. Domestic money-market rates commenced rising from mid-April, and on 27th April the Central Bank increased its short-term facility lending rate by 1 percentage point to 92%.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply provides information about the scenario of the Irish pound, the actions taken by the Central Bank in response to commercial outflows, and the increase in short-term lending rates.



This passage was too long for model to process and thus had to be split: Passsage number 13
 The Italian lira was mostly stable in the lower part of the EMS band.  Large capital inflows occurred during the second week of the month requiring fairly large purchases of Deutsche Mark by the Banca d'Italia.   Adverse press comments triggered a fall in sterling at the beginning of the month, but it recovered well in the wake of robust intervention and growing expectations of a further increase in UK interest rates.  When no such increase was forthcoming, sterling became unsettled, amidst fears of a dock strike and concerns about a dis.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage describes various events related to currency exchange rates and interventions by central banks without any indication of contention or disagreement.ruption to oil production in the North Sea.  Further support was also provided following the interest rate increases elsewhere in Europe but, helped by the better-than-expected UK trade figures for March, sterling ended on a steadier note.  The trade-weighted index fell by 0. 4% to 95. 1 (1985=100).   The Greek drachma remained stable against the US dollar, but against the ECU it depreciated by 0. 7%.  The Bank of Greece intervened in the market several times in implementing the current exchange policy.  In effective terms the drachma dep.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents various economic facts and events without expressing conflicting opinions.reciated by 0. 72.   The Spanish peseta again came under upward pressure, due mainly to short-term capital inflows driven by the existing interest rate differential, which resulted in intervention purchases by the Banco de Espana.  It ended 0. 4% higher against the ECU and 1. 12% higher against the US dollar.  On 25th April the Banco de Espafia raised its three-month repurchase agreement rate by 0. 4 percentage point to 13. 752.   In effective terms, the Portuguese escudo depreciated by 0. 25% as a result of considerable intervention purc.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.Passage number 14.
 Interventions in Community currencies and _ in private ECUs  Interventions in EMS currencies by Community central banks amounted to the equivalent of US$ 2.3 billion, compared with US$ 2.9 billion in March. The interventions consisted almost entirely of purchases of Deutsche Mark by the Banco de Espafia, the Banca d'Italia, the Banque de France, the Banque Nationale de Belgique and the Central Bank of  Ireland. Also the Sveriges Riksbank made substantial purchases.  III. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 5TH MAY  Upward pressure on the dollar persisted in the first few days of May, tempered by several rounds of concerted central bank intervention. The dollar firmed amid reports of strong corporate and investor demand for dollars and a marked absence of dollar sellers. Thin markets, due to holidays in Europe and Japan, at times exacerbated the effect of large  orders to buy dollars on exchange rate levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply provides information about interventions in various currencies and the developments in the exchange rates in the first few days of May.



Passage number 15.
 1A  EVOLUTION OF THE ECU, THE MIDDLE RATE OF THE CURRENCIES PARTICIPATING IN THE EXCHANGE RATE MECHANISM OF THE EMS, AND THE CURRENCIES OF THE EEC CENTRAL BANKS WHICH DO NOT PARTICIPATE IN THAT MECHANISM, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*  -20  « See next page.  §.5.1989  ov  EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION, ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE USD*  4 3.2 10.2 17.2 24.2 3.3 10.3 17.3 24.3 31.3 7.4 14.4 21.4 28.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply provides information about the evolution of different currencies based on exchange rates on specific dates.



Passage number 16.
4  1989  * ECU 0,767254; GBP 00,5346; GRO 126,2002; ESP 107,8498; PTE 130,0242; FIM 3,945; CAD 1,302; CHF 1,2775; JPY 121,4501; SEK 5,795; NOK 6,233; ATS 11,129; middle rate of the currencies participating in the EMS 0,77324.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No. 

This passage simply lists the exchange rates for various currencies without any indication of contention or disagreement.



Passage number 17.
 The middle rate of the currencies participating in the EMS represents the daily average of the exchange rates of those two currencies which have the largest divergence from their current bilateral central rates, with a maximum fluctuation of 2.25%.  §.5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No

Explanation: This statement provides a clear explanation of how the middle rate of the currencies participating in the EMS is calculated without any indication of disagreement or contention.



Passage number 18.
1989  1B  ue  - 16  -20  -24 MOVEMENTS IN THE EMS PARITY GRID  1989  §.5.1989  EVOLUTION OF THE DIVERGENCE INDICATOR* 100  75  50  25  -25  - 50  -75  ant Bee es  -100 27.1 3.2 10.2 17.2 24.2 3.3 10.3 17.3 24.3 31.3 7.4 14.4 21.4 28.4  1989  * The divergence indicator provides a uniform measure of a currency's position in relation to its ECU central rate. The maximum divergence spread is the maximum percentage by which a currency's market rate against the ECU may appreciate or depreciate in relation to its ECU central rate; it is expressed as +/-100, the divergence threshold being +/-75. The data which has been used to draw this graph are the ECU rates against the different currencies, adjusted to eliminate the effect of the fluctuation of the Italian lira, the pound sterling and the Greek drachma outside the 2.5% margin against the other currencies participating in the EMS.  §.5.1989 ot  EVOL PESET “AND TA OF TH D TH RTUG - UND a ORT ES EVAILING ON 31 E5000, THE 1ST BER AS DECEMBER 198 ®ASIS OF TH sa 7 ae F THE eT 18 oF L neKe ANISH ite JARKET meus RATES  -“4 \\ an ~ " / sn. maan at f 7 ito ed —   a —_ — . a __ GBP  - 7 == = 3R0  PI ESP : _.. PTE           _ I.   come — wt tee : ee —  er a ee  7 women, . ees poset  TOTS  ~- - ao N_  i _  l _  ~  7 , _ po l > _ Uwe  . « a . . . A s . 0 2 3.3 Q. .3 3 .3 2 . 28 6 ba  §.5.1989  4A  rd EVOLUTION OF THE CURRENCIES OF THE NON-EEC CENTRAL BANKS  PARTICIPATING IN THE CONCERTATION,   } ween een nero n nena akin,  ON THE BASIS OF THE EXCHANGE  RATES PREVAILING ON 31ST DECEMBER 1987 AGAINST THE ECu*  * USD 1,30335; CAD 1,69696; CHF 1,66503;  14,5050:  FIM 5,14172.  17.3 24.3 1989 JPY 158,292;  SEK 7,55292;  NOK 8,12378; ATS  §.5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is presenting data and information about movements in the EMS parity grid, the evolution of the divergence indicator, and the evolution of the currencies of non-EEC central banks participating in concertation.



Passage number 19.
1989  4B  ow  28  24  20  16 Annex  Horst Bockelmann 7th April 1989  Speaking notes for a presentation to the EEC Governors, on llth April 1989,  on exchange rates in a longer-term perspective  The tenth anniversary of the EMS seems an appropriate occasion to reflect on longer-term exchange rate devel- opments, but as the EMS is a regional agreement within a wider international context, I shall enlarge my perspec- tive to include all EEC currencies and the two major currencies outside of the EEC, the US dollar and the  Japanese yen.  Let me explain briefly how I have approached the sub- ject. Exchange rates as a market phenomenon are bila- teral by nature. However, when a large number of curren- cies are being considered, it becomes rather difficult to keep track of the bilateral relationships, even though they vary widely in importance. I shall look at effective exchange rates for the currencies concerned, based on trade weights calculated from export and import flows for twenty-one industrialised countries, and also taking into account third-market competition on the export side. For some time the BIS has been using its own method for this calculation which has, however, been revised recently. The decision to employ our own formula was taken in view of the fact that no clear “winner” has emerged so far from among the different approaches. In the absence of a broad consensus, one has to use one's own judgement to decide how best to combine the maximum number of advantages with a minimum of disadvantages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model:
 No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their approach to analyzing exchange rates in a longer-term perspective for a presentation to the EEC Governors.



