Passage number 1.
Confidential  (Translation)  MINUTES * OF THE 230th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 13th DECEMBER 1988 AT 9.30 a.m.  Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Banque Nationale de Belgique and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Godeaux, accompanied by Mr. Rey and Mr. Michielsen; the Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank, Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied by Mr. Schlesinger and Mr. Rieke; the Governor of the Bank of Greece, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by Mr. Papademos and Mr. Karamouzis; the Governor of the Banco de Espana, Mr. Rubio, accompanied by Mr. Linde and Mr. Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France, Mr. de Larosiere, accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi, accompanied by Mr. Dini and Mr. Santini; the President of De Nederlandsche Bank, Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied by Mr. Szasz and Mr. Brockmeijer; the Governor of the Banco de Portugal, Mr. Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Pégo Marques and Mr. Amorim; the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied by Mr. Price; the Director-General for Economic and Financial Affairs at the Commission of the European Communities, Mr. Costa, accompanied by Mr. Mingasson; the Director General of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, Mr. Jaans; the Secretary of the Monetary Committee, Mr. Kees. Also present at the meeting was Mr. Dalgaard, Chairman of the Group of Experts. The Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul, Mr. Scheller and Mr. Giles, and Mr. Bockelmann and  Mr. Dagassan also attended.  en * Final text, identical to the draft, approved at the meeting on 14th February 1989. Tt. Approval of the minutes of the 229th meeting.  The Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the 229th meeting, on the understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would be in-  corporated in the final text.  Il. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the EEC based on:   - Preparation by the '"Dalgaard Group" and discussion by the Committee of Alternates;  - Statistical charts and tables.  A. Statement by Mr. Daligaard  The most striking development recently had been the weakness of the dollar in October and during the first two weeks of November. The dollar had fallen by 8% against the Deutsche Mark during that period. The fall had occurred in spite of an increase in the interest rate differential in favour of the dollar. In the second half of November the dollar had stabilised, and at the beginning of December there had even been signs of a slight improvement. On balance, however, the dollar was at a higher level at the beginning of December than in May 1988 and was 10% above its lowest level, recorded at the end of 1987. The central banks had responded to the fall in the dollar by purchases which had amounted in November to about US$ 8 billion, US$ 2 billion of which had been by the Federal Reserve and US$ 2.5 billion by the Bank of Japan. The Deutsche Bundesbank had purchased approximately US$ 350 million and had sold small amounts in early December when the dollar had firmed slightly. However, it appeared that the Bundesbank's influence on the dollar exchange rate had been much more marked in November, since it had allowed an increase of DM 3 billion in its net foreign exchange reserves. Since then, these reserves had been reduced by approximately DM 1.5 billion by rechannelling dollar earnings onto the market. This policy was grounded in the belief that adjustment was moving in the wrong direction. In fact, since the second half of 1988, Germany's net exports had started to rise again, chiefly to other European countries but also, more recently, to the United States. This development was not desirable and was leading the Bundesbank to resist a depreciation of the Deutsche Mark. The experts were of the  opinion that adjustment in the United States would take time and that a  rise in the dollar would jeopardise the process. Nevertheless, it did not seem likely that the dollar would show any lasting appreciation, given the persistence of fundamental problems in the United States. Furthermore, it seemed that the US and Japanese authorities were not very concerned about the current situation, although the statistics confirmed that adjustment between the United States and Japan had also come to a standstill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 2.
  Within the EMS the situation had been calm and there were evidently no expectations of a realignment in the near future. It was acknowledged, however, that the recent sharp expansion in the German trade surplus vis-a-vis the other EEC countries could generate tensions within the exchange rate mechanism if it were to last too long. The experts had also pointed out that the foreign exchange markets were influenced these days not only by trade balances but perhaps more by ever increasing capital flows. These could neutralise current-account deficits, even over long periods, but the financing of deficits in this way had repercussions on interest rate differ- entials. Moreover, the fact that the last realignment had taken place almost two years previously tended to encourage expectations of a change in parities, and that could cause interest rate differentials to widen further.  The Italian lira had been firm recently, notably as a result of a rise in interest rates due to domestic factors. In October the Banca d'Italia had taken advantage of this strength to purchase foreign currency, but these purchases were scaled down in November in order to limit the impact on domestic liquidity. The lira's position within the fluctuation band had strengthened and was very close to the narrow band. Although the measures to liberalise capital movements introduced on ist October 1988 had had no decisive effect, they had played a role insofar as private foreign borrowing to finance the purchase of foreign securities had risen. In Denmark the full liberalisation of capital movements that had taken place on lst October 1988 had not had any notable impact. In Ireland the announcement of liberalisa- tion measures had caused bond yields to rise at the end of October and the beginning of November; since then they had returned to the previous levels.  In Germany interest rates had begun to rise again: bond yields started to  do so at the beginning of November and short-term rates at the end of November. This had resulted in a narrowing of differentials vis-a-vis a number of countries, such as Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland and the Netherlands.  In the last-mentioned country, where the markets were extremely sensitive  to slight variations in the differentials vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark,  their development had led the central bank to intervene to support its currency before domestic interest rates adjusted to the new German rate levels. The French franc had remained stable despite the narrowing of interest rate differentials vis-a-vis the Deutsche Mark and labour unrest. In the United Kingdom the fight against inflation had been pursued by means of a further raising of interest rates; this had caused a degree of appreciation of sterling, which had been contained by a number of interventions. It was to be noted that the sterling/Deutsche Mark parity had since March 1988 remained within narrow fluctuation limits (DM 3.10 - 3.25 to the pound).  The Spanish peseta had continued to firm in the context of a relatively high level of interest rates that was justified by the acceleration in the rate of inflation. The Banco de Espana had barely intervened at alli  in the last two months.  B. Statement by Mr. Rey  On hearing the report presented by Mr. Dalgaard, the Alternates had felt that the monitoring exercise was of especial importance in present circumstances.  The problems that currently arose should be set in the context of the international adjustment process. In this connection the Alternates had listened very attentively to the point of view expressed by the German delegate, which could be summarised as follows:  If the process of adjustment was currently at a standstill, or was at the very least slowing down, this should be seen notably as reflecting the impact of exchange rate relationships. In particular, it was symptomatic that the German trade balance had stopped adjusting or was even improving, mainly vis-a-vis countries whose currency had risen against the Deutsche Mark in the course of the year.  At the same time the German economy was growing at a rate of 3.1/2 to 4%, i.e. far in excess of the growth potential, and indicators showed that production capacity was fully utilised. In these conditions it was scarcely possible to consider taking macro-economic policy action to further the adjustment process by stimulating domestic demand. This was the backcloth against which the Bundesbank's exchange rate policy and monetary policy outlook were to be seen.  Concerning exchange rates, German policy was to resist any  depreciation of the Deutsche Mark, which would add further fuel to the risk of - 5 -  inflation. The Bundesbank was thus taking the opportunity to counter the  rise in the dollar exchange rate, but this policy was being applied prudently and did not reflect any relaxation of the co-operation with the Japanese authorities, contrary to the impression recently gained in the markets.  Concerning interest rates, the Alternates agreed with Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply presenting different points of view and explanations regarding the current situation.


Passage number 3.
 Dalgaard in recognising that it was particularly important to maintain appropriate interest rate differentials, even widening them, when exchange rate stability within the EMS relied on a less convincing international adjustment process. Indeed, the Alternates had noted the recent narrowing of this differential following the rise in short-term Deutsche Mark rates since the end of November. This increase was apparently attributable at this stage to technical factors linked with the proximity of the end-of year settlement deadline, and not to central bank action in the money market.  However, some stressed the danger that this spontaneous development of interest rates might be perceived in the market, willy-nilly, as the outcome of deliberate action, as had already happened in the past. If, on the other hand, it was desired to raise interest rates to counter any risk of inflation and any depreciation of the Deutsche Mark, this would make the task of attaining the appropriate differential all the harder for the other  countries in their conduct of monetary policy.  C. Discussion by the Committee  Mr. de Larosiére offered a number of comments on the monetary target that had just been adopted in France for 1989. A range of 4 to 62 in 1989. In 1988 the target had been growth had stood at 4.1%. GNP growth  had been set for the expansion of M.  2 in 1988 would probably be 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is discussing different perspectives and considerations regarding interest rate differentials and their impact on the exchange rate stability within the EMS. While there may be different viewpoints and concerns mentioned, there is no direct contention or disagreement stated.


Passage number 4.
7% in real terms, and inflation would be in  the same, and at end-October 1988 M  the order of 3%. Nominal growth would thus be around 6.5 to 6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating numerical figures without any conflicting information or contradictory statements.


This passage was too long for model to process and thus had to be split: Passsage number5
72, and the  fact that the French economy had been able to function with M, growing at  around 4% was explained by the acceleration in the velocity of circulation of M.  > which was a classic phenomenon in a period of upturn in business activity such as experienced in 1988.  M had expanded by 7. 3%, whereas in 1987 it had grown by over 9%.  The broadest aggregate, L, had risen by 9. 52%, which again represented a slowing-down from the 1987 figure (11. 72).   The forecasts for 1989 were for real growth of the order of 2. 62  and inflation around 2. 5%, with nominal GNP growth thus in the region of  5%.  It had seemed reasonable to expect the velocity of circulation of M. , to stabilise and not to acc.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The information provided is presented as factual and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or contrasting views.elerate any further, given that the pace of economic activity was forecast to slacken somewhat in the course of 1989.  In these conditions it had appeared desirable for M.  growth to centre around the 5% point, and thus the 4 to 6% range had been retained and announced at the beginning of December.  The objective aimed for was to ensure disinflation, safeguard the stability of the franc and not to leave any margin for prices to get out of control or for an excessive rise in consumption, while at the same time not impeding a reasonable rate of economic growth.   Lending had grown quite strongly in 1988: total lending to the economy would have risen by almost 12%.  This development warranted very clos.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statements are presenting information and describing the objectives and actions taken by policymakers.e monitoring and had led the Banque de France to decide on the establish- ment of a register to permit a better appraisal of consumer lending, which was growing very rapidly at over 20% per annum.  This register was to be based on the Belgian model and should enable defaults on lending to households  to be detected.   III.  Adoption of the Committee's report to the EEC Ministers of Finance on developments on the foreign exchange markets of the nineteen countries participating in the concertation procedure during November and the first few days of December 1988.   The Chairman noted that the Committee approved the "concertation report", which would be sent to the EEC Ministers of Finance in the usual.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the establishment of a register for consumer lending and the adoption of a report on foreign exchange markets.This passage was too long for model to process and thus had to be split: Passsage number6
 It was, however, important that central banks considering intervening in ECUs - whether they belonged to the EMS exchange rate mechanism or not - should take account of the impact of their interventions on exchange rate stability within the EMS and on the level of EMS exchange rates vis-a-vis other currencies.  In addition, consideration had been given to a request that the Group should carry its analysis of the effects of ECU interventions further by taking into account the size of ECU positions covered by the basket of constituent currencies.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage provides information and states the importance of central banks considering the impact of their interventions on exchange rate stability within the EMS and on the level of EMS exchange rates vis-a-vis other currencies. It also mentions that consideration had been given to analyzing the effects of ECU interventions further by taking into account the size of ECU positions covered by the basket of constituent currencies. There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage..  As regards the clearing system, the Alternates had noted that the operation of the system and the admission of new banks were at present under discussion within the ECU Banking Association.  The Commission representa- tive said that he would submit to the Committee a note concerning certain specific aspects of the operation of this mechanism.  It was recalled that until further notice the conditions governing intervention by the BIS in the ECU clearing had been agreed within the Committee and remained in force.  Finally, as regards the third.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply reports on discussions and decisions made regarding the ECU clearing system and the involvement of the BIS. point, the Alternates thought that in view of the size of the market and of the banks' net creditor position in ECUs careful attention should be paid to ways and means of safeguarding the smooth functioning of the market as the time for the revision of the ECU basket approached.  They had expressed interest in the possibility of a two-stage revision procedure, in contrast to the method adopted in 1984.  They suggested that when sending off Report No.  64, the Chairman of the Committee of Governors should send a letter to the President of the C.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the thoughts and suggestions of the Alternates regarding the revision of the ECU basket.Passage number 7.
 Extension of the EMS revolving swap mechanism  The Chairman said that the Alternates had had no comments to make on this question and he took note of the Committee's approval, as to substance and form, of the extension of the EMS revolving swap mechanism, as proposed  in a note from the Secretariat dated 6th December 1988, viz.:  1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is reporting a decision made by the Committee regarding the extension of the EMS revolving swap mechanism. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 8.
 The entry in the minutes of the present meeting of the following  text:  "In order to ensure the continuation of the revolving swap mechanism of the EMS beyond 13th March 1989, its expiry date stipulated in the Governors' decision of 9th December 1986, the Governors decided, in pursuance of Article 20.1 of the Agreement of 13th March 1979 between the EEC central banks laying down the operating procedures for the EMS, as amended by the Instruments dated 10th June 1985 and 10th November 1987, that:  - the swaps referred to in Article 17.3 and 18a.4 of that Agreement  shall not be unwound on 13th March 1989;  - the swap mechanism shall be extended for a further two-year period,  at the end of which, save in the event of a unanimous decision to - 1. -  the contrary, the said swaps will be unwound.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply stating a decision made by the Governors regarding the swap mechanism of the EMS.


Passage number 9.
 During the said  period (that is, until 13th March 1991) the swap mechanism will remain subject to the same provisions of the Agreement of 13th March 1979, it being understood, however, that the Governors may, by a unanimous decision, shorten this period and modify the mechanism  in the event that the transition to the institutional phase of  the EMS takes place before 13th March 1991."  2. The sending of a letter from the Chairman of the Committee of Governors to the President of the ECOFIN Council, the text of which is  annexed to the above-mentioned note from the Secretariat.  VI. Chairmanship of the Committee  The Chairman announced that, on the basis of the contacts and consultations he had had with the Governors, he was able to propose Mr. Chalikias, Governor of the Bank of Greece, as the new Chairman of the Committee as from lst January 1989 and for the customary one-year term.  The Committee approved the Chairman's proposal.  Mr. Chalikias thanked his colleagues for the honour they had paid him in entrusting him with the chairmanship of such a prestigious committee. On behalf of all the Governors he expressed his gratitude to Mr. Godeaux for the very substantial contribution which Mr. Godeaux himself and the Banque Nationale de Belgique had made to the work of the Committee in 1988. The Governors had all appreciated and admired the professionalism of their Chairman and his profound devotion to the European cause, and also the skill with which he had succeeded in guiding the Committee with a hand both firm and courteous through all the varied and often difficult tasks it had undertaken in 1988. Such an example did not make the task of his successor  an easy one.  - 13 -  VII. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee: - Meeting between the Chairman of the Committee and the Governor of Norges Bank ,  The Chairman informed the Committee that on the preceding Sunday, llth December 1988, he had held a meeting with Mr. Skanland, Governor of Norges Bank, and his colleagues, within the framework of the monetary co- operation that had been developing between the Committee and Norges Bank since 1984, primarily in the form of an annual meeting. The exchange of views had focused, on the one hand, on the economic and monetary situation in Norway and, on the other, on the main developments in the activities of the Committee during 1988. A brief resumé of this exchange of views would  be circulated shortly to the members of the Committee.  VIII. Date and place of the next meeting  The next meeting would be held in Basle on Tuesday, 10th January 1989 at 9.30 a.m.  Annex  Committee of Governors of the 13th December 1988 Central Banks of the Member States  of the European Economic Community Confidential  BRIEF REPORT ON DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE  NOVEMBER 1988  This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation proce- dure. and briefly describes their interventions during November and the  first few days of December 1988.  I. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS  The main feature of the foreign exchange markets in November was a further decline of the US dollar despite some central bank intervention support.  The US dollar moved lower on balance against all major currencies amid concerns about the prospects for continued reductions in the US budget and trade deficits. The dollar's decline was limited, however, by co- ordinated central bank intervention and expectations of a further rise in short-term dollar interest rates. The dollar closed the month approximately 1.75% lower against the Deutsche Mark, 22 lower against the yen and 3.52% lower against sterling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly provides information about the activities and decisions of the Committee of Governors.


Passage number 10.
  The EMS was free of tensions. The only important change was a strengthening of the Italian lira by almost 1% in the second half of the month. The currencies within the narrow band did not change their relative  positions.  i The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland, Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.  1 to i  The Deutsche Mark was fairly stable. Vis-a-vis the US dollar it firmed by 1.8%. It weakened slightly against the currencies participating in the exchange rate mechanism. A sharper decline, of 1.9%, occurred vis-a-vis sterling. At the end of November the Deutsche Mark's weighted index vis-a-vis fourteen industrial countries stood at 170.4, only marginally below its end-October level of 170.6 (1972 = 100).  Against the background of rising interest rates abroad the French franc, on which interest rates remained stable, weakened only slightly vis-a-vis the group of currencies in the narrow band. The worsening of the trade balance in October (with a deficit of Fr.fr. 4 billion following a surplus of Fr.fr. 0.6 billion in September) and the spread of the labour disputes had only a limited impact on the franc's performance.  The Banque Nationale took advantage of the firmmess of the Belgian franc to purchase foreign exchange and lower official rates, reducing the three-month Treasury bill rate twice by 0.05 percentage point to 7.15% and the discount and lombard rates by 0.25 percentage point to 7.25% and 7.502% respectively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply provides information about the stability and changes in various currencies.


Passage number 11.
  There was no change in the Dutch guilder's position in the upper part of the EMS band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply describes that there was no change in the position of the Dutch guilder in the upper part of the EMS band.


Passage number 12.
  The Danish krone remained just below the middle of the EMS band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is presenting a factual observation about the value of the Danish krone in relation to the EMS band. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 13.
  The Irish pound was relatively stable in the upper half of the EMS band. Small net inflows of currency over the month resulted in modest net purchases of currency by the Central Bank of Ireland.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 14.
  The Italian lira strengthened in the EMS in the second half of the month due to continued short-term inflows. The Banca d'Italia conducted only limited intervention purchases to contain the monetary impact of such inflows.  Sterling was on the sidelines for much of November, trading narrowly but with a firm tone against the Deutsche Mark until the release of the October trade figures. The record £2.9 billion deficit caused sterling to fall briefly before the 1 percentage point increase in interest rates, to 13%, brought a sharp recovery. With the Chancellor also emphasising the importance of a firm pound as part of his counter-inflation policy, sterling ended the month at six-month highs. Sterling's trade-weighted index rose by  2.5% to 78.3 (1975 = 100).  The Greek drachma appreciated by 0.7% against the US dollar and depreciated by 1.3% against the ECU. In effective terms the drachma depre- ciated by 1.32.  Following the increase of 1/4 percentage point (to 11.75%) in the Banco de Espafa's three-month repurchase agreement rate on 15th November, the Spanish peseta firmed during the second half of the month due to some capital inflows driven by the higher interest rates and the expectation of further rises. The peseta appreciated by 1.1% with respect to the ECU and by 3.2% with respect to the dollar.  Vis-a-vis the US dollar the Portuguese escudo rose by 1.8%. In effective terms the escudo decreased by 0.252%.  Vis-a-vis most currencies the Swiss franc firmed slightly. On an export-weighted basis the increase in value amounted to 0.6%. As against the US dollar, it strengthened by 2.3%. Euro-franc rates for maturities of up to three months rose markedly (by 3/4 to 1 1/4 percentage points) to just under 5Z. The rise for longer maturities was less pronounced, thus leading to an inverse interest rate structure.  The Austrian schilling firmed by 1.7% vis-a-vis the US dollar, with a monthly spread of 4.1%. Against the Deutsche Mark it fluctuated by only 0.082%.  The Norwegian krone came, in the second week of the month, under Strong selling pressure as rumours of a devaluation started to circulate in various foreign markets. Domestic interest rates increased sharply as heavy central bank interventions drained liquidity and market participants antici- pated increases in signal interest rates. This market reaction helped to halt the outflow of foreign exchange and with higher oil prices resulting from the OPEC agreement, the krone started to firm as both foreign and domestic investors rebuilt their krone positions. Before the month ended, one third of the reserve reduction was restored through intervention purchases, interest rates declined and the effective exchange rate was only 0.3% weaker than when the month started.  The Swedish krona has been relatively stable with a tendency to strengthen towards the end of the period.  The Finnish markka firmed slightly in the course of the month. On 30th November the base interest rate was cut by 1/2 percentage point effective lst January 1989. The fluctuation range of the currency index was widened from 4.5% to 62%.  The Japanese yen strengthened by 2.6% against the US dollar, reflecting the persistent bearish sentiment towards the US dollar. It reached its post-war high (on a Tokyo closing rate basis) of Yen 121.15 per US dollar on 24th and 25th November. The Bank of Japan intervened in the market in a concerted fashion throughout the month to counter the sharp appreciation of the currency. Meanwhile, the yen was unchanged against the ECU.  The Canadian dollar appreciated by 3.4% against the US dollar to close at US$ 0.8432. The currency traded in a volatile way, falling to a two-month low of US$ 0.8078 early in the month before moving sharply higher to close the month at a new seven-year high. Exchange rate weakness earlier in the month was linked to doubt about the passage of the free trade agreement with the United States given the uncertainty surrounding the outcome of the 2lst November federal election. In the event, the re-election of the con- servative party with a majority was interpreted positively by market par- ticipants since ratification of the US/Canada free trade agreement by the  Canadian Parliament is assured.  II. INTERVENTIONS A. Interventions in US dollars  Net purchases of US dollars by central banks in November amounted to US$ 7.9 billion, compared with net purchases of US$ 2.6 billion in October. The purchases, which were partly made as concerted operations, were under- taken by a large number of central banks; the Bank of Japan, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Bank of Canada, Norges Bank and the Banca d'Italia being the major purchasers. The major sellers of US dollars were  Norges Bank and the Bank of Canada.  B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing information about the strengthening or weakening of various currencies.


Passage number 15.
 Interventions in Community currencies and_in private ECUs  Interventions in EMS currencies by Community central banks amounted in November to the equivalent of US$ 1.3 billion, compared with the equivalent of US$ 2.3 billion in October. The Banca d'Italia purchased Deutsche Mark and French francs.  Among non-Community central banks, Norges Bank was a major seller  of Deutsche Mark. III. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 9th DECEMBER  The US dollar continued to fluctuate, influenced, inter alia,  positively by expectations concerning reductions in military expenditure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing interventions and developments in various currencies and central banks. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 16.
 EVOLUTION DE L’ECU, DU COURS MEDIAN DES MONNATES PARTICIPANT AU MECANISME DE CHANGE DU SME ET DES MONNATIES DES BANQUES CENTRALES DE SUR LA BASE DES COURS RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986 VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*  LA CEE NE PARTICIPANT PAS A CE MECANISME,  * Voir page suivante.  4.11  18.11  .1988  1A  ow  28  24  20 ov  32  28  24  20  16  12  1B  EVOLUTION DES MONNA LA CONCERTATION, SUR LA BA Beene voe ner ee nn ASE DES COURS RELEVES NE SEE PARTICIPANT A IS-A-VIS DU $EU* 31 DECEMBRE 1986      woene FS . ——— $Can   KRS   st eenee Sch  :  32 Jorn KRN   ) 0 teeeees FIM            28             24     ;         } . :    20       oo   os . . “. a ° -° ‘   “20  7 .  am ON : yrs A ; ™ ON )  zycr pu * “~~ : fo. <] 18  _ - ” v \. °° ys/   “— -m — ™~ 7 ~~  e's ee ° we. / -\- ¢* J.  . : \ - — on e — A, % i  fs ia . \ hr \ y } , r~ 3 3 ; ie INA Ry tte te . pen ie . _ . ” lane l v ry  Py . ot"  , se . oi ** ie  ” “pee” . ve” wen, ° mY ’ , .” ee pate ; ' rr ae aid a. #40 o* Pee  ao ealy ee  enor’  nN .7* /  1s’ aot 8 ’ Pd «    potas -. : on . ra P ad   1,” se e4 ‘ - ‘   “hie s Woes aa ‘ . “see 4 } ‘y_.. ‘ ue ete Pe  2 Mee ,°8 _°  ' 4 a.    .   8 9.9 53.9  * 7.10 21.10 4.11 . 18.1 0 1988 ' 2.12  * ECU 0,93425; 1,3805; FS 1 6 # 90,6773; DR 138,7601; ,6215; Y ,7601; PTA 13 des ; Yen 159,7993; 1,8700; des nonnates participant au 993; KAS 6.7750; KAN 0; ESC 146 0995; FIM 4.7925; Stan fluctu spresente la moyenne j , 2913. Le cours médi 13,6520; cours médi ation de 2,25% journali@re des an des monnaies 3 megian actuels. ’ qui se sont é6loi cours des deux m participant ignés le plus de leurs operas a marge de -pivots bilatér aux  88.12.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage discusses the evolution of exchange rates between different currencies as of December 31, 1986, and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


