Passage number 1.
Confidential  _ (Translation)  MINUTES* OF THE 225th MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF GOVERNORS OF THE CENTRAL BANKS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY HELD IN BASLE ON TUESDAY, 10th MAY 1988 AT 10 a.m.  Those present at the meeting were: the Governor of the Banque Nationale de Belgique and Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Godeaux, accompanied by Mr. Janson, Mr. Rey and Mr. Michielsen; the Governor of Danmarks National- bank, Mr. Hoffmeyer, accompanied by Mr. Mikkelsen; the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr. Pohl, accompanied by Mr. Gleske and Mr. Rieke; the Governor of the Bank of Greece, Mr. Chalikias, accompanied by Mr. Papademos and Mr. Karamouzis; the Governor of the Banco de Espana, Mr. Rubio, accom- panied by Mr. Linde and Mr. Duran; the Governor of the Banque de France, Mr. de Larosiére, accompanied by Mr. Waitzenegger and Mr. Cappanera; the Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Doyle, accompanied by Mr. O'Grady Walshe and Mr. Reynolds; the Governor of the Banca d'Italia, Mr. Ciampi, accompanied by Mr. Dini and Mr. Masera; the President of De Nederlandsche Bank, Mr. Duisenberg, accompanied by Mr. Szasz and Mr. Boot; the Governor of the Banco de Portugal, Mr. Tavares Moreira, accompanied by Mr. Pégo Marques; the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. Leigh-Pemberton, accompanied by Mr. Loehnis and Mr. Price; the Director-General for Economic and Financial Affairs of the Commission of the European Communities, Mr. Costa, accompanied by Mr. Louw; Mr. Kees, Secretary of the Monetary Committee; the Director General of the Luxembourg Monetary Institute, Mr. Jaans. Also present at the meeting were Mr. Raymond and Mr. Dalgaard, Chairmen of Groups of Experts. The Secretary General of the Committee, Mr. Morelli, his Deputy, Mr. Bascoul, Mr. Scheller and Mr. Cook, and Mr. Bockelmann and Mr. Dagassan also attended.  The Chairman opened the meeting by proposing that items II and V of the agenda be discussed at the same time in view of the links between  the subjects covered.  nD * Final text approved at the meeting on 13th June 1988, which incorporate some drafting changes. I. Approval of the minutes of the 224th meeting.  The Committee unanimously approved the minutes of ‘the 224th meeting, on the understanding that the editorial amendments suggested would be in-  corporated in the final text.  II. Monitoring of economic and monetary developments and policies in the EEC based on:  - Preparation by the 'Dalgaard Group'' and discussion by the Committee of Alternates;  - Statistical charts and tables.  V. Examination of current monetary policies in EEC member countries based on Report No. 32 of the group of experts chaired by Mr. Raymond. Adoption of a mandate for the “Raymond Group" concerning the improving of monetary policy co-ordination between EEC member countries.  A. Statement by Mr. Dalpaard  The dollar had continued to move within a narrow band whose limits, from November 1987 to the beginning of May 1988, were $1 = DM 1.65 and 1.70. In mid-April it had recorded a brief decline following the publication of the US foreign trade figures, but this had been quickly halted by quite substantial, concerted interventions by several central banks. The stability of the dollar had been helped by two factors: the markets’ perception that the central banks would not allow the dollar to fall much further and the rise in short and long-term interest rates in the United States. This upward trend had spread to some other countries, in particular France and Germany, at least as far as long-term interest rates were concerned. It could still not be ruled out that the dollar would fall further later, for example if inflation were to rekindle in the United States, if there were further unfavourable US foreign trade figures, or if the Federal Reserve appeared hesitant as to the policy to pursue, in particular as regards accepting higher interest rates.  The yen had continued to appreciate also vis-a-vis the European currencies and had returned almost to its level of the summer of 1986 vis-a-vis  the Deutsche Mark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 2.
 Within the EMS there had been some movement in the relative positions of currencies, and some interventions had been made. Overall, however, the situation had been calm, particularly when it was considered that there had been elections in two countries, viz. France and Denmark. In fact, the French elections appeared to have had a greater influence on the Italian lira than on the French franc, which had not experienced any tensions. The authorities had let the exchange rate slip, but only very slightly; there had been no interventions; and interest rates had not been changed.  The Italian lira had weakened from mid-April onwards, and sizable interventions had been made in the market. Substantial outflows of capital had in large measure represented a reversal of the inflows which had occurred in the wake of the reintroduction of exchange controls in 1987; by this means the Italian banks had reduced the exchange risks they had incurred.  The political tensions in Denmark in mid-April had resulted in a slight weakening of the Danish krone and some firming of market interest rates, but the calling of elections and the election campaign had not had any impact on the exchange rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply provides information about the movements of currencies and interventions within the EMS, and the impact of elections on certain currencies.


Passage number 3.
  The other EMS currencies had remained stable. All in all, the experience of April and the beginning of May had been satisfactory and had shown that the flexible deployment of the various instruments could be highly effective; in particular, it appeared that even modest exchange rate movements within the band had a considerable stabilising effect. These positive results had been possible because the market did not anticipate a realignment in the near future and assumed that, even were there to be a realignment at a later date, it would be a minor one and would probably leave market rates more or less unchanged. In this situation the market tended to focus on small variations in interest rate differentials. In the three countries already mentioned, viz. Denmark, France and Italy, non-resident capital inflows had persisted right up to the elections, taking advantage of the high rates of interest.  In the Netherlands the introduction of a system of compulsory reserves had been announced with the aim not of tightening monetary policy but of enabling De Nederlandsche Bank to retain its influence on short-term interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply describes the stable nature of other EMS currencies and the positive results of the flexible deployment of various instruments in maintaining stability.


This passage was too long for model to process and thus had to be split: Passsage number4
  Outside the EMS exchange rate mechanism, mention should be made of two currencies.  The pound sterling had remained strong; pressure had  eased somewhat with the fall in oil prices and the rise in interest rates in some countries, but recently sterling had strengthened further.  In the longer term, however, it was expected to weaken.  The Spanish peseta had appreciated further, and the Banco de Espana had made sizable purchases.  The 0. 7Z increase in the consumer price index in March, much larger than expected, had led to a rise in market interest rates, resul.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing information about the pound sterling and the Spanish peseta.ting in fresh inflows of capital and a firming of the exchange rate.   The "Monitoring Group" had also discussed the question of the choice of intervention currencies on the basis of the situation in April, when there had been at the same time sizable sales of Deutsche Mark by the Banca d'Italia and substantial purchases of that currency by the Banco de Espana.  This situation had not given rise to any real problems, but the group was agreed that in future intervention policies should be better co-ordinated and that there should be closer co-operation between the.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides information and does not contain any contention or disagreement. central  banks concerned.   B.  Statement by Mr.  Raymond  The development of the economic situation was undoubtedly more favourable than expected, but the financial and exchange markets were none- theless not immune to further disturbances.   For its part, the European Community was encountering some particular difficulties of its own.   Firstly, it appeared to constitute an area of lower growth within the OECD group and was, unfortunately, likely to remain so.  It could suffer as a result of a more aggressive posture by the Far East and improved American compe.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.Passage number 5.
  The Alternates had noted with satisfaction that the current exchange market situation, both within the EMS and worldwide, was free of major tensions, but they were concerned about certain developments that might  cause disturbances in the future.  2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states the Alternates' satisfaction with the current exchange market situation and their concerns about potential disturbances in the future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 6.
 With regard to the current situation the Alternates had noted in particular: - the psychological impact of the co-ordinated interventions carried out on a large scale when the dollar was suffering a bout of weakness in the wake of the publication of less satisfactory  current-account figures; in the view of the Alternates it was necessary to seek to maintain this psychological impact as far as possible; ;  - the fact that within the EMS the election period had passed without any major tensions; this good performance was attributable not only to the flexibility of interest rates but also to progress in convergence, especially between France and Germany;  - the need for close and frequent consultation on the choice of intervention currencies, in particular among the central banks  that were signatories to the EMS Agreement.  3. As far as the longer-term outlook was concerned, the attention of the Alternates had been focused on two problems:  - the rise in long-term interest rates, which had so far been more marked in the United States than in Europe and had had the effect of widening long-term interest rate differentials;  - the Community's inability to achieve stronger economic growth and a higher degree of convergence among member countries, which cdrried the risk of engendering tensions at the international level and within Europe (which was the principal argument of  Report No. 32, as M. Raymond had just pointed out).  Given the role played in this context by the economic policy pursued by Germany, the Alternates had considered it essential to hear the opinion of the German representative. Mr. Gleske had made an interesting statement. The Alternates had noted with satisfaction that the Bundesbank did not intend to alter the stance of its monetary policy at present and that it did not consider the rate of growth of the monetary aggregates to be a factor likely in itself to jeopardise price stability. The Bundesbank‘s representative had pointed out, however, that a close watch had to be kept on the rapid pace of monetary expansion insofar as the pressures coming from the real economy indicated a certain deterioration in the climate of price stability.  The Alternates had also noted that, again in the opinion of the German authorities, the low rate of growth in Germany had its origin in demographic and structural factors. A policy of stimulating domestic demand would therefore be unlikely to remedy this problem. As far as monetary policy was concerned, any action by the authorities aimed at lowering short-  term interest rates would prove counter-productive since it would entail, -~ 8 ~-  through the intermediary of inflationary expectations, a rise in long-term  capital market rates. On the other hand, it had been noted that a tightening of monetary  policy could be counter-productive: a rise in interest rates would contribute  to capital inflows (or a reduction in capital outflows) and thus serve to  increase liquidity. At the same time, the rise in interest rates would have  repercussions throughout Europe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage discusses the different viewpoints held by the Alternates and the German representative on various issues related to economic policy and monetary stability. These differences in opinion suggest a certain level of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 7.
 Such an impact could only be avoided at  the cost of greater exchange rate variations, both within the EMS and  internationally. Greater exchange rate flexibility, however, would not be  in the interest of the European countries; it would not serve the purpose  of greater convergence and would have adverse consequences for the management  of the EMS.  D. Discussion by the Committee  Mr. Duisenberg offered some explanations regarding the introduction of a system of compulsory reserves in the Netherlands. Hitherto, the Nederlandsche Bank had used the two instruments of official discount and lombard rates and quantitative credit restrictions, but it also wanted to be able to influence the yield curve in the long-term sector. To that end, an agreement had been reached with the Government, and the central bank would be able to carry out open market operations in the long-term sector; in an initial stage it would build up, over a period of eighteen months to two years, a portfolio of government securities amounting to around Fl. 3 billion. Given that it was not a question of financing the budget deficit, the total of short-term Treasury paper held by the banks would be simultaneously reduced by a comparable amount. This would result in an increase in banks' liquidity and, with their agreement, this additional liquidity would be frozen by means of the compulsory reserves during the transitional period. Once the portfolio of government securities had been built up, the Nederlandsche Bank would be better able  to influence long-term capital market interest rates.  Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply provides an explanation of the introduction of a system of compulsory reserves in the Netherlands.


Passage number 8.
 Pohl expressed his satisfaction that the issue of interventions and of their co-ordination had been discussed by the "Monitoring Group"; exactly that subject fell within its brief, and it was the duty of the central banks to co-ordinate their efforts to stabilise exchange rates  within the EMS and also against the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 9.
 Within the EMS, there were clear rules of procedure governing co-ordination, written rules laid down  in the Agreement establishing the EMS and in the Basle/Nyborg Agreement of September 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is stating a fact about the rules and procedures within the EMS.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 10.
 These rules stipulated that, for interventions in EMS currencies, whether purchases or sales, the consent of the central bank issuing the currency used was required. These rules were fundamental and  had to be respected by all the members of the Community, both those participa- ting in the exchange rate mechanism and the others.  The remarks made by Mr. Raymond and Mr. Janson, in particular regarding the lack of convergence within the Community, deserved to be looked at more closely. Admittedly, there was a lack of convergence as far as current accounts were concerned; the disequilibria had even increased slightly as a result, in particular, of the fall in the price of oil and Natural gas. It was necessary to consider also the development of domestic demand and inflationary pressures and to concentrate on the current accounts rather than external trade, since the former included intra-EEC transfers and tourism, which were very large components. It was debatable whether, as had been pointed out, the existing substantial imbalances posed a threat to the stability of the exchange rate mechanism. That was perhaps true in the long term, but in the short term there did not appear to be any tensions in spite of those external imbalances and the holding of elections. It would be interesting, nevertheless, to look more closely at the reasons for this calm. The imbalances did not entail tensions or problems as long as they were offset by capital movements. Those movements should not represent simply lending or borrowing but, above all, direct investment, and the deficit countries should improve the conditions for direct investment in then.  It was also debatable whether it was necessary to reduce the external imbalances, and what would be the best way to go about it. Adjusting the exchange rate was one way but, for very good reasons, that was more or less out of the question at present, and in any event minor adjustments had no effect on the current-account balance. Nonetheless, the exchange rate was still an appropriate and classic method of correcting external imbalances. The other method, which consisted in taking action in the areas of general economic and budgetary policy, did not fall within the province of the Governors. They should make it clear that the principal aim of monetary policy was not to put right the errors of budgetary policy but to maintain  price stability. In that respect, German monetary policy was if anything - 10 -  expansionary, judged by the monetary aggregates and the low level of interest rates. Thus, even if that meant there were no margin for manoeuvre, for the  moment there were no plans to change this accommodative attitude.  The Chairman remarked that the Governors had emphasised on several occasions the need for better co-ordination of interventions and had pointed out that the communication channels for this existed. The question was thus in what form, and in what forum, could improved co-ordination be achieved  in concrete terms.  Mr. Rubio said that Spain did not participate in the exchange rate mechanism and thus did not have the same legal obligations; however, it did inform its partners of its interventions and had avoided purchasing Deutsche Mark during periods of tension or pressure. Moreover, there were times when it was necessary to intervene very swiftly and when prior notification or prior consultation was impossible. These problems should be discussed in a more general context. Thus, the problem of interventions was linked to that of the composition of reserves; Spain had, in fact, a lot of dollars for the size of its economy, and did not want any more. The Banco de Espana was therefore prepared to discuss all these issues, in particular the aspect of reserves composition, which had never previously been raised,  and was ready to present its case and to listen to the others.  Mr. Tavares Moreira expanded on a number of remarks concerning Portugal in Report No. 32. The Report suggested, for example, that the slowdown in the growth of the monetary aggregates had been less than forecast. In fact, the slowdown had been in line with projections in connection with various factors, such as inflows of capital, public sector indebtedness and the reclassification of certain bank deposits held by non-resident Portuguese. It was true that, in the current inflationary environment, the inflexibility of monetary policy instruments had made it impossible to reduce monetary growth further, but the central bank should soon have more flexible instruments at its disposal. As far as the Portuguese current account was concerned, the mention of a substantial deterioration in 1988 should be corrected insofar as the current account was nonetheless forecast to remain in surplus  to the tune of around $600 million.  Mr. Duisenberg wondered whether there were not some misunderstanding on the part of Mr. Rubio in respect of interventions. Article 15 of the EMS  Agreement did, indeed, stipulate that interventions in Community currencies - jl -  could only be carried out with the consent of the issuing central bank, but that rule bound all the signatories to the Agreement and not just those  participating in the exchange rate mechanism.  Mr. de Larosiere observed that, in addition to the legal aspect which Mr. Duisenberg had just mentioned, there was a more general aspect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement is about whether the rule requiring consent from the central bank issuing the currency for EMS interventions applied to all signatories of the Agreement or just those participating in the exchange rate mechanism. Mr. Duisenberg believes it applied to all signatories, while Mr. de Larosiere believes it was more general.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 11.
 It would, in fact, pose a great danger to the balance of the EMS if the European central banks were to intervene individually in the currency of their choice for any desired amounts with the intention of modifying the composition of their reserves. Such a policy would have very disruptive repercussions on the members of the exchange rate mechanism, who were obliged to maintain very close relationships at all times between their exchange rates and that of the Deutsche Mark, for instance. There was a real problem there, which had been raised some time ago, under different  circumstances, with their colleagues from the United Kingdom.  Mr. Pohl followed up the remarks made by Mr. Duisenberg and Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions a problem that had been raised with colleagues from the United Kingdom, which suggests disagreement or contention between the European central banks and their UK counterparts.


Passage number 12.
 de Larosiére by recalling that the EMS Agreement of 13th March 1979 was general in application, which meant that all the signatories were obliged to respect it, not simply the members of the exchange rate mechanism. Furthermore, the Governors had always been in agreement on the principle that interventions should be co-ordinated. To that end, a telephone network had been installed and four concertations took place each day. It had all worked very well, and within this framework several central banks, such as the Banque de France, had accumulated considerable holdings of Deutsche Mark in consultation with and, in short, with the consent of the Deutsche Bundesbank. Such a rule was fundamental to the EMS, and also to co-operation within the G-7 countries. Clearly, one central bank could not be expected  to buy dollars while others were buying Deutsche Mark.  Mr. Rubio expressed surprise at and disagreement with  Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 13.
 Duisenberg'’s intervention and his interpretation of Article 15 of the EMS Agreement of 13th March 1979. He voiced his conviction that the Banco de Espafia had respected its legal obligations under the Agreement by pro- viding the required information on its operations in the framework of the concertation system; in his opinion, the Agreement did not involve any other legal obligation for the Banco de Espana since the latter was not subject to the discipline of the exchange rate mechanism. He added that he  did not believe the legal aspect was the most important one; on the - 12 -  contrary, he believed the economic aspect was, and he noted that in this respect the Banco de Espana had supported the US dollar strongly in 1987 and during the early months of 1988 by absorbing a very considerable proportion of the dollars accumulated by the EEC central banks. He also indicated that the Banco de Espafia was ready to collaborate with the other EEC central banks at times of crisis and to discuss problems related to intervention currencies and the composition of reserves if it was wished to study this question in its entirety.  Mr. Hoffmeyer recalled that the concertation telephone network had been set up within the EEC at the beginning of the 1970s precisely for the purpose of enabling the member countries to co-operate; it was only later that other countries, in particular the United States and Japan, had been connected. Consultation before intervention was a permanent principle which had always been followed.  In the experts' Report No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


This passage was too long for model to process and thus had to be split: Passsage number14
****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED******************* 32, the question of the stability of the EMS which had been addressed raised two principal issues, namely the development of the competitive capacity of the European countries and that of their balances of payment, in particular the German foreign trade surplus.  As far as competitiveness was concerned, the results and the conclusions which could be drawn varied depending on the criteria used, the rate of inflation, the GDP deflator or unit costs.  In spite of the technical diffi- culties involved, it might be interesting to take hourly labour costs, and, based on this criterion, the conclusions might be less negative than those in Report No.  32.  The German foreign trade surplus was still worrying.  Economic growth in 1988 would indeed be more vigorous than forecast, perhaps rising as high as 3%, which might explain the increase in industrial exports from Denmark to Germany.  However, two comments should be made.  Firstly, the State of Schleswig-Holstein, a.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage presents varying conclusions and perspectives on the competitiveness of European countries and their balances of payment, as well as the German foreign trade surplus. The statement that "the conclusions might be less negative than those in Report No. 32" suggests a different assessment of the situation compared to the previous report. Additionally, the passage raises concerns about the German foreign trade surplus, suggesting that it is still worrying despite potential economic growth.****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************djacent to Denmark, was a depressed area with a high unemployment rate, and it was therefore very difficult to export there.  Secondly, projections for growth and the current-account surplus in Germany in 1989 were somewhat pessimistic and might entail an adjustment of  exchange rates.   The Chairman referred to Mr.  Poéhl's remarks on the disequilibria within Europe vis-a-vis Germany and on the possible remedies.  European countries did not seem to be performing very well on the German market, since the growth of their exports was weaker than that of countries outside  the EEC.  A theoretical or textbook solution consisting in the adjustment of - 13 -  exchange rates had been put forward, but one had to realise that prices were not the only factor to have a bearing on competitiveness.  The case of Belgium was significant in this respect: its currency had appreciated vis-a-vis the French franc and depreciated in relation to the Deutsche Mark and the Dutch guil.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions disagreements and differing viewpoints regarding the imbalance and competitiveness of European countries in the German market, as well as potential solutions such as exchange rate adjustments.der, but Belgian exports to France were growing faster than those to Germany and the Netherlands.  It therefore appeared that modification of the exchange rate parities was not the only means of  correcting external imbalances and certainly not the most important one.   Mr.  de Larosiére noted that this varied performance of Belgian exports was due to the fact that the growth of domestic demand was faster  in France than in Germany.   Mr.  Pdéhl acknowledged that the five German research institutes were predicting a slowdown in economic growth in Germany in 1989, which was partly associated with the increase in taxation that had been announced.  This, however, was an area for which the Ministers of Finance were respon- sible.  In addition, it might be desirable to tell the Ministers that the existing disequilibria could not be corrected either by modifying exchange rates - which the Governors considered inappropriate under the present circumstances - or by mon.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements are presented as facts or observations without any conflicting opinions.Passage number 15.
 Janson's report dated 27th April 1988, underline the need:  - for progress in areas outside the competence of the central banks, such as the co-ordination of overall economic policies and action on structural obstacles to growth; and  - to avoid any changes to the EMS which would risk destabilising the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Janson's report and his recommendations without presenting conflicting opinions.


Passage number 16.
  If, in fact, certain countries were to yield to the temptation of pursuing a more expansionary budgetary, and even monetary, policy, without tackling structural problems, not only would they fail to achieve faster  growth but they would also risk destroying the EMS and stability.  Mr. de Larosiére said that he was broadly in agreement with what it was proposed to submit to the Ministers, in particular on what the Governors had done and intended to do, and added that he did not wish to give the impression that the concept of symmetry had the Committee's approval. However, it should be clear that in the Committee's subsequent work on the concrete proposals the question of greater symmetry in inter- ventions would not be evaded. This question could even be mentioned in the Chairman's oral report as being an idea put forward by the Governor of the  Banque de France.  Mr. Pohl pointed out that he was perfectly willing to see the Governors discuss the idea of symmetry, but it should be extended to include economic performances and not limited to interventions. However, it seemed preferable to avoid using this term, since even if there was some asymmetry in economic performances the Governors should not give the impression that they recognised that there was asymmetry in intervention obligations.  The Chairman wound up the discussion by noting that the various  comments made by the Governors were sufficient to draw up a preliminary  - 17 -  symmetry to be discussed in this context. The second idea had been to begin examining a much more distant question, viz. monetary integration within Europe and the institutional and practical aspects this might comprise.  It would be desirable if these two ideas were to be reflected in  the oral report to the Ministers.  The Chairman pointed out that point 5 of the outline presented by Mr. Janson stated that the Governors were in agreement as regards the under- lying approach to the work to be conducted, viz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in this passage. The passage states that Mr. de Larosiére is broadly in agreement with the proposed submission to the Ministers, and while Mr. Pohl suggests expanding on the concept of symmetry, he does not disagree with discussing it. The Chairman also notes that the comments made by the Governors were sufficient to draw up a preliminary symmetry to be discussed.


Passage number 17.
 the need to consolidate the achievements of the EMS and to build the future progress of the system on these foundations and the scrutiny of the ideas that could help bring advances, in a balanced way, towards the objective of economic and monetary  union. This was certainly a framework that could be expanded upon.  Mr. Janson recalled that point 5 of the outline for a report also mentioned the desirability of focusing the examination on the concrete proposals that had been put forward, taking account of the basis on which they rested and of their technical aspects, which meant that the Governors were indicating their willingness to take into consideration all the  memoranda that had been presented.  Mr. Pohl recognised that it was not easy to submit a report on questions that had not yet been discussed in detail. The message to be sent to the Ministers could be grouped under three headings. Under the first reference could be made to the action the Governors had taken to implement the Basle/Nyborg agreement, for example the important steps taken to improve the co-ordination of monetary policies, including the mandate given to the Group of Experts, and also the use of the new credit facilities and the co-ordination of intervention policies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It mainly discusses the need to consolidate the achievements of the EMS and build future progress on these foundations, as well as the willingness of the Governors to consider all presented memoranda. There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 18.
 A second section would indicate the Governors’ willingness to study the technical modifications to the operation of the EMS that had been suggested, in particular by the French and Italian authorities, but it would be desirable not to use the term symmetry, which was both misleading and a source of disagreement among the Governors. The various proposals could nonetheless be referred to briefly, indicating that time would be needed to examine them and thus to report to the Ministers. Finally, a third section could mention the institutional framework for the development of monetary union, but with prudence and  circumspection. The political thinking in this area was not clear, and it  - 18 -  would be preferable to await the European Council meeting at the end of June before deciding anything. If the Heads of State were not to take any decision in this area, it would be premature or risky to forge ahead at this stage; were they actually to agree to set up a group of experts, the latter would have to work in contact with the central banks, and the  Governors would be able to keep this work under scrutiny.  Mr. Ciampi considered that the suggestions put forward by Mr. Janson for the outline of the report by the Chairman of the Committee reflected the state of progress of the discussions by the Alternates, which made it impossible to go much beyond a preliminary report. However, it was necessary not to let questions that fell within the competence of the central banks be taken out of their hands, and it would therefore be useful to give a rather more precise list of the topics the Governors would be examining; to this end some of the comments made, in particular by “Mr. de Larosiére, could serve to flesh out the proposed outline of a report. It would also be desirable, as Mr. Pohl had pointed out, to empha- sise the limits of monetary policy, which could not support the whole burden of adjustment; budgetary policy had an essential role to play, while the objective of monetary policy was above all to ensure price and exchange  rate stability.  Mr. Duisenberg accepted that the European Council at the end of June might not take any decision on the subject of monetary integration, but it would not be desirable to take this for granted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply discussing different suggestions and viewpoints regarding the outline of a report and the potential decisions to be made by the European Council.


Passage number 19.
 It was important that monetary issues and the further development of the EMS should continue to be studied by the competent bodies, namely the Monetary Committee and the Committee of Governors, and the latter should make this position clear  to the Ministers.  The Chairman pointed out that the outline of the report contained two important statements in point 4, viz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the importance of studying monetary issues and the further development of the EMS by the competent bodies and making their position clear to the Ministers.


Passage number 20.
 that the Governors would examine the aspects of the proposals put forward that lay within their sphere of competence and that it was desirable that the studies on the strengthening of the EMS and on the European monetary structure should be carried out within the competent Community institutions, namely the Monetary Committee and the Committee of Governors. However, as Mr. Pohl had pointed out, if the Heads of State wished to set up a group of experts, this should not be opposed. - 20 -  oral report. and stressed that the Governors were agreed that none of the ideas presented in the various memoranda should be disregarded; they would all be examined in due course, and there would be an opportunity for all  opinions to be voiced.  VI. Other matters falling within the competence of the Committee. Problems encountered by European banks operating in Japan.  Mr. Janson mentioned that the Alternates had received a request from the services of the Commission, aimed at inducing the Committee to make representations to the Bank of Japan. The object would be to persuade the latter to remove certain barriers encountered by foreign banks in Japan as regards the terms of deposit collection and the operation of the inter- bank market. This question had already been raised within the Monetary Committee and views had been divergent.  The Alternates were of the opinion that bilateral representations by the countries concerned would be more appropriate and effective than a joint approach by the Committee of Governors. That had been the course adopted, with some success, by a number of countries, among them the United Kingdom and the United States. Moreover, it was necessary not to under- estimate the domestic political problems raised in Japan by deregulation  and the relaxation of requirements.  The Chairman noted that the Committee shared the opinion of the Alternates that no joint representation should be made to the Japanese authorities and that it should be left to individual countries to take the  initiative of bilateral representations.  1 The text forming the basis of the Chairman's report is attached as Annex 3. - .] -  VII. Date and place of the next meeting.  ‘  The next meeting would take place in Basle at 10 a.m. on Monday, 13th June 1988, i.e. just before the BIS Annual General Meeting. The June meeting was traditionally confined to one or two items only, such as the approval of the Minutes and of the “concertation report". As in previous years, the latter report would be prepared at a meeting to be held by the "Concertation Group" at 8.30 a.m. on Monday, 13th June. The 'monitoring" exercise, which had not existed in June 1987, might be carried out without a meeting of the group of experts but during Friday afternoon's telephone concertation which, for the occasion, might be protracted so as to enable Mr. Dalgaard to make a report to the Governors on the Monday. Of course, should the situation so require, the "Monitoring Group" could meet in Basle during the weekend. The same would apply to the Committee of Alternates  but, as yet, there were no plans for such a meeting. Annex 1  “ommittee of Governors of the fOth May 1988 Central Banks of the Member States Confid val of the European Economic Community wont icentiat  BRIEF REPORT ON DEVELOPMENTS ON THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS OF THE COUNTRIES WHOSE CENTRAL BANKS PARTICIPATE IN THE CONCERTATION PROCEDURE  APRIL 1988  This report summarises developments on the exchange markets of the countries whose central banks participate in the concertation proce- dure. and briefly describes their interventions during April and the first  few days of May 1988.  IT. EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS  The main features of the foreign exchange market during April 1988 were:  - The US dollar firmed slightly vis-a-vis most currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 21.
  - Stability within the EMS continued although there were minor changes of positions.  - The positive economic trend registered generally and fears of  inflation caused a rise in interest rates in some countries.  The US dollar moved marginally higher on balance against most major currencies. Throughout the month the dollar was underpinned by rising US interest rates as well as expectations of further increases. The dollar came under a bout of selling pressure following the announcement of a  slight widening of the US trade deficit in February. However, the dollar's  1 The central banks of the EEC, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland, Austria, Japan, Canada and the United States.  Jecline was held in check as widespread reports of concerted intervention reinforced the sense that official co-ordination was continuing. The dollar closed the month approximately 3/4% higher against the Deutsche Mark and 1/22 higher against the yen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents information about the stability of the EMS, the positive economic trend, the rise in interest rates, and the movement of the US dollar against other currencies.


Passage number 22.
  The EMS remained stable. There were, however, some changes in the positions of the individual currencies. In particular the Italian lira and the Danish krone weakened.  The Deutsche Mark proved to be relatively stable. At the end of April, its export-weighted index vis-a-vis fourteen industrial countries (172.8%) was slightly below the level reached at the end of March (173.12; 1972=100). Small exchange rate gains were shown against the Swiss franc, the Italian lira and the Danish krone, whereas losses were registered vis-a-vis the US dollar and the pound sterling.  In the election environment, the French franc moved within rather narrow limits. The publication of less satisfactory economic figures had no significant impact (external trade deficit of Fr.fr. 5.2 billion in February, following Fr.fr. 0.6 billion in January; price increase of 0.3% in March, following 0.2% in February).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing information about the stability of the EMS and the changes in the positions of individual currencies.


Passage number 23.
  The Dutch guilder showed a firm tone vis-a-vis the EMS currencies throughout the month. The Nederlandsche Bank bought a moderate amount of Deutsche Mark to smoothen this tendency.  The Belgian franc slightly improved its position within the EMS. No change in official interest rates took place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply reports on the actions and movements of various currencies within the EMS without any conflicting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 24.
  The Danish krone weakened by 1/2% within the narrow EMS band in the middle of the month in connection with a difficult political situation which resulted in a call for a general election.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions a "difficult political situation" and a "call for a general election," suggesting potential discord or disagreement within the political landscape.


Passage number 25.
  The Irish pound was relatively stable, remaining in the upper half of the EMS band during the month. Over the period the Central Bank of Ireland effected net purchases of foreign currency to absorb continuing net inflows and reduced the short-term facility rate by 3/4 percentage point to 8 1/2% on 1lth April.  The Italian lira was subject to some pressure, as market partici- pants continued to reduce short-term borrowing in foreign currencies, ahead of the French presidential elections. The Banca d'Italia intervened on several occasions in the market and accepted a slight depreciation of the lira against the Deutsche Mark, while keeping the lira/French franc rate  stable.  Sterling was very firm and some periods of strong overseas demand were seen. A 1/2% cut in UK base rates on 8th April (to 8%, their lowest level for ten years) tempered enthusiasm for a while, but further inflows were seen following the disappointing US trade figures for February. Although there was some precautionary profit-taking ahead of the UK trade figures for March, the pound recovered on news of the reduced deficit and sterling ended the month on a firm note. Its trade-weighted index rose by 0.4 per cent. to 78.4 (1975=100).  In the course of the month the Greek drachma weakened against both the US dollar and the ECU by 0.9% and 0.22% respectively. In effective terms it declined by 0.52.  The Spanish peseta ended the period 0.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply provides information about the stability or performance of various currencies during the given time period.


Passage number 26.
8% higher with respect to the EMS currencies in effective nominal terms, due to continued capital inflows and in spite of some purchases of foreign currencies by the Banco de Espana. With respect to the US dollar, the peseta strengthened by 0.22.   In line with the exchange rate policy defined by the authorities, the monthly depreciation of the Portuguese escudo in effective terms was reduced by 0.1 percentage point to 0.32%.  The Swiss franc weakened vis-a-vis all currencies. In relation to the US dollar the depreciation amounted to just over 1 1/2%. Its export- weighted value dropped by 1.6%. This trend is attributed to the domestic interest rate level which continues to be low.  The Austrian schilling weakened vis-a-vis the US dollar by 0.82, the monthly spread amounting to 22. As against the Deutsche Mark the schilling fluctuated by a mere 0.062.  Supported by a continued currency inflow which increased during the last days of the month, the Swedish krona firmed against its currency index which moved from 130.75 to just above 130.00, i.e. the lower limit of the band. In order to curb the rapid credit expansion and to reduce domestic demand, the discount rate was increased from 7.5% to 8.52% as from 29th April.  The Norwegian krone strengthened further, appreciating by 1.6% in effective terms. Firmer oil prices and the high level of domestic interest rates continued to be the main factors. Although the interest rate differ- ential narrowed somewhat against the basket currencies, it remained on  average as high as 6 3/4% at the end of the month.  In effective terms, the Finnish _markka strengthened slightly. Finlands Bank made some intervention purchases. .  The Canadian dollar appreciated, improving by 0.4% against the US dollar to close at US$ 0.8130 and improving by 0.6% on a G-10 trade- weighted basis. The strengthening was in response to Canada's continued strong economic performance, favourable terms of trade, and favourable spread between comparable US and Canadian money market rates.  The Japanese yen traded within a relatively narrow range against the US dollar, depreciating marginally by 0.3%. The yen's stability was brought about partly by concerted intervention by the major central banks, particularly in mid-April, and by the fact that previously expected large dollar sales by Japanese institutional investors did not materialise.  Vis-a-vis the major European currencies the yen appreciated by 0.32.  II. INTERVENTIONS A. Interventions in US dollars  In April the central banks effected net purchases amounting to US$ 4.6 billion compared with US$ 2.5 billion in March. Gross purchases amounted to US$ 5.2 billion (of which US$ 2 billion in concerted action to support the US dollar around the middle of the month). The main buyers were the Bank of Canada and the Bank of Japan. Gross sales amounted to US$ 0.6 billion.  B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 27.
 Interventions in Community currencies and in private ECUs  Interventions in EMS currencies by Community central banks amounted to the equivalent of US$ 2.8 billion compared with US$ 5.3 billion in March. These interventions mostly consisted of sales of Deutsche Mark by the Banca d'Italia and, to a lesser degree, of purchases of Deutsche Mark  by the Banco de Espana.  III. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CURRENT MONTH, UP TO 6th MAY  The upward trend of the US dollar continued vis-a-vis all cur- rencies except the Japanese yen. Within the EMS, there was a slightly  greater variability of exchange rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply presents information about interventions in community currencies and private ECUs, as well as developments in exchange rates.


Passage number 28.
 1A  EVOLUTION DE L'ECU, DU COURS MEDIAN DES MONNAIES PARTICIPANT AU MECANISME DE CHANGE DU SME ET DES MONNATES DES BANQUES CENTRALES DE LA CEE NE PARTICIPANT PAS A CE MECANISME, SUR LA BASE DES COURS RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986 VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*  \ } N    . . . . . . . 4    = Voir page suivante.  6.5.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the evolution of exchange rates.


Passage number 29.
1988 1B  EVOLUTION DES MONNAIES DES BANQUES CENTRALES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A LA CONCERTATION, SUR LA BASE DES COURS RELEVES LES 31 DECEMBRE 1986 VIS-A-VIS DU $EU*  te  -  ~ 7 wee > -»  ~ 1  1988  * ECU 0,93425;: £ 0,6773; DOR 138,7601; PTA 131,8700; ESC 146,0995; Yen 159,7993; KRS 6,7750; KRN 7,3975; Le  FIM 4,7925; $Can 1,3805; FS 1,6215; Sch 13,6520; cours médian des monnaies participant au SME 0,92913.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the exchange rates of various currencies as of December 31, 1986.


Passage number 30.
 cours médian des monnaies participant au SME représente la moyenne jour-  naliére des cours des deux monnaies a marge de fluctuation de 2,25% qui se sont @éloignés le plus de leurs cours-pivots bilatéraux actuels. 6.5,.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes the average daily exchange rate of currencies participating in the SME and the range of fluctuation allowed.


This passage was too long for model to process and thus had to be split: Passsage number31
1988 2  MOUVEMENT A L'INTERIEUR DE LA GRILLE OE PARTIES DU SME CALCULES SUR LA BASE DES COURS DE L'ECU DANS LES OIFFERENTES MONNAIES PARTICIPANTES  ade i i) enane” meet  6. 5. 1988 100  -100  EVOLUTION DE L'INDICATEUR DE DIVERGENCE*  100  ieieietehdaiietiiaiieidabiaaiddeidd eit 75  w----- KH  ; 50  aeeenwse  25  et eee  oae ewe emeereanant  a a ~ ~~ —.  es é ‘  -25  eee eee ee  -50  -75  -100  29. 1 12. 2 26. 2 11. 3 25. 3 8. 4 22. 4  1988  * Lt’indicateur de divergence a pour but de mesurer, sur une base compa- rable pour toutes les monnaies participant au mécanisme de chan.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage appears to be presenting data and information without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.ge européen, la position d'une monnaie vis-a-vis de son cours-pivot ECU.  L’écart maximal de divergence est le pourcentage maximal par lequel le cours de marché de 1’'ECU dans chaque monnaie peut s’appréctier ou se déprécier par rapport 4 son cours-pivot ECU; il est exprimé par + 100, le seuil de divergence étant + 75.  Les données qui ont servi de base a4 1’ établissement de ce graphique sont les cours de 1'ECU exprimés en termes de diverses monnaies, cours qui sont toutefois corrigés des effets des fluctuations  de la lire italienne, de la livre sterling et de la drachme g.

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining a concept regarding the position of a currency in relation to its ECU pivot rate and the maximum divergence allowed. It is providing information regarding calculations and data used to establish a graph, without presenting any contention or disagreement.recque au- delé de la marge de 2,25% vis-a-vis des autres monnaies participant au  SME.  6. 5. 1988  4A  EVOLUTION DE LA LIVRE STERLING, DE LA DRACHME, DE LA PESETA ET DE L'ESCUDO PAR PAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*  1988  “ # 0,724942; DR 148,526; PTA 141,151; ESC 156,382.  6. 5. 1988  EVOLUTION DES MONNAIES DES BANQUES HORS CEE PARTICIPANT A LA CONCERTATION PAR RAPPORT A L'ECU SUR LA BASE DES COURS DU MARCHE RELEVES LE 31 DECEMBRE 1986*          .   e«  .  .  o” ow” %e—"* arr Es  a el hes ae .   29. 1 12. 2 26. 2 11. 3 25. 3 8. .

Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply providing information about the exchange rates of different currencies.Passage number 32.
  The strengthening of the EMS is a constant concern of the Governors which may be reflected, when necessary, in amendments to the rules and procedures in force, the most recent example being the Basle/Nyborg agreements, drawn up with a view to the full liberalisation of capital movements. The improvements in the facilities for financing and settling interventions resulting from these agreements have already been put into practice. For example, a sizable amount of intra-marginal interventions (ECU 3.4 billion) has already benefited from the new financing terms. The monitoring of develop- ments in the member countries and in the capital markets has been intensified, and the close concertation between central banks, which has at times taken the concrete form of co-ordinated action in the markets, has undoubtedly contributed to the smooth functioning of the system in recent months. The Governors have, moreover, taken the steps announced in their recent report on the full liberalisation of capital movements to reinforce the process of  monetary policy co-ordination among the member countries.  5. The wish has been expressed in a number of quarters that various other modifications to the operation of the European Monetary System be  examined, chiefly, according to their advocates, with a view to promoting a  better balance between economic performances, economic policy objectives and the constraints bearing on the different participants.  The Governors propose to examine these proposals insofar as they lie within their sphere of competence. They will seek to examine all the concrete proposals that have been put forward, taking account both of their underlying motivations and of their technical aspects. The proposals concerned, in particular, are those relating to the intervention mechanism, reserve asset diversification, the ECU creation mechanism, the development of the use of the official and the private ECU, the expansion of the role of the EMCF and a new credit mechanism connected with the full liberalisation of capital movements.  In this examination particular importance will be attached to the concern to consolidate the achievements of the European Monetary System in terms of internal and external stability and to build the future progress of the system on these foundations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The focus is on the efforts being made to strengthen and improve the European Monetary System, with the Governors seeking to address various proposals for modifications in a constructive manner.


