Federal Open Market CommitteeConference CallApril 29, 1983PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMr. WallichMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Balles, Black, and Ford, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of San Francisco,Richmond, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, Eisenmenger, Ettin,Prell, Scheld, and Zeisel, AssociateEconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Office of BoardMembers, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Board of Governors-2-Messrs. Burns, Keran, Koch, Mullineaux, and Stern,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Dallas, San Francisco, Atlanta,Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Cacy, Meek, and Soss, VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Kansas City, New York, and New York,respectivelyTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Callof April 29, 1983[Secretary's note: The roll call and opening statements bystaff were not transcribed.]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, this is Tony. It seems to methat the current situation reflects the clause in the last FOMCdirective that lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context ofmore pronounced slowing of growth in the monetary aggregates, etc.And I think we ought to give serious consideration to a cut in theborrowing level assumption. In theory, a cut of $100 million from$250 to $150 million would give us about a 25 basis point reduction onaverage in the fed funds rate. On top of that there probably would besome psychological effect and we might get a drop over a period oftime down to as low as the 8 to 8-1/4 percent area. It seems to methat there's some advantage in doing that because all the arguments,including both the international side and the high level of realinterest rates, are on one side with this very major slowing. It alsoseems to me that we would want to see that development first beforeconsidering a discount rate cut. And next week there are three daysof Treasury refunding, so that it would be very hard to do a discountrate cut in the middle of that or the day after. Any discount ratecut probably would come in the early part of the following week, so wewould have about a 10-day period before we could give that reallyserious consideration and in which we could have a working out of thisreduction in the borrowing level. We ought to have some discussionand serious consideration of doing this.MR. PARTEE. Tony, this is Chuck Partee. I think you're alittle premature in your conclusion that the growth rate in theaggregates has dropped off very markedly. We only have April. Iwould be more inclined to think that if May does not show a sharprebound, as Steve apparently is projecting, but continues at amoderate rate, then there would be a basis for what you say. But atthis point it seems to me we only have one month and it very well maybe a sport. It's too early to take the kinds of actions you'resuggesting.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even if May showed a rebound of themagnitude that I understand is being considered, growth would stillaverage out for April and May at only 5 percent.MR. PARTEE. Well, as I recall, the projection for thequarter was on the order of 8 percent for M2 and I've forgotten whatthe M1 projection was. So, remembering that we've had very strong[growth] over an extended number of months in the case of M1 and overseveral months in the case of M2, it seems to me that people wouldthink it pretty fast to be reacting [now].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But you would agree, Steve, that theaverage of April and May would still represent a significant slowingcompared to the growth rates we've been seeing all this year. Andgiven the facts--and I'm thinking particularly of the internationalside as well as the solidifying of the recovery here and the slowingof the inflation rate--there would seem to be a lot of good reasonsfor some modest reduction. If we wait until we see May data, we'retalking about waiting maybe five to six weeks--4/29/83MR. PARTEE. Or several weeks.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. --before we have a clear idea. Andwe may be losing an important period of time.MR. PARTEE. That's on the presumption that we are going tobe moving in an easing direction. If that's incorrect, we're notlosing an important period of time, we're avoiding an error.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anyone else want to enter into thisat this point?MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey. I would like tojoin Tony for some of the same reasons, but I would restate somereasons that I have put to the Committee before. It seems to me thatwe should take advantage of a "window" to move interest rates a bitlower in the period ahead, and the window may be within the nextcouple of weeks. Even if it's a mistake, as suggested by Chuck, I'mmore concerned at the moment that we do indeed continue the recoverythan I am with the fear that there is a possibility for some fairlystrong growth in the aggregates in the second quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have any real questions aboutthe recovery at the moment?MR. MARTIN. Well, I would like to enter my usual cautionwith regard to the so-called housing recovery, Paul. We're still notsure of the new housing sales. The anecdotal evidence from developersis that these are still predominantly and unusually first-time buyers,and that sort of market can weaken very readily.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, this is Frank Morris. I'd like tobe recorded as supporting Tony Solomon's position as well. If we lookat the performance of the broader aggregates, we simply don't find thekind of enormous bulge that we have had in Ml and M2. Without beingtoo repetitious, I simply don't think that they have been giving us aproper clue as to what policy ought to be doing.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, this is Lyle. I agree withFrank's last comment that the aggregates have not been giving us anindication of what is happening to monetary policy. And I would bestrongly opposed to the use of one month's prospective reduction inthe growth rates from very high paces to take action to lower interestrates. I interpreted Jerry Zeisel's comments as indicating that byand large the recovery is coming along as well as we could haveexpected. There are the same kinds of weaknesses and question marksthat we had at the time of the FOMC meeting, but nothing new in thatrespect. I think we ought to wait until we have a clearer indicationbefore we take precipitate action to lower interest rates.MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, this is Henry. It seems to mewe've reversed ourselves here. The main concerns of the present timeare on the international side and there's quite a bit of reason fortrying to get to lower real rates. Domestically I see very little.The economy seems to be moving slowly but fairly stably. So we havenow a situation where international considerations urge ease butdomestic considerations do not. In short, I think we ought to wait.4/29/83MR. ROBERTS. I'd like to be associated with those who wantto wait. I think one month is much too early to start fine-tuning,particularly when the economy seems to be moving along all right here.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're all aware that thatdirective has a clause in it saying that we would ease in a sense--automatically is too strong a word--if we had a convincing lower[monetary] growth rate over a period of time. I myself think it'spremature to do it now after one month, with confusion about IRA/Keoghaccounts, seasonals, and mainly the fact that it's only one month.And the latest indication we have is that the trend may be reboundinga bit. I think we just have to wait and see a few more weeks and notget caught in a move that we may want to reverse quickly. But I thinkit's a legitimate question to be raised and to watch in coming weeks.I would assume, and I won't raise the question, that the directive iscertainly valid. I don't think we have to vote on anything.MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, at the last meeting you indicatedthat if there was any erring in policy, given the recovery and thestrong aggregates, that one would tend to err a little on the highside rather than the low side. It would seem to me, while it might bepremature for any significant change in policy, that the erring oughtto be more neutral and not have that bias on the high side.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say in that respect that wealready have unbiased errors. We are not trying to err--well, wenever do try to err on anything--but there currently is no attempt tobias the errors, as you put it.MR. MARTIN. Snugging is dead. Is that right?SPEAKER(?). Unbiased.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a straightforward aim that is notalways reflected in results. We had very high borrowings at the endof last week. Everything was more or less on track and then went offright at the end of the week. As a result, borrowings started outheavy this week. So we may have more than $250 million of borrowingsthis week, but not because we're aiming at that; it's just because wealready have them on the books, which I suppose technically will meanthat the markets will ease after the weekend sometime, maybe around4:00 p.m. Wednesday afternoon. But, obviously, we are and have beenoperating in a very narrow range. If there is not a strong feelingotherwise--in terms of riding with the existing directive under thoseunderstandings and watching this as it evolves to see whether we doget a May rebound or not--I think we can conclude.SPEAKER(?). I think we've lost you again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What?MR. RICE. They can't hear you.SPEAKER(?). We've lost you again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just said that I don't think we need totalk about changing the directive. We have a directive. I interpretit at this point, on the basis of the discussion I've heard, that4/29/83we're not going to do anything or even talk about doing anything verysignificant anyway, but that we'll play an unbiased approach for thenext few weeks and watch how things develop. If we have a strongindication of a confirmation of the April trend, obviously, thingswill look differently; if the aggregates are rebounding, then for themoment, unless it's an enormously strong rebound, we will still be ontrack in terms of the aggregates. Just to see if that's acceptable, Iwill pause for 10 seconds.Let me just turn very briefly to a couple of other things asa matter of information. We have had a request for the Redbook to besent regularly to the Congress. We wouldn't want to do that withoutsome expurgation. I have agreed to do it, but I think it's better todo it in a non-Redbook form. So, I'm going to be sending a request tochange the format a bit. I don't know the details; maybe we'll do itslightly more frequently. Essentially it will be the same regionaldocument, which will be given to one Congressional Committee--notnecessarily for publication, but it may end up that way sometime downthe road.SPEAKER(?). We lost you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you didn't lose anything veryimportant because I will be communicating with you in writing on whatwe're going to do with the Redbook.SPEAKER(?). Okay.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might just note for your informationthat we continue to get, because of budget resolutions or whatever,these various resolutions on monetary policy. I think you should beaware that there is a more concerted review under way of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act directive, clearly with the intention at this stage ofchanging it to reduce or eliminate the emphasis on the aggregates.How that will materialize, I don't know, because there's going to be aseries of hearings and we will be testifying I think late in June.This is a direct review of the matter by the appropriate committee andit will be rather interesting to see how and if it develops.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're going to be testifying beforethe Banking Committees of both houses? Does this mean that theparagraphs in the budget resolution are stalled temporarily or what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I'm talking about at this point ispurely in a subcommittee in the House, the Monetary PolicySubcommittee. Whether the other things are dead, I don't know.There's going to be an attempt on the floor because it's not dead inthe House resolution. There is some doubt about whether they willeven pass the budget resolution. But in the Senate a strong protesthas been made by the Banking Committee on jurisdictional grounds and Iwould think that might hold it at bay in the Senate. If there isnothing else, I will be in communication with you on the Redbookmatter in writing. Okay. Thank you. If something amazing comes up,we'll have another consultation.END OF SESSION