Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 28-29, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., beginning on Monday, March 28, 1983, at 3:00 p.m. andcontinuing on Tuesday, March 29, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, and Ford, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Ettin,Prell, Scheld, Siegman, 1/ and Zeisel, AssociateEconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Attended Monday session only.3/28-29/83Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Associate Director,-Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, 1/ Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Sims, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of San FranciscoMessrs. Burns, J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Mullineaux, and Stern,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofDallas, Cleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta, Philadelphia,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Richmond and New YorkMs. Joan Lovett, Manager, Securities Department, FederalReserve Bank of New York1/ Attended Tuesday session only.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 28-29, 1983March 28, 1983--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Cross, do you have anything to sayabout the foreign currency authorization, the foreign currencydirective, or the procedural instructions?MR. CROSS. No changes are recommended.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And you have no comments?MR. PARTEE. Would you refresh my memory, Sam? What kind ofauthority does this gives us on the foreign currency operations?MR. CROSS. What kind of authority does this give us?MR. PARTEE. What restrictions exist on our authority to dealin foreign currencies?MR. CROSS. These are procedural restrictions, which set outlimits on how much we can--MR. PARTEE. And which currencies we can deal in.MR. CROSS. And the currencies we can deal in.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the amounts [allowable] withinintermeeting periods unless the Foreign Currency Subcommittee moves onsomething urgent.MR. PARTEE. We have 14 currencies listed, some of whichwe've never dealt in, I believe. Is that an exhaustive list of thecurrencies that we can deal in without Committee action?MR. CROSS. Yes.MR. PARTEE. It would take Committee approval to add acurrency to that list? Is that right?MR. CROSS. Yes.MR. TRUMAN. The Authorization would have to be changed.MR. PARTEE. The Authorization would have to be changed. Andlikewise the aggregate limit?MR. CROSS. There is an aggregate limit. Let me check onwhether Committee action is required on that. It is required.MR. TRUMAN. Well, except in exigent [circumstances].MR. CROSS. It is required, but a change can be approved bythe Subcommittee, which would be subsequently taken to the Committee[for ratification].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But normally the Subcommittee doesn't3/28-29/83act unless there's a time bind, and even then I think a proposedchange is frequently referred to the whole Committee.MR. PARTEE. I was questioned recently by a CongressionalCommittee on this, in the environment of discussing the possibilitiesof bailouts of foreign countries. And I reassured them that weweren't going to bail out any foreign countries through the operationsof the Federal Open Market Committee. So, I wanted to be sure thatthere wasn't anything here that really would permit us suddenly tomove in and buy the Yugoslavian currency or the Chilean currency oreven the Brazilian currency--currencies that are not named on ourlist.MR. TRUMAN. I think the answer to your question, GovernorPartee, is that an addition to that list of 14 currencies has to beauthorized by the full Committee. To the extent that the proceduralinstructions, which relate to the day-to-day operations of the Desk,[address this], there are some provisions such that if the fullCommittee can't be consulted there's a way of continuing to dobusiness. But I think, as common sense would suggest, that would beonly in cases in which we had ongoing operations and not somethingthat we were starting fresh.MR. PARTEE. And the only Latin American currency we have onthe list is the Mexican peso?MR. CROSS. That's the only one.MR. GUFFEY. Are we talking about the swap arrangements orthe Desk operations?MR. PARTEE. I'm talking about Desk operations in foreigncurrencies.MR. GUFFEY. Okay.MR. PARTEE. Although the two happen to be the same listright now, I think. It's not exactly coincidental, but it'saccidental in the sense that there could be a different list.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, but on the swap agreements the Desk has tohave prior authorization from the Committee to activate a swap.MR. TRUMAN. No. The procedural instructions call foractivation of the swap by the Subcommittee if it's [less than] 15percent of the arrangement or $200 million. So, as a matter of theCommittee's procedures, that's what is called for. In most recentcases that I remember when the foreign country was activating theswap, as a matter of practice, the full Committee has been consulted.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Anyway, [despite] what Ted said,Chuck is exactly right: You don't have to worry about it.MR. PARTEE. I just wanted to probe a little for the recordto see whether I got general agreement from people here that there'snothing to worry about. I think it's true also, Roger, that among theproblem countries the only one we have a swap line with is Mexico.3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In which one of these [documents] does theoverall limit appear?MS. TEETERS. Agenda item 4a: Authorization for ForeignCurrency Operations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's in the Authorization. Have all thesublimits on particular currencies disappeared?MR. TRUMAN. On holdings, Mr. Chairman, the last time aroundon that the Committee maintained the overall limit of $8 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $8 billion. Yes, but I don't see thesublimits.MR. TRUMAN. We have not made those limits public.SPEAKER(?). Even to the Committee?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are those sublimits?MR. TRUMAN. They are not in these documents.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're not anyplace?MR. TRUMAN. They aren't in the documents that werecirculated to the Committee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are they?MR. TRUMAN. They were determined in a decision by theCommittee the last time this was reviewed, which I think was last May.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we do have an outstanding decisionthat controls individual currencies?MR. TRUMAN. Yes.MR. BERNARD. Yes. There are so-called informal limits andthe total is $4-1/4 billion.MR. TRUMAN. It's $5 billion, actually.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Bernard.MR. BERNARD. My list may be a little out of date. When theinformal limit was $4-1/4 billion, at any rate, [the breakdown] was$2-3/4 billion in German marks, $1 billion in Japanese yen, and $500million in all other currencies. I don't know if that $4-1/4 billionwas increased or not.MR. TRUMAN. I think it was increased to $5 billion the lasttime.MR. CROSS. It was increased to $5 billion last year and theGerman mark portion of that was increased to $3-1/2 billion. Now weare getting close to that $3-1/2 billion limit. We do not expect toneed it within the next few weeks, but we are not that far away from3/28-29/83the limit and we continue to earn interest on these marks, so it is amatter of time before we may need to change that limit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How far are we from the yen limit?MR. TRUMAN. $502 million.MR. CROSS. We're under [no] pressure on the yen limit.MS. TEETERS. We're holding these--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're $502 million away from the limit?MR. TRUMAN. There is the limit in the Authorization, though,for an overall open position of $8 billion, which the Committee set.And that is what appears here in paragraph 1(d) in the Authorization.The Committee has chosen to set limits on balances in these currenciesinformally in the way in which Norm and I together with Sam havedescribed. That limit is $5 billion, with the sublimits of $3.5billion in marks, $1 billion in yen, and $500 million in all othercurrencies. In the case of the yen, we hold roughly $500 million inyen balances and, therefore, there's $500 million to go.MR. PARTEE. Well, the only reason these would be working upis because of earnings.MR. CROSS. Yes, interest earnings.MR. PARTEE. I must say that in reviewing the material thiscame to my attention and I don't recall it ever being discussed by theCommittee. One could have presumed that when we received the earningson our foreign investments we would liquidate the earnings--that is,convert them into dollars. But instead, apparently we have neverconverted any of these earnings to dollars; we leave them in theforeign currencies. Is there some reason for that, Sam?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it makes sense to bebuying dollars at a time when we're all worried about there being sucha strong appreciation of the dollar, Chuck. I think that was the onlyreason.MR. PARTEE. [I suppose] that's the only reason, because Isee no reason in principle that we wouldn't want to convert theearnings to dollar form.MS. TEETERS. Do these limits include the holdings that wehave for repaying the Carter bonds?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Treasury has those.MR. CROSS. They're put in and then taken back out.MR. TRUMAN. No, these are not the currencies that are heldagainst Carter bonds.MS. TEETERS. So, those holdings are in addition to what wehold in3/28-29/83MR. CROSS. The currencies you are talking about are thecurrencies held by the Treasury. The currencies that we hold underwarehousing [agreements] are in addition.MR. PARTEE. [That has] come way down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I have a motion on these?MR. CROSS. Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say that since we'regetting close to the limit on [marks] and the Committee has had thischance to discuss it, you may want to consider whether to raise it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's wait until we get to your part onthe [agenda].MR. PARTEE. I want further discussion before I'm prepared tovote.MR. MARTIN. Move approval of item 4(a).MR. PARTEE. All right, I second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Objections? In the absence of anyobjections, they're all approved. On Treasury warehousing, [wereceived] a memorandum from Mr. Truman. This is something we reviewevery year. The staff's recommendation is that it be agreed to foranother year. The Treasury is still warehousing a lot, I guess.MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, the remainder being warehoused isentirely in marks and it's just under $1.1 billion. The timing ofthat warehousing agreement is such that it will be used to pay offremaining Carter notes--Governor Teeters, this is where the Carternotes come in--in May and June.MR. CROSS. May and July.MR. TRUMAN. May and July of this year. And then we wouldhave no more [foreign currency holdings] actively warehoused with theTreasury. On the other hand, it seemed to us and the Treasury, giventheir activities in other currencies--ones we'd just as soon not hold--and the fact that they do hold a certain amount of marks and Swissfrancs and yen in addition to what they've already warehoused, that tothe extent the Exchange Stabilization Fund might get into a liquiditybind it made sense to maintain this facility for that purpose.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd certainly like to argue in favorof it. I see no reason for discontinuing it; it's an important helpto the liquidity of the ESF. The Treasury would have had some veryserious problems from time to time if it had been operating withoutthe warehousing fallback.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to make a motion?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would move that it be extended foranother year.MR. MARTIN. Second.3/28-29/83MR. PARTEE. What happens here with the earnings?MR. TRUMAN. We keep the earnings.MR. PARTEE. In foreign currency form?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's Treasury earnings.MR. TRUMAN. No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are the Treasury's foreigncurrencies, aren't they?MR. TRUMAN. It's the Treasury's foreign currency but the--MR. PARTEE. I think we pay--MR. TRUMAN. The warehousing takes the form of a spot saleand a forward purchase, flat. So, they sell us 100 marks and we sellthem back 100 marks, except that the 100 marks have earned someinterest in the meantime.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which we put in our regular-MR. TRUMAN. We keep it in our balances.MR. PARTEE. As marks?MR. TRUMAN. As marks.MR. PARTEE. And we then perhaps pay them off in dollars?MR. TRUMAN. No, we pay them off in marks.MR. PARTEE. It accumulates in marks on their side too, sowe're neutral so far as the foreign exchange risk is concerned on theearnings.MR. TRUMAN. No, we take the earnings into our portfolio.The principal is where the--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Treasury bears the foreignexchange risk.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the principal, as far as--MR. PARTEE. So much [unintelligible] exchange is coming-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The explanation, as I understand it, isthat we just take the earnings into our portfolio and add them to ourbalances in foreign currencies.MR. ROBERTS. So, forget the exchange rate risk.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Forget the exchange risk on the principal.MR. MARTIN. There's a risk on the earnings but not on theprincipal.3/28-29/83MR. RICE. These earnings come from investments in mark-denominated securities?MR. TRUMAN. Well, among other things, yes.MR. PARTEE. We're not talking about weak currencies here?MR. TRUMAN. No. Again, the only currencies that the SystemAccount could hold would be the 14 that are on that list.MR. PARTEE. Even for the Treasury?MR. TRUMAN. Even for the Treasury, except by a separateauthorization of the Committee. In contrast to other operations theTreasury has with us, like the SDR monetization, this is not anautomatic facility. It's at our discretion as to whether we agreeabout the liquidity conditions or the circumstances. If we deem thatthe circumstances so deserve, they can activate the facility. So, wehave to agree to the circumstances.MR. RICE. Do we manage the investment?MR. TRUMAN. We manage it; we have some for the Treasuryanyhow. It's through the Treasury account at the New York Bank thatwe would manage the investments.MR. WALLICH. Is the holding of a foreign currency resultingfrom interest receipts defined as intervention or is the nonholding--that is, the disposing of that--defined as intervention in yourreport? You know what I mean.MR. TRUMAN. As I remember, the report is agnostic orsomewhat ambivalent on this point [as is] the U.S. government itself.I was amused to hear President Solomon's response to that because Ithink when he was once [wearing] another hat he argued--and we didtoo--that interest on dollars that foreigners accumulate should be putinto the markets. Now, I think you can argue the economics of theissue on either side. Likewise, the question of whether it'sintervention can be argued on either side. My purist colleagues wouldsay that that is indeed intervention since the interest changes thenet asset position in foreign currencies.MR. PARTEE. We take the interest in foreign currency formand it then flows through to the earnings of the Federal ReserveSystem.MR. TRUMAN. Right.MR. PARTEE. We then pay the earnings of the Federal ReserveSystem in dollars to the Treasury.MR. TRUMAN. Right.MR. PARTEE. As I see it, in some sense the quality of theFederal Reserve's balance sheet deteriorates.MR. TRUMAN. You might look at it just as that we'vediversified further.3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any objections? Not hearing anyobjections, it's renewed. We now have the Authorization for DomesticOpen Market Operations, agenda item 6. We have a recommendation fromMr. Sternlight to increase from $3 to $4 billion the intermeetinglimit on changes in System Account holdings. He had a memorandum. Doyou have anything further to say, Mr Sternlight?MR. STERNLIGHT. I'd just remind the Committee that the lastchange in that standard authorization was made in 1974, when theCommittee raised it from $2 to $3 billion. I think the recommendationis logical. It seems to me, with longer intervals between meetingsand larger dollar volume changes in the typical factors affectingreserves, such as seasonal currency flows, that a change is in order.And I think this proposed change would reduce the frequency ofoccasions for going back to the Committee for intermeeting changes ofthe leeway but would still call the Committee's attention to reallylarge needs for change. In the past two years, for example, therewere 8 occasions when we came to the Committee for a change in theleeway. Had the leeway been $4 rather than $3 billion, there wouldhave been just 3, rather than 8, such occasions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is still low enough so that therewill be some occasions for a check upon your operations.MR. STERNLIGHT. I would expect so, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I have a motion?MR. RICE. Moved.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any further discussion? Do I hear anyobjections? The limit is raised from $3 to $4 billion. Now, item6(b) is a recommendation to delete section 2 of the Authorizationpertaining to direct lending to the U.S. Treasury. We also have amemorandum on that from Mr. Bernard. Are you going to say something?MR. BERNARD. I have nothing really to add, Mr. Chairman,beyond underscoring the fact that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's against the law.MR. BERNARD. That's right. And there are no prospects forrenewal [of that authorization] that we know about.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As it now stands, we provide for anauthorization to do something that's against the law. I thinkthat's--MR. FORD. That's too frank!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If there were an unexpected cashproblem in the Treasury, then in practice that night we would honoroverdrafts, I gather. But they would be expected then to do a cashmanagement bill and get the cash in before close of business the nextnight?3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that we've been that preciseabout it. I think if they're stuck and they overdraw their account,we're stuck. But I guess we'd get after them.MR. AXILROD. Yes, but we do have a ruling from a lawyer whosays that that overdraft is not lending to the Treasury but isperforming a normal banking function.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, if they can't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A normal banking function in this day oflax banking practices!MR. MORRIS. Was that Burt Lance who wrote that?MR. MARTIN. [Unintelligible] everybody overdrawing?MR. FORD. Burt Lance is going to be relieved to hear this!VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, but what happens if we honorthe overdraft and the next morning they issue a cash management billbut they can't settle it until the next day? Are we permitted underthe lawyer's ruling to give an overdraft the second night?MR. AXILROD. I think they would have to extend their rulinga bit [beyond] one day. I don't know that they would--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't see why under presentprocedures they wouldn't be able to settle a cash management bill thesame day. If I can just elaborate on this first point: This rulingfrom a lawyer sounds very open ended, but it has to be judged aninadvertent overdraft--something that arose despite prudent and properplanning.MR. BLACK. Did you have to try more than one lawyer?MR. GUFFEY. Do we get the discount rate plus 2 percent onthat overdraft?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know if there's any interestprovision.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We better get this changed. If it[unintelligible] Patman [unintelligible]--MR. PARTEE. It seems strange that this [legal authority]ended in [1981].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I hear a motion?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection we will approve thedeletion. Next is a recommendation from Messrs. Axilrod andSternlight to renew the authorization to conduct RP transactions in3/28-29/83bankers acceptances. I don't know which one of you wants to addressthat; I understand we also have a memorandum on that.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think I speak for both Mr. Axilrod andmyself when I say I see this as a fairly close judgment call. Theactivity is of some use in implementing reserve objectives, althoughit's not really so critical that we could not get on without it. Atthe same time, we see the financial risks of continuing the activityas fairly low. By doing RPs only in paper regarded as "prime" by themarket and engaging only in short-term transactions with reputabledealers who are obliged to buy the paper back in a few days, theSystem incurs little risk in our view. Perhaps a more likely sourceof difficulty, though, is the possibility that we would be presentedwith paper that we had some reason to question. It could be awkwardto turn down a name that had previously been regarded as prime, lestthat very refusal escalate the questions being raised.If we were not now involved in doing RPs in BAs, I don'tthink I would suggest getting into the activity even if it did help ussomewhat in meeting reserve objectives. At the same time, given thatwe are occasionally involved, one must weigh the impact of withdrawalat a time when confidence in the national and worldwide banking systemis still fairly tender--though less so than last summer and fall.Withdrawal could be taken as a sign of lack of confidence in thebanking system and not merely a judgment that the activity was notessential in meeting reserve objectives or showing support to the BAmarket. On balance--acknowledging that it's a narrow rather than anoverwhelming balance--I'd favor retaining the authorization and sorecommend to the Committee. It should be recognized, though, thatunder a continued authorization, it may well be deemed expedient undercertain circumstances to continue accepting names that may be startingto come under some question, lest our refusal aggravate doubtfulsituations.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have great doubt myself whether weshould continue this for a more underlying reason than anyonementioned: I think the bankers acceptance market has developed farbeyond what was technically thought of as a bankers acceptance in theyear [Congress] put in the Federal Reserve Act that we can deal inbankers acceptances. And I'm not sure we want to give this kind ofofficial endorsement to the market anymore. I don't feel stronglythat it should be done now. I think there's something to the pointthat withdrawal at the moment would raise questions in a rather tendersituation in the market internationally. So, I don't feel stronglyabout that. But I do think we probably ought to take an earlyopportunity to get out.MR. GRAMLEY. How often do we engage in RPs in the BA market?Is this once a week, once a month? Is it with the kind of frequencythat if we were out for any significant length of time there would becommentary on it?MR. STERNLIGHT. We normally do it in conjunction with doingRPs on behalf of the System. When we have some temporary reserves toinject, we have the choice of whether to engage in RPs on behalf ofthe System or to just pass through to the market some of the foreign-10-3/28-29/83account temporary investment orders. It is done largely on the basisof the size of the need we have to put reserves into the market. Ifit's a fairly sizable need or we're going to do multi-day RPs, then wedo them on behalf of the System and we normally do them on acceptancesas well as Treasury and agency securities. I would say it works outon an average to be a few times, maybe two or three times, a month.MS. HORN. Would it be noticed if you did it half as much inthe future as you do now? Would that be commented on?MR. STERNLIGHT. It would be noticed if we did fail toinclude acceptances when we were doing RPs on behalf of the System.If we reverted to just leaning more often on passing through thecustomer RPs and less often on our own RPs--a modest change in thatdirection--I don't think it would attract great attention.MR. PARTEE. I want to agree with the Chairman. We have hadjust a massive increase in the issuance of acceptances relative to thecapital of the banks, which would be an occasion for saying: Allright, if this is going to be such a big market, it can operate on itsown without our doing RPs in it. In addition, we have the problem,which is not quite yet disposed of, of the risk participationacceptance. Now, that'll depend on the Board's definitions of terms,if I understand the matter correctly, and the Board has not yetdefined the terms on risk participation. But it makes it at leastpossible, depending on what the Board does, that we can have an awfullot of acceptances out with a bank's name with the indirect guaranteeof secondary banks. And I think we might get in a situation where,although we wouldn't ordinarily have any problem with the bank--let'sjust take for example Chase Manhattan--that if there were three timesthat many acceptances circulating with Chase's name because they haveparticipated out with banks like that one in Oklahoma City and others,the risk might indeed begin to cause us trouble. So, I can see thepossibility of an embarrassment, looking ahead, particularly with thisrisk participation question.MR. ROBERTS. Isn't the practical consequence, though, thatunder those circumstances the bank would come to the discount windowand give us the same asset and we would accept it for discounting andwe would still have the asset?MR. PARTEE. That might well be, but in that case we have theadministrative possibilities of counseling with them that we don'thave when they do an acceptance in the RP market.MR. ROBERTS. It seems to me that, psychologically, it's apoor time to [make a] break. At the moment it's still a high qualityasset and it gives us flexibility. I'd be for retaining theflexibility.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm for retaining it for the timebeing but it's not clear to me, aside from waiting until there's muchmore confidence in the banking system, [when and how to get out]. Ifyou were requested, Peter, to figure out a scenario to get out of thiswithin a year, what kind of strategy and what kind of rationale wouldyou adopt, assuming you knew you had a very healthy period of time inwhich to work your way out of it?-11-3/28-29/83MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'd probably suggest just announcing afuture date beyond which we would cease that activity.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What explanation would you give--thatthe market had developed enough that it didn't need this?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'd say that the market has matured tothe point that it doesn't warrant any vestige of Federal Reserveparticipation in it as a supporting arm and that it's of such modestusefulness in open market operations that that reason for staying withthe activity has distinctly diminished. And to provide an adjustmentperiod for the market, we can announce a date X months ahead beyondwhich we would not do it. I don't see a way to phase it out in step-by-step procedures.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we gave a substantial delay--Idon't mean a time limit of one month but, let's say, 6 or 9 or 12months--do you think there would also be some market feeling that wewere leery of this stuff?MR. STERNLIGHT. There might be.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even with such a long time?MR. STERNLIGHT. I suspect that there would. I don't know;it's hard to say.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My main concern is not that I'm leery ofthem but that they are not what they purport to be. They're no longerself-liquidating pieces of paper. Well, I am perfectly [willing] toput this off, given the surrounding circumstances. I think we oughtto come back to it in 6 months or so as one way of dealing with it.MS. TEETERS. Couldn't we also recommend that we decrease ouractivity in them rather gradually over time?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as Peter says, there are limitationson what we can do without calling attention to it. I suppose we couldjust buy fewer when the Desk normally would go in. I don't know howwe would lean in that direction, I guess.MR. MARTIN. Peter, about the comment on page 9 with regardto the two firms that are not on the regular government securitiesdealer roster: Is it feasible to drop those two off?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we've been thinking about that, as thememorandum noted. My inclination is that as long as we're satisfied,as we have been, with the financial strength and so forth of thosefirms, I don't think I'd recommend discontinuing activity with them.But I think we would be very reluctant at this point to take up withany new firms that were active only in acceptances and not in thewhole range of government securities.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does our presence in the market contributeat all to the quality of this instrument any longer, in terms of whatwe will accept and not accept?MR. STERNLIGHT. I'd say it's a pretty small factor.-12-3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the only reason I can see forstaying in it--if we exerted some discipline in the market. But Idon't think we do.MR. PARTEE. I think you're right, Paul, that we ought toreview the matter maybe in 90 days or 4 months or so. The Board isnow positioned to make this definitional determination because I senta letter out on that a few days ago. So, I'd favor a temporaryextension and a review of the matter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we need a motion, if Iunderstand this correctly. It can just stand as it is but we willmake note of the fact that we ought to review this, let's say, nolater than September.MR. PARTEE. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to approve the minutes.MS. TEETERS. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objections. We'll now go toforeign currency operations.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]Mr. Chairman, I would also like to get back to the questionof the possible increase in the limits on the currencies we hold. Thepresent limit is now $5 billion overall of which $3-1/2 billionrepresents maximum holdings of German marks. We are now at about$3.450 billion marks--in other words, $50 million below the DM limit.We're not going to run against that limit immediately, but with thecontinued receipt of interest earnings it would be appropriate toprovide some additional room for these earnings to accumulate. Iwould like to recommend that the Committee consider an increase from$5 billion to $5-1/2 billion for the overall limit and an increasefrom $3-1/2 billion to $4 billion for the DM portion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me raise the question of ratifying theprevious transactions, just to get that out of the way. Do I hear amotion?MR. MARTIN. So moved.MS. TEETERS. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. On the first pointthat Mr. Cross raised--renewing the Mexican swap drawings--have we amotion?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That includes the second [renewals], Isuppose. Without objection that will be approved. Now, let me add to-13-3/28-29/83what Mr. Cross said. I think there is some possibility here with theweakening of the mark and a potential weakening of the yen--there'sconsiderable nervousness about the level of the yen and has been forsome time--of more willingness perhaps to intervene should that weakenfurther. I think we have a $500 million limit on the yen.MR. CROSS. We have $500 million left under [the $1 billioninformal limit.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be enough, but I'd throw thatquestion into the pot too.MS. TEETERS. Well, the limit on the yen is $1 billion and wehave $500 million left.MR. CROSS. Right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we have much leeway ineither of these currencies. Obviously, we have very little in themark. I think the yen is the more likely candidate for earlyintervention simply because [the Japanese] would not be surprised if[it did weaken]. I know they want to use their money; they don't useit because they're afraid of renewing the pressures on the yen. Andit's possible that we might want to intervene, if they did, if the yenin fact did weaken.MR. PARTEE. Intervene to hold it up? Is that the idea?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To prevent it from weakening.MR. PARTEE. Don't we want a weaker yen? Isn't that ournational objective?MR. TRUMAN. No, we want a stronger yen.MR. PARTEE. We want a stronger yen. All right. I got itreversed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This always gets confusing. It's weakerin number. We would like a yen that had a smaller number attached toit. So, I think this is a relevant question. I didn't realize wewere as close to the limit as we are in terms of marks but it'spotentially relevant with respect to the yen as well.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It still doesn't make any sense to meto take the marks that we get as interest and turn around and sellthem. Therefore, I don't see why it's relevant to his proposal, whichis to raise the limit in order to accommodate the interest that we'llbe getting in marks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because we have to raise it. We get theinterest and it raises our holdings in marks and begins to threatenthis limit.MR. CROSS. We're only $50 million below.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we don't have much more interest to beearned without raising the limit or selling them in the market.-14-3/28-29/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. All right. And I'm saying that weought to raise the limit because it doesn't make any sense to sellthem.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're in agreement, I guess.MS. TEETERS. How much interest do we earn on the marks?MR. CROSS. We get about $25 or $30 million a month.MR. FORD. Mr. Chairman, I would suggest: Let's sell marksand buy yen. Really, that would solve it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand the yen part but I'm not sureI understand the mark part. That's been pretty weak too.MR. CROSS. The mark has been quite weak recently.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't got a currency to sell, I'mafraid.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Excepting dollars.MR. CROSS. Dollars.MS. TEETERS. How much of other currencies do we hold?MR. TRUMAN. The total is $300 million and something, andmost of that is in Swiss francs.MR. MORRIS. Has there been any change since Reagan [cameinto office]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have the best one can hold relative tothe dollar. They haven't been any good but I don't know of anybetter.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There has been no change. Aside fromrepaying the Carter bonds, there has been no change, virtually, in thecombined Treasury and Federal Reserve holdings of foreign currenciessince the new Administration came in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a little intervention, I think.MR. MORRIS. What I meant was: Do you sense any change inthe Treasury's stand on intervention?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We've seen signs of flexibility buthaven't seen the flexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there hasn't been a real clearreason to [intervene] in recent months. But there was interventionlast fall at some point.MR. TRUMAN. October was the last time.3/28-29/83MR. RICE. A very small amount.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was not very large.MR. TRUMAN. Governor Teeters, we hold at purchase price,which is what these balances are carried at, $296 million of Swissfrancs and only about $20 million in currencies other than Swissfrancs. I don't have [a list of] all the others but it's only about$20 million.MR. CROSS. The others are very tiny balances of severalcurrencies. Holdings of Canadian dollars, I think, are very modest.MR. MARTIN. Are there specific staff recommendations on themark and the yen?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have one on the mark and I threwthe yen into the pot at this point, which is obviously less pressingsince we have a $500 million leeway. I don't feel strongly about itexcept it's not inconceivable that we may run into conditions where wewould want to change that.MR. ROBERTS. Is there no limit on our actions? We can dowhatever is our judgment?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no legal limit.MR. ROBERTS. No legal limit on anything.MS. TEETERS. There would still be the $8 billion overalllimit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. But this is all within the$8 billion, which is in our formal authorization.MR. GUFFEY. Absent some change of policy by the Treasury,though, we're not going to use that $500 million on the yen, are we?We're not going to do it unilaterally?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not at this stage, no. I don't think it'sparticularly a matter of Treasury policy, if I can distinguish thetwo. They are ready to do it, if it is weakening.MR. WALLICH. But it seems to me sensible to provide for thatin case they give us a little leeway.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know what that means, Paul.Today for example, the deutschemark started at 2.42, didn't it, Sam?And now it's down to what--about 2.39?MR. CROSS. No.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I mean up to 2.39.MR. CROSS. It has changed over the course of the day. Therehave been a number of days when these exchange rates have moved by,say, 1 percent. The mark got down to over 2.43 today. It closed at2.42-1/4 on Friday. The dollar in terms of DM got down below 2.433/28-29/83again. There have been a substantial number of occasions where the DMhas moved a couple of pfennigs or even more and the yen has moved by acomparable amount. So, a 1 percent movement in these rates is by nomeans unusual. And there have been a lot of periods when there havebeen substantially higher pressures. Throughout this period there hasbeen a considerable amount of volatility in these rates and aconsiderable amount of nervousness and unsettlement.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Under what circumstances would youencourage the foreign exchange Desk, Mr. Chairman, to make to you andthe Treasury a recommendation that intervention seems appropriate tous? Earlier we made that recommendation a few times when there hadbeen a very substantial weakening in a key foreign currency and theTreasury would then say: Well, let's wait a while and watch. And sothe opportunity would be missed. [Their] reaction might have beenthat if there's a further weakening, yes, we'll do something. But bythen there had already been a 1 percent or a 1/2 percent move and thenthere wasn't any further weakening.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That has been the story of our liferecently. It moves and we're ready and then it moves the other way.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But it would seem to me that we couldhave a prior understanding and a presumption that, if it were to movemore than, say, 1/2 point in 3 hours or more than a point in 4 or 5hours or overnight, we wouldn't wait for a further significantweakening--that only a few basis points move after that would besufficient to trigger it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a long history of trying to reduceit to arithmetic and I'm not sure at this stage that we can.MR. PARTEE. We don't know in advance what kind of news wouldhave brought that about. We wouldn't know what the news is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, we have a recommendation for$500 million, which I would support. I think the yen is moreproblematical. We could do $250 million as a gesture or we could donothing now and wait and see what is needed.MS. TEETERS. How long will the $500 million last you? Itdoesn't sound as if it would be a whole year even.MR. CROSS. It would not be a large amount if our policy wereone in which there were more intervention; $500 million is not a largeamount if we're intervening with very much activity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Certainly, it can last you. I don't thinkwe're going to become that aggressive all of a sudden. It presumablywill last you for a few days at the very least.MR. CROSS. Oh, yes. And that would be time enough toconvene the Subcommittee.MR. TRUMAN. As a matter of procedure, normally in recentyears when we have intervened, the proceeds have been shared with theTreasury in any case. The limit on actual intervention is twice thatmuch.3/28-29/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I move that we increase the limit onthe deutschemark but not on the yen. Are you ready for a motion?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we need a motion. This isdone by an understanding.MR. BERNARD. It's not a vote, no.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless I hear some objections, we willassume that we have another $500 million on the mark.SPEAKER(?). Therefore, the total is--MR. PARTEE. This is all within the $8 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All within the $8 billion.MR. CROSS. All within the $8 billion.MR. CORRIGAN. The total informal limit would go to $5.5billion.MR. PARTEE. That would be enough for quite a few months'interest, wouldn't it?MR. CROSS. Yes, it would.SPEAKER(?). That's around $30 million a month.MR. CROSS. It would carry us for several months.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how you feel about the yen.Let me suggest the $250 million increase in order to test youracquiesence for a little more intervention if the occasion arises.MR. GUFFEY. Well, if that's the purpose of your discussion,I join you.MR. MARTIN. It isn't much intervention; I would certainlysupport that.MR. ROBERTS. Why would we want to intervene? Do we knowbetter than the market what the rate ought to be?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At times.MR. WALLICH. Yes.MR. PARTEE(?) I doubt that.MR. FORD. We like to think that, but I think we know[better]. Didn't you say you tried the arithmetic on this a lot oftimes and you could never figure out a formula for intervention?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I could never figure out a formula forwhether it should be 1 percent more or less in a day. I have no doubtat all in my own mind that the yen at 270, or wherever the heck it gotto a few months ago, was too low and was greatly damaging to our3/28-29/83interest and theirs. I have no hesitation at all in pronouncing that.I thought so at the time and I think so now.MR. PARTEE. But what we are talking about is disorderlyconditions, isn't that right? We're not talking about trying to set ayen/dollar relationship; we're talking about smoothing a movement inthe market so that we could--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only contingency I see now is that theyen might weaken appreciably, contrary to the desires of the Japanesegovernment and contrary to the desires of our own government as apolicy matter.MR. WALLICH. And in the process that would create problemsof protectionism and a larger current account deficit for us.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me hasten to say that I don't thinkwe're going to cure the basic problem by a little intervention. Butit's a gesture.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [If you are] testing the tone of theCommittee's thinking, obviously, I would be in favor of raising it.But I didn't think that $250 million had very much meaning. There isa real need to move on the deutschemark because we're getting near thelimit with the interest earnings.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Although $250 million is not all thatmuch, Mr. Truman is correct that what we're basically talking about interms of intervention is $1-1/2 billion of leeway and that is morethan I suspect we will need in any short period of time.MR. PARTEE. Am I right in thinking that we have $500 millionleeway now?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, I think that's what the Chairman'sarithmetic was. The $500 million plus [$250] million is $750 millionand times two it's $1-1/2 billion.MR. PARTEE. How do we get times two?SEVERAL. Treasury.MR. PARTEE. That's a lot of intervention.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There have been times when the Fedhas intervened without the Treasury, but it has been more common--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the Treasury might not want tointervene just because they're worried about their own cash position.That's the only--. It's quite possible at some point along the linehere. Well, what is the overwhelming sentiment one way or another?MR. PARTEE. I would prefer not to until we can review thewhole question of intervention at the international level, which Ithink is going on, if I understand it. Am I right in thinking thatthere is still such a study?3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. There is still such a study, whichwill be discussed in Williamsburg. What I'm saying is not apart fromthat in the sense that that's part of the background. But it couldwell arise before Williamsburg--like tomorrow.MR. TRUMAN. The study, as far as the studiers are concerned,has been completed. Our lords and masters have not had a[unintelligible]. It is actually going to be at the end of April thatthey are going to have a meeting on the subject.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has not yet been considered by thegovernments.MR. PARTEE. Well, my thought was that I didn't get a clearanswer to [my question on] this disorderly market test. It sounds asif maybe we're changing the test some on why we would intervene, inwhich case it seems to me we really ought to consider what the issuesare and to what extent it ought to be the Federal Reserve and to whatextent the government ought to be directly the intervener [under] adifferent policy. I just don't feel very comfortable with it.MR. WALLICH. You know, we have a directive--MR. PARTEE. We haven't discussed this at all. It hasn'tcome up in months and now it suddenly is coming up and I'm just notprepared to support it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've done a little intervening offand on--MR. PARTEE. $5 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --and we were prepared to do more if themarkets moved the other way.MR. PARTEE. We've been doing an awful lot of $5 and $10million amounts with a $500 million leeway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have been prepared to do considerablymore than that upon occasion, if the market ran the other way--nothingvery big. But this directive, I think, was the same when we did a lotmore.MR. WALLICH. And it is always directed against counteringdisorder, so you're--MR. PARTEE. Except I was uncomfortable about it before, andnow we've not done anything for a couple of years to speak of and I'mstill uncomfortable about it. I am just not prepared to support ittoday, that's all.MS. TEETERS. You're prepared to support the mark increase,though?MR. PARTEE. Well, that seems to be because of the interestthat came in. Although, again, I have some doubts about it.-20-3/28-29/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What you're saying is that you'dprefer a full-dress debate on this one.MR. PARTEE. I think we ought to have an issue paper and havea discussion here in the Committee.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I hope you're not suggesting that wewould not intervene, assuming the Treasury was in agreement, onoccasions that we decided met the criteria that have been existing forsome years.MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't even think I had the latitude tosuggest that because there's $500 million of leeway.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take it that wording has been theresince 1976 when we were going through a great game of interventionfrom active to inactive to moderately active to moderately inactive.MR. PARTEE. Yes, there's not very much--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We had a full-dress debate on this in1980 and we continued the policies that we had been following jointly--the Treasury and the Fed--in terms of trying to slow theappreciation of the dollar. And we got up to $8 or $9 billion inforeign currency holdings by the time the current Administration camein and [intervention] was brought to an abrupt halt. Even thoughthere had been some incidental comments on that at various meetings, Iguess we haven't had a full-dress discussion. In deference to Chuck'sview, why not schedule one for the next meeting? That will be afterWilliamsburg; it will be after your G-Five Ministers of Financemeeting, Paul.MR. TRUMAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know when that is.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It will be after that. That would bea logical time, then, to have a discussion here. In the meantime, wecan just move on the deutschemark limit.MR. PARTEE. If we're going to be talking about doingsomething considerably larger here, which seems to be in the wind, I'minterested in the question of how much we could reasonably do withoutusing these foreign currencies to collateralize Federal Reserve notes.That's an ancillary issue that I'd like to have investigated becausethere must be some limit. We've collateralized, as it happens, ourcurrency with foreign currency something like 138 times. And thatneeds to be examined too so that we know what we're getting into if weconsiderably expand our effort in this sphere.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not want to suggest at thisparticular time that I see anything I would consider really large interms of affecting the overall [composition] of our asset portfolio inany significant way. Have we concluded that we have ample leeway forthe yen for the time being? If we have to change it later, we'llbring it up. We will change the mark. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]-21-3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions? You uncovered anoverpowering interest--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I have a premature question. If thefed funds rate continues at around 8-3/4 percent, am I correct inassuming that it's rather unlikely that the prime rate would move upbut that if it were to go to 9 percent the prime is likely to move?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I mentioned, that spread betweenthe prime rate and the rate on CDs or other things that I think theprime tends to take its cue from has gotten relatively narrow. Ithink it's at the point that would very likely call for a move.Obviously, as the funds rate moves up and other short-term rates moveup, at some point a prime rate move would very likely be kicked off.I think the whole set of public policy considerations that banks willlook at will play a role here. I'm just guessing, but if funds got upto around 9 percent or somewhere in that area--maybe more toward 9-1/4or 9-1/2 percent--there probably would be very strong pressures forthe prime rate to move.MR. PARTEE. It's above 9 percent really, Peter, that youwould be concerned that the pressures could be [strong]?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the CD rate now?MR. STERNLIGHT. The CD rates are now 9 to 9-1/8 percent--something in that area.MR. GUFFEY. They may be in a danger zone right now.SPEAKER(?) That's before reserve adjustments.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't got much for them.MR. BOEHNE. On the decision, Peter, to err on the side ofproviding fewer rather than more reserves when there has been somecloseness in that decision: Was that related to a conscious decisionto react to the strong aggregates or was it more technical than that?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that was part of the background.I'd say this came about just in the day-to-day implementation when wehad discussions on our morning conference calls or with senior Boardstaff. I don't know whether Mr. Axilrod wants to add any comments onthat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will speak for myself to the extent thatI was involved. Yes, because of a stronger business picture andstrong aggregates [I had the view that] if we were going to make amistake, it'd be better to make it on that side than the other side.Also, I think in terms of free reserves we were overshooting on theliberal side earlier--inadvertently, but there it was. We need amotion to ratify the transactions.MR. PARTEE. So moved.3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Approved without objection. I didn't wantto cut off any discussion, but I didn't hear any. Let's turn to thestaff report on the economic situation. Mr. Zeisel.MR. ZEISEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the staff has presented you with anice smooth middle-of-the-road forecast, I suppose.MR. ZEISEL. The smoothness is the nature of forecasting, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably right--mostforecasts anyway. I'd be interested to explore who has somethingsharply different than a nice smooth, even, business forecast ineither direction.MR. FORD. For the remainder of '83 or are you talking aboutnext year too?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever you want to talk about.MR. ROBERTS. I have a question, just out of curiosity. Thechange in final sales was predicated upon a big swing in CCC. How bigwas that and is that based on something unusual? Has that happenedbefore?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Zeisel, would you like to respond tothat?MR. ZEISEL. CCC has had a tendency in the last 3 yearsapproximately to rise very, very sharply toward year-end, much morerapidly than it had historically. And that's one of the problems inthe sense that if it had been going on long enough it would be in theseasonals and it would be damped. But as it stands, we have tended toget these huge payouts in the fourth quarter and then a smaller rateof payout in the first quarter for the last couple of years, and thishas tended to distort the numbers. This will be less of a factor nextyear. But for the time being, it really does distort.MR. ROBERTS. Would it be fair, therefore, to conclude thatfinal sales weren't really as strong in the fourth quarter and aren'tas weak in the first quarter?MR. ZEISEL. They've been running about 3 to 3-1/4 percent inboth quarters. So, it's fairly moderate. It suggests that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you mean final sales have been running3 to 3-1/4 percent leaving out this factor?MR. ZEISEL. Leaving out CCC.MS. TEETERS. What about the next quarter?MR. ZEISEL. Leaving in other components of government,however--just taking out CCC.-23-3/28-29/83MS. TEETERS. But didn't you say this morning that there weresome influences on that final sales number from net exports also?MR. ZEISEL. Oh, there are.MR. TRUMAN. Not between the two quarters, though.MR. ZEISEL. Well, it changes the pattern. If you excludenet exports, you'd get a slightly larger deceleration, but it doesn'tchange the fundamental picture. Excuse me, final sales excluding netexports were about 4 percent in the fourth quarter and about 3-1/4percent in the first. So, it's in the same ballpark, I suppose.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're right [that] it is clearlya distorting factor in trying to trace final sales. Any otherquestions or broader comments?MS. TEETERS. At this point you have just the month ofJanuary on inventories, don't you? So, you really have no feel yetfor what February and March are doing on inventory liquidation.MR. ZEISEL. No, we don't really. This is a forecast andit's a forecast based upon the fact that the inventory level in realterms has been reduced to at least, or actually below, pre-recessionlevels; it's extremely low. The inventory/sales ratios have beenbrought down considerably. There are indications in some very keysectors, such as automobiles and steel, that the end of liquidation isat hand and they're beginning to build a little. And these factorsare sufficient to indicate that we've just about run the course on ourinventory liquidation. We have some liquidation actually in the totalcontinuing for the next several months, but the rate of liquidationdecelerates considerably and by the end of the second quarter is nolonger a factor.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What assumptions with regard to thetrade deficit and the current account deficit underlie yourprojection?MR. TRUMAN. We are assuming that the trade deficit thisyear, Mr. Solomon, will be on the order of $35 billion dollars.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the current account.MR. TRUMAN. Excuse me. The current account is $35 billionand the trade deficit--that's a wrong number here--is about $65billion. They are rising by $20 billion approximately next year.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Both?MR. TRUMAN. Both.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The only way that you factor theextent of recovery abroad into your domestic projection is through thetrade account?MR. TRUMAN. I'm not sure what else you would have in mind.-24-3/28-29/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'm not sure myself. I wasjust wondering.MR. TRUMAN. As far as GNP, that's largely it--well, theexchange rate too, and prices. Price is more generally ininternational trade prices.MR. ZEISEL. Well, the exchange rate too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are other people forecasting for thetrade balance?MR. TRUMAN. Most outside forecasts, although there are somein the range that we're in, tend to be in the $20 billion range forthe current account. I misspoke again, excuse me. The [trade]account forecasts tend to be in the $20 billion range. There are somethat are as high as ours.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to say--you can correctme if I'm wrong--that your depressed outlook for the current [account]has not been matched by developments so far. You were predicting abigger deficit than materialized in the fourth quarter and potentiallyin the first quarter?MR. TRUMAN. Well, the fourth quarter in fact was a $24billion current account deficit; we had forecast somewhat higher, Ithink, but not more than $2 or $3 billion dollars higher than that forthe fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was $34 billion in the fourth quarter?MR. TRUMAN. It was $24 billion in the fourth quarter of lastyear, at an annual rate. At one point we had forecast somewhathigher--I think $25 or $26 billion--for the fourth quarter of lastyear. The figure that came out was a bit lower. What came out was alittle higher than even we had forecast at the last meeting.MR. KEEHN. Could I ask about capital goods? I think youindicated that as we get further into recovery you expect animprovement. But with the level of capacity utilization where it iscurrently, when would you expect this to occur? Is it an '83 event orare you thinking about later?MR. ZEISEL. It's an '83 event. Breaking it down intoequipment versus construction--that's important because they arereally in different phases--we expect a recovery in purchases ofbusiness equipment to start very shortly, within the next quarterroughly. Looking back at past relationships between purchases ofbusiness equipment and production, there tends to be something like aone-quarter lag there. Typically, it starts with purchases of trucks,cars, office equipment--off-the-shelf kinds of items. But we have arather moderate turnaround occurring. On the nonresidentialconstruction end of things, we expect weakness to continue throughout'83 and then relative stability in '84.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do the figures show weakness currently incommercial building--not the new orders figures, the actualexpenditure figures? Are they coming down?3/28-29/83MR. ZEISEL. Well, there was a one-month jump in January--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Up?MR. ZEISEL. Up. But the vacancy rates on commercialbuildings have been rising and are quite high. And we feel thatthere's a fairly long digestion time involved, given--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no evidence yet in the actualspending figures of a downturn?MR. ZEISEL. Well, the January spending figure was up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it was up. Were there any previousmonths that were down appreciably?MR. ZEISEL. There was a flattening out, an indication thatthey were weakening. But there was not a sharp decline, no.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How would you change this forecast if thetax cut were rescinded or if there were another more or lessequivalent tax increase before the end of the year?MR. ZEISEL. I think the initial response might well be inconsumer expenditures, in terms of the effect on disposable income,[which might tend] to damp the growth somewhat. The longer-termresponse is, of course, a function of changes in attitudes and marketperceptions of the implications of these changes. I think they wouldbe positive over the longer run, but I do think the first responsewould be to slow down the recovery somewhat.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Stop the recovery?MR. ZEISEL. Well, that would depend on how large--MR. TRUMAN. [If the] third stage is dropped.MR. ZEISEL. Oh, the third stage alone. No, I don't thinkso. The third stage is not really that big. As it stands now we'retalking about something in the neighborhood of a net effect of about$30 billion at an annual rate for Q3 from that alone. I don't thinkthat would undermine the growth momentum overly.MS. TEETERS. The jobs bill that just passed will show upwhere--in state and local purchases?MR. ZEISEL. That would be mostly in the form of transfersand, therefore, will show up in state and local purchases.MS. TEETERS. And is the new increase in the gas tax devotedexclusively, as in the past, to highway construction?MR. ZEISEL. Well, that gets a bit obscure; I think there isa promise that a good deal of it is so dedicated, but I don't know ifall of it is.MR. PARTEE. Mass transit takes some of it.-26-3/28-29/83MR. ZEISEL. Mass transit, yes. It's not a big item in anyevent. Wait a minute. No, I'm sorry that's the bill that's[unintelligible]; the jobs bill is not so big.MS. TEETERS. But between the two of them it's $10 billion.MR. ZEISEL. The jobs bill is $4.6 billion over a 3-yearperiod: it reaches a maximum in 1984 of about $3 billion ofexpenditures.MR. BOEHNE. How sensitive is your forecast to interestrates? The underlying assumption, I gather, is about constant orperhaps a slightly downward drift in rates. How much of a backup inrates do you think this forecast could stand before the cumulativemomentum would be affected seriously?MR. ZEISEL. That's an interesting question. We don't have avery vigorous forecast and it's already in a sense damped byhistorically high interest rates, particularly in real terms, whateverthat means. Further movement in that direction could well have asignificant effect on attitudes; it depends on the degree, I think.It's one of those extremely difficult questions to answer becausebusiness attitudes are likely to be very sensitive at this time.MR. BOEHNE. Well, just an observation on that: Thereclearly is a recovery and attitudes are clearly improved, but it'smore because people have seen business go downhill or be completelystalled for so long that even a modest lift from the very deep holethat they're in makes them feel a good bit better. But I think thisincreased optimism is very sensitive to interest rates. It seems tome that it wouldn't take much of a backup before this optimism couldturn around rather sharply and even turn to some pessimism.MR. PARTEE. There's nothing mild, Ed, about the increase inresidential construction and the turnover of used properties, both ofwhich have increased much more sharply than we would have expected--[more than in] previous recoveries, I think the staff has said. Itmight be that that would be shut off by a point rise in interestrates. I don't know. But that has been a very strong recovery tothis point.MR. ROBERTS. Of course, that's financed by long-term money.The best way to hold that rate down is to avoid changing inflationaryexpectations and that gets to our discussion, I'm sure, of the rate ofincrease in money. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to go back, if I may, to apoint you were making about the July tax cut. An area I'm curiousabout is what is happening at the state and local level with regard totax increases. I keep reading that state after state is raising taxesbecause of deficits, so I guess a big deficit there is changing to alower deficit, which is going to take something out of the spendingstream. Have we any figures on that from the staff?MR. PRELL. I don't think we have. There is a cumulative taxincrease of note going on. It's probably several billion dollars thisyear in total, which doesn't loom large necessarily against the kindof tax cut that's going to occur at the federal level, but it issubstantial. Clearly, many state governments have run through all ofthe surplus funds they had and are having a drain in spending as well-27-3/28-29/83as an increase in their taxes, so that we're getting an unusually weakcyclical contribution from the state and local sector in thisforecast.MR. CORRIGAN. The state and local [situation] is even worsethan the numbers suggest because, for example, a large number ofstates don't even have their state pension plans anywhere near fullyfunded. They've been living off that to the tune of billions ofdollars. And at some point they not only have to raise taxes but oneway or another have to replenish those pension arrangements, and Iwould imagine for the 50 states as a group we're talking about anenormous sum of money there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any overall information aboutwhat is going on in state and local government employee compensationtrends?MR. ZEISEL. On wage rates do you mean?MR. MARTIN. Well, we have some information from the resultsof the surveys that we do for the setting of compensation levels inthe Federal Reserve Banks. In some of those surveys state and localcompensation is included.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's pretty fragmentary.MR. MARTIN. That's pretty fragmentary, yes.MR. ZEISEL. The BLS does collect state and local data--witha fair lag, but still the data are available. Unfortunately, I'm notreally familiar with what they've been showing recently.MR. MARTIN. Back on interest rates: I noted in that fairlynew survey of commercial bank pricing of their various deposits a 25basis point backing up in the rate on money market deposit accounts.Is that unexpected? Is there some particular factor that caused thatturnaround in the pricing of that instrument?MR. PRELL. This is news to me, I must confess. It couldsimply be sampling errors.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's this--a higher rate on money marketaccounts?MR. MARTIN. It's up 25 basis points.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I see that some [depository institutions]in New York are getting more aggressive again. They're paying 9.50percent.MR. MARTIN. Why is it a sampling error when it goes up andit's just good information when it goes down?MR. PRELL. A 25 basis point change might not be somethingsignificant in terms of the aggregate.3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it seems to be going up according tothe newspapers in New York. Is there any sense that it's going upelsewhere?MR. MARTIN. Yes, the national survey, which is a very largesample stratified by bank size, had a 25 basis point backup. That isthe reason I'm questioning it.MR. PRELL. Is this our survey?MR. MARTIN. No, the Money Market Monitor, or whatever thatnew commercial--MR. BOEHNE. It has it by sections of the country.MR. MARTIN. It has it by sections of the country. Itdoesn't look like very hard data but, anyway, it did go up.MR. MARTIN. You've seen that?MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I've seen it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has pretty good figures.MR. MARTIN. Yes, it's up 25 points.MR. PARTEE. It's a rather large sample, as a matter of fact.MR. MARTIN. It's a large sample.MR. STERNLIGHT. They're doing it keyed to something likewhat the money funds pay; that has crept up a bit as market rates havecome up.MR. BOYKIN. We're looking at 7-3/4 percent versus 7-1/4 or7-1/2 percent a couple of weeks ago. But it's not close to 10percent.MR. BOEHNE. For the money market accounts?MR. BOYKIN. Money market deposit accounts.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it's up a little.MR. ZEISEL. The question is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.]MR. PRELL. That would be less than market rates in general.MR. ZEISEL. Yes, rates in the market have been moving up.MR. BOYKIN. Either that or I'm in the wrong bank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who has a case they want to make fora markedly different business forecast?MR. CORRIGAN. I won't make the case, but---29-3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, wait minute. Mr Guffey was ahead ofyou.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I'm not sure I'm going to respond to that;I don't want to make a markedly different case. I just would like toobserve perhaps the obvious that has already been touched on. What wehave seen and have described as a recovery is largely driven by thetwo interest-sensitive sectors of our economy, autos and housing. Andto the extent that interest rates move up appreciably from this level,that quite likely could kill off the recovery. In other words, therecovery that's being projected is very fragile. I just note that oneof the comments made concerning the outlook was that [the staff]expects business spending on equipment and exports to increase tosustain this recovery, and each of those areas is as fragile or asuncertain as anything we can tie it to. I really think this is a veryfragile recovery. There's no question of recovery, but [in] autos andhousing it's the rundown of inventories that has made the numbers lookpretty good in the last 2 months or perhaps 3 months. That can goaway pretty quickly with any increase in rates--maybe even to thelevels that we're now experiencing. The reported increase in the fedfunds rate, for example, and the upward pressure that may exert--theprime could go up--could be very devastating in my view to thisrecovery.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. I'm not about to make the case myself but Iwill at least report that at our board of directors meeting last weekI think I can fairly say that our directors were more bullish thanthey have been at any point since I've been at the Bank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not a--SPEAKER(?). 2-1/2 years.MR. BLACK. It's been pretty bad the whole time you've beenthere.MR. CORRIGAN. Clearly, their comments [conveyed] atremendously different atmosphere. Some of that does reflect what Mr.Boehne spoke about--just the fact that it was so bad that if thingsbegin to look at all better it sounds a lot better than that. But Ithink housing has an awful lot to do with it. The thinness ofinventories in the retail sector in particular is something thatpeople cite, and to some extent there's a little glimmer of hope inthe agricultural sector because livestock prices are a little betterand people are feeling a lot better because of the PIC program, eventhough it's recognized that that's not going to mean much until welldown the road. The other thing that is more or less compatible withthat is that a significant body of my colleagues in my researchdepartment also take the view that the economy is in fact a lotstronger than some of the numbers now suggest at current interestrates. I think they pretty much take the view that if long-terminterest rates in particular were to go up at all, the fragility thatMr. Guffey speaks of could be manifested in a hurry. But in theframework of current long-term interest rates, a number of thosepeople are really quite bullish. I myself have not quite bought intoall of that yet, but I do think in the framework of roughly the-30-3/28-29/83current level of rates that the prospects for the economy performingalong the lines of the staff's forecast or maybe even a little aboveit are quite good. But, again, I certainly would agree that anynumber of things could unravel that in a hurry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. I don't know that I would want to argue that myown thinking is radically different from that of the staff's, but Ithink the time has come when we have to wonder whether or not thisrecovery might not be gathering more steam than we've realized up tothis point. I can make a case for a significantly higher rate ofincrease in GNP, I think, along lines like this. If we look back atthe past two quarters, in the fourth quarter to the first quarter wesee an increase of private final purchases on the order of 3-1/2percent at an annual rate--a little less in the first than in thefourth quarter--and this is just in the process of going intorecovery. That's what we are getting before we have the effects ofthe tax cut hitting in the second half of the year and before we havethe beginnings of a pickup in business fixed investment, which we allexpect to happen at some point or other. Now, the staff forecastdoesn't have a sustaining of the recent pace of advance in privatefinal purchases, partly because it's expected that we're going to geta big drop in net exports in real terms and also because residentialconstruction is not going to contribute as much as it has in therecent past. The staff may be right. But there is a tendency, Ithink, for final sales to gain momentum as a recovery proceeds; andthat could happen again.The second fact is that I'm very, very much uncertain aboutwhat we ought to be forecasting for inventory acceleration during thecourse of this year. When I talk to people out in the field they tellme: Boy, those shelves are just bare so that if you get a dollar'sworth of orders at the consumer level it just goes right back throughto an order for a manufactured good because there's nothing [on theshelf] to sell. In fact, if you look at the statistics, you'll findthat in real terms we've had the biggest drop absolutely ininventories in this recession than in any since 1949. And that tendsto confirm the bareness of the shelves argument that we hear fromqualitative comments. We don't have what I would consider a normativeratio of inventory investment to GNP in real terms until we get out toabout the end or the middle of 1984, when we get inventory investmentup to about 1 percent of GNP. It could happen sooner than that. Wecould easily get an increase of as much as 1 percentage point in realterms above what the staff is forecasting at present levels ofinterest rates for 1983. If that happened, the momentum is going tobuild still further. I don't know whether this is really going tohappen or not, but my guess would be--and we talked about this at theBoard meeting this morning--that the risks at this juncture are moreon the high side than they are on the low side of our staff forecast.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think it's a little too early tohave any convictions as to how strong this expansion is going to be.We have two sets of numbers, January and February. The Januarynumbers at face value looked very good, but probably the seasonalfactors made them look better than they were. The February numbers ingeneral were quite disappointing. If we're talking about triggeringorder books, they weren't triggered in February; the orders numbers in3/28-29/83February were really quite disappointing. Again, that may reflect thefact that the January numbers were inflated. But certainly, the rangeof numbers for February on retail sales, on personal income, and onnew orders would have to be viewed as on the disappointing side. Ithink we need another month of data to shake this out; I'd like to seea little more of that inadequate inventory phenomenon showing throughin the orders. It's not there yet.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that fragility is almostinherent in this kind of expansion and one should not be too surprisedto see that. The sectors that can move up at a time like thistypically are interest-sensitive; that is, housing and automobilestypically start up at this time since they've become very much amatter of interest rates. So, to find that those are the areas thathave been moving the economy more strongly than others is notsurprising. It doesn't seem to me to suggest that it is fragile inany sense other than that other previous expansions have been fragile.If we had all the other factors moving right now--if consumption weremoving forward on a broad base, if we weren't losing from exports, andif inventories were turning around strongly--we would have a verybooming situation and that wouldn't be conducive to sustainability.So I think as far as we've gone, with rather limited impulses, we'vedone quite well. We should be concerned about the possibility ofexcess [spending] as well as the possibility that it might weaken. Idon't think fragility is a particular warning at this time.MR. MORRIS. Certainly, Henry, in terms of the financialstructure, we have a greater fragility than we've ever had before.That is one area, and a very important area, where we have morevulnerability built into the system than we've had before.MR. GRAMLEY. Are you talking about the thrifts or theinternational situation?MR. MORRIS. I'm talking about the quality of debt, domesticand international. If we do abort this recovery, I think we would endup with financial strains of a sort that we would find very difficultto handle.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might just assert, on that point, that Idon't think the international strains are getting any less and theyare a little more disguised. They will get worse. Basically, thereare more countries unable to pay--I'm looking for a polite term. Andthe ones that have been attempting adjustment for some period of time--I think with the exception potentially of Mexico which has now beenhit by the oil situation--have not yet shown a turnaround. There isno confidence returning to that picture in a basic sense. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I always feel very uncomfortablewhen I make a forecast on anything. This whole Committee ought tofeel uncomfortable because I think if you look at our Humphrey-Hawkinstestimonies, most of the time the majority has been wrong. There isusually somebody who is right each time, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You managed to get right outside the rangea good part of the time.-32-3/28-29/83MR. BLACK. --the one who is right usually differs frommeeting to meeting.MR. PARTEE. That's the trouble.MR. BLACK. That's right. And that's why I feel veryuncomfortable. I hasten to add that that is why I have less and lesssympathy for discretionary monetary policy too, but that's anotherissue. But I'm very much in sympathy with the points that Lyle made;my guess would be that this is going to be front-end loaded a littlemore than the staff has projected. It does follow a deep recession,and historically deep recessions usually have been followed byrelatively fast recoveries. We've also put out a lot of liquidity inthe economy. It's also at this stage historically that most peoplehave underpredicted the amount of economic growth. And I think theswing toward optimism, though certainly it may well be fragile, hasbeen the most abrupt swing that I can remember. It may be becausepeople were so fearful it wouldn't come at all, but it seems to me tohave been more abrupt than it has been in the past. I thinkbusinesses are unusually lean now and if we do get any kind of pickup,profits ought to rise more rapidly than most people think and againought to help the outlook. So, my guess would be that growth is goingto be a little faster. Like Lyle, I think the error may be on theside of [the staff forecast] being slightly lower than what reallywill occur.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I can even report a better attitude on the partof the Chicago directors at our meeting about 10 days ago. They weremore positive in their outlook than they've been since I've beenthere, and it's really a very surprising change. A lot of it comesfrom the agricultural side through the PIC program, in which theparticipation is becoming very heavy. I think that has changed theattitude in the agricultural sector very dramatically.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A little inflation makes people feelbetter!MR. KEEHN. In fact, whereas our original guess was that thePIC program wouldn't have any effect [until] 1984, we now have thefeeling that we will see some effect from PIC this year. On thecautionary side, though, it may be darkest before the dawn but thepeople I talked to still say that the capital goods side is very, verysick and they don't see any near-term outlook for an improvement.That is why I asked the question about capital goods. On theinflation side, I have just a word of caution there: We are beginningto see increases in prices of some of the basic commodities like steeland nonferrous building materials. It's not so much that the pricesthemselves are going up, but the discounts that had been offered verybroadly as we were going through a difficult period are beginning tobe eliminated. So, I think we can expect to see some increase on theprice front as we get into this recovery.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.MR. PARTEE. I want to make a case for the staff forecast asa good working premise for the Committee. I think it's possible, as3/28-29/83Lyle suggests, that we could have a little stronger recovery, probablyled by housing. That could give us maybe a half point or even a pointmore in the real GNP increase, but it's still certainly well withinmanageable territory. But I also am impressed that it could be alittle weaker than the staff forecast because the financial fragilityis really pretty deep and it could affect our export numbers if infact the Latin Americans buy very little from us in the course of thisnext year. It also could affect, more adversely than the staff hasforecast, the commercial construction projection because I do thinkthere's a very serious overbuilding problem occurring, particularly inoffice buildings, but to some extent in shopping center andhotel/motel complexes and things of that sort too. Now, the thingabout office buildings and big commercial centers that they share incommon with foreign situations is that they involve an awful lot ofdebt; and in both cases an awful lot of the debt is held by banks. Itseems to me that we may have a very conservative lending attitude onthe part of financial institutions for more forthcoming deals for thenext year or so and that could hold back the recovery some. So, Icould see the outcome being below the staff projection by as much as apoint and I can see it being above the staff projection by as much asa point. Therefore, I think the staff projection is a good workingdocument.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much are our exports to Mexico downpercentage wise in the past year?MR. TRUMAN. Oh, it's more than 100 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It can't be down more than 100 percent.MR. TRUMAN. It depends on which number I use as a base.Exports to Mexico in the fourth quarter of last year were at an annualrate of $6.8 billion dollars and in the fourth quarter of 1981 theywere at an annual rate of $17.6 billion. So it's more than $10billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two-thirds.MR. TRUMAN. More than one-half.MR. PARTEE. That's a lot.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was talking to a Mexican centralbanker and I was beginning to think I didn't hear him correctly. Hesaid their exports in the first quarter were 15 percent of what theywere a year ago.MR. TRUMAN. That is possible, yes.MS. TEETERS. Exports or imports?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Imports. I'm sorry.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I began thinking afterwards that he hadsaid 50 but maybe he did say 15.MR. BLACK. Is that from us, Mr. Chairman, or all imports?-34-3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's their total imports, but they get abig--MR. TRUMAN. I was thinking that probably the right number is50 percent of the imports of a year ago. The first quarter a year agoour exports to Mexico were $15 billion. So, something on the order of$7-1/2 billion at annual rate is probably right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That says, though, that it went up from[the fourth quarter].MR. TRUMAN. Slightly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not possible, I wouldn't think.MR. TRUMAN. Well, the fourth quarter had October, November,and December in it. I'm almost surprised that they were in[unintelligible] in the fourth quarter of last year.SPEAKER(?). Financed?MR. TRUMAN. We financed $700 million in that quarter; halfof it would have been CCC-related in the fourth quarter of last year.MS. TEETERS. What about other South American countries, Ted?MR. TRUMAN. I don't have that with me here as such, but forother developing countries our exports dropped by $3 billion on thesame fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter basis.MR. CORRIGAN. How many billion?MR. TRUMAN. $3 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think any of them have tightenedup the way Mexico has in this time period. That may still lie aheadbut they haven't done it yet.MR. TRUMAN. Exports to Mexico were essentially financiallyconstrained; they weren't letting in anything in that period.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They weren't in the first quarter either.MR. TRUMAN. They probably were somewhat more in the firstquarter than they were in the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. I'm not surprised at the numerous positivecomments in the Redbook or those that we've been sharing with eachother. As far as the businessman's attitude is concerned, I think weneed to separate his or her little burst of optimism here from theprobabilities of their obtaining the results they're talking about.Partly their attitudes are those of survivors. And as survivorsthey're looking at ways to increase their market share over thecompetition and they have good probabilities of doing that. I thinkwe may be discounting a little in the forecast the shape of the curvethat we have reviewed with regard to profitability. The increase in3/28-29/83profitability projected a few quarters from now and for next year isvery great indeed and that, of course, not only affects the externalfinancing of the business sector but gets good old Keynesian animalspirits going again. And once the profits begin to come rolling inwith some modest recovery, with the middle management cutbacks and thelayoffs and so forth that have trimmed some of these organizationsdown, you get a positive effect on inventories, you finally get apositive effect on the computer-related or so-called tech kind ofpurchases in the equipment area. But I think we have to keep our eyeon the probability of these attitudes not materializing. In housing,I am at a point of eating my words. I was hopeful that the mortgagelending institutions of our world, particularly the thriftinstitutions, finally would have learned something and as the MMDAscame in they would not put virtually all of it out in fixed rate long-term mortgages. I eat those words. I admit being overly influencedby the representatives we have on the Thrift Institutions AdvisoryCouncil; those people aren't doing that, but it looks as if everybodyelse is. And it's a small advisory group.MR. PARTEE. I even wonder about them sometimes.MR. MARTIN. So here comes this flood of fixed rate long-termfunds. It meets the demand of the first time home buyers. They areinfluenced by an improvement in their tax position and are willing toundertake these obligations. The thrift institutions are not payingoff the Home Loan Banks, as we found out today. They've made realprogress; they've gone from $65 billion in debt there to $62 billion!Given the flood of funds coming in, they likewise have not paid offtheir friendly commercial bank. So, they're carrying that credit.They didn't do that with the money market deposit funds either. Onthe other hand, I separate the positive implications of home buyersfrom the probability that it will occur in the future. Namely, theseare people who despite the after tax implications of income tax[savings] are sensitive to the interest rate. These are small youngfamilies in which two people are working. They can wait if theinterest rates move up some; they'll simply postpone the purchase andwe could have a good deal of that impetus disappear. So, again, Iseparate the positive nature of profitability and equipment purchasesaround the corner from home-buying--in terms of the sensitivity theseareas have to the interest rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One aspect that Governor Martin did notmention, except by implication, is that unfortunately the savings andloans have gotten themselves more and more sensitive to changes ininterest rates on the liability side of the balance sheet and they areeven less in a position to take an increase in interest rates now thanthey were before.MR. MARTIN. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, we have revised our own forecastup just slightly. We tend to line up much as Governor Gramley and Mr.Black did. On balance, I rather like Governor Partee's position thatthe staff forecast presents a pretty good working document. We dohave developments in our District that are causing some concern--certainly the energy situation and the implication that has for our3/28-29/83banks down there. This past week most of our major bank holdingcompanies have been making their public announcements about decreasedearnings and increases in loan loss reserves. And unemployment pickedup in February from 8.2 to 8.8 percent, which by our standards atleast seems awfully high. In Houston, where nothing can go wrong,unemployment went from 9.1 up to 9.7 percent in February.MR. MARTIN. Those people are all from Michigan!MR. BOYKIN. That doesn't sound too high by nationalstandards, but if you remember it was just half that a year ago. Iwas told last week that in Houston there are 30 million square feet ofoffice space in commercial real estate construction that either iscompleted or is in the process of starting. I'm also told by one ofthe large developers that an estimated 65 percent of the office spacein Houston is energy-related in some way. So, with what is happeningin energy, that raises a question. We have an overbuilt situation inDallas for commercial office buildings. We just started a 70-storybuilding last week to cure that! The people in the energy businesswho feel that they're in it to stay, and we find fewer of those, saythat stability in price is probably more important than the actualprice level--that is, within a reasonable [range] of, say, somewherebetween $25 and $29 per barrel. They would not get overly upset if itjust stabilized, because [the instability] causes them difficulties indoing their planning. We know that the supervisory and regulatorygroups are quite concerned about energy portfolios. There are somespecial [examinations] going on, as I understand it, in the majorenergy-lending banks just to take a look at the energy portfolio. So,being that close to what is a drag [on the economy] tends to color mythinking somewhat. But we still have some positives in areas thathave already been mentioned, such as housing. On balance, for theeconomy as a whole I feel relatively optimistic that growth will besomewhere in the 4 to 5 percent range. That sounds reasonable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the [energy industry] forecast, can yoube more specific? Suppose the energy price stayed close to where itis now. Would the number of rigs hold up? Would you continue to getthe current amount of drilling?MR. BOYKIN. I don't think we would, Mr. Chairman. I wouldnot anticipate a great deal of added activity. There are thoseengaged in that business who say that we will probably see drillingpick up again in the latter half of the year. Some of it is for taxpurposes if for no other reason. I was talking to a pipe supplier tothe energy business who says he basically is not doing anything but intalking to the majors--and these are the people he supplies primarily--they tell him just to hold still and that come summer and on intothe rest of the year they have their budgets planned and they willspend that; he will get the orders. At that same meeting there was anindependent oil man who has a pretty big business and he said that isthe difference between the independents and the majors. Theindependents are not going to be going in.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a lot cheaper to drill now, isn't it?MR. BOYKIN. Oh, yes.3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It must be more cheap to drill than thereduction in the oil price.MR. BOYKIN. It is; it's a lot cheaper to drill. But alsothe price is lower and there are a lot of rigs laid over. There is aquestion of whether one wants to wear that rig out right now onrelatively cheap oil because some think that this may turn around nextyear. So, they're hedging their bet and figure they are better offkeeping the rig down rather than pulling it up and wearing it out.MS. TEETERS. It's cheaper to drill because the interestrates are down?MR. BOYKIN. Yes. The cost of labor and all of the costcomponents are substantially--MR. CORRIGAN. The cost of the rigs?MR. BOYKIN. Yes, you can get a rig at a really cheap price.I might even have one or two before too long!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you don't have one now, you soon will.Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. My next door neighbor is one of those independentswho is a millionaire a number of times over. He told me there hasnever been a better time to buy rigs and leases--that right now is thetime to get in. I always wondered--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is he buying them?MR. FORD. He's doing it.MR. BOYKIN. If I could just tack on, Bill, I got a reportfrom one of our major banks that they are seriously putting a grouptogether to bring up some REITs in the not too distant future.MR. FORD. What's that--a rig equity investment trust?MR. BOYKIN. Not in rigs, but in office buildings--theybelieve that there are some really good deals out there.MR. FORD. Mr. Chairman, on the general economic outlook thatwe've been talking about, I come down on the side of Lyle Gramley andPreston Martin. When you look at the major sectors of the economy,the only thing I see to worry about is the one that has been noted;export growth is likely to be weak for the reasons we're all aware of,namely, that the buyers abroad are financially strapped and can'tafford to buy. But if you take all the other sectors of the economy,in government spending, for example, the surge is just starting to hitin our part of the country and spending is going to come down likemanna from heaven as far as the military buildup and the other sectorsof government are concerned. It looks as if federal spending is juststarting to surge through as a stimulant to the economy. I agree thatthere will be a sharp inventory turnaround; there almost has to be.All of the businessmen I've talked with in our area are saying thatthe [inventory] pipelines are dry. The orders are starting to pick upin our area. It's also showing up, as was noted, in sensitive-38-3/28-29/83commodity prices; virtually everything except oil and precious metalsis surging. The BLS 22 commodity spot market index has been up 14weeks in a row. Scrap steel, lumber, aluminum, wheat, corn, soy bean,cattle, cotton--everything--is going up and going up fast, which is afurther indicator that the pipelines are rather dry as prices get bidup.The big thing that we have to watch for, though, which willdetermine which of these polar forecasts is right, is exactly what theconsumer does. When you look at the consumer's potential, theconsumer really hasn't hit the market at all and he's in excellentcondition to do it. The only thing that consumers are buying is newhomes; and there's a little more resale house business. We haven'tyet seen it feed through to the related industries in the consumerdurables sector other than autos. I think that's bound to come withthe employment picture brightening; the consumer's balance sheetcertainly allows it. Then there is the profits surge that allowsbusiness to finance the inventory buildup. So, when you go throughthe different sectors--and the internal arguments we have at theAtlanta Fed have been on how vigorous and how quickly the surge iscoming and so far I'm ahead--I think it's going to be a vigorousspring and summer for us. And I'm worried about what will happen atthe end of the year and early next year--whether it's sustainable,given what we're doing with the monetary aggregates while this deficitspending is going on. I'm worried that we'll have a vigorous recoveryand a drop through the floor about a year from now or maybe sooner.That's where I come out on it. I'm not worried about the next fewmonths. I think we're going to be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where does this drop through the floorcome from against that background?MR. FORD. I think what is going to happen is that when we doraise the rates, and I think we are going to raise the rates within ayear for the reasons others have given, we're going to put the economyback in the tank. And it will come when we finally pay for all themonetary expansion that has been going on. We are going to have topay for what we're doing now; we can't put off the day of reckoningforever. We can put it off for another 6 to 9 months and then we willpay. One way or another--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you mean we will pay?MR. FORD. We will pay when all this borrowing in the privatesector that has to come in order to continue the expansion much beyonda few months comes into conflict with government [borrowing]. Then weare going to have to blow the whistle on it. And when we do, we'regoing to drive up rates and put the economy back down.MR. PARTEE. You really do have a different pattern, Bill.MR. FORD. Yes, I see a vigorous recovery.MR. PARTEE. You have a pretty aggressive recovery and then aturn.MR. FORD. Another surge and then a drop-off.-39-3/28-29/83MR. ROBERTS(?). He has a boom/bust.MR. FORD. That's my forecast: boom/bust.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because private credit demands arecolliding with government credit demands?MR. FORD. Yes. So far it has been rather moderate as far asthe private sector tapping the market. But it has to come, don't youthink?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can see that very clearly. Idon't see the connection quite so clearly with the money supply. Itseems to me you said we'd avoid this by getting a much lower privatecredit expansion now.SPEAKER(?). Get if off now.SPEAKER(?). Have a lower economy now.MR. PARTEE. Have no boom.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't--MR. FORD. What I'm suggesting is that the thing to do is tothink in terms of moderating a boom now so that we don't have to comedown as heavily about 9 months to a year from now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. I have just a couple of comments. Our staffhas consistently been optimistic and is looking for about a 5 percentfourth-quarter real growth and we think that the first quarter isprobably running ahead of expectations in terms of the numbers thatwill come out. I went around to all my branches recently, as part ofan introductory thing, and I met with the boards and heard theirsummaries of what they thought about the economy. I would say inreference to what someone said earlier that they're not euphoric atall. If anything, it's a reluctant optimism; but there's definitelyunanimity of optimism. In the wood products area, for example, onefellow was cautioning about interpreting the February seasonallyadjusted number and yet he concluded that [business is] really boomingand prices are up 60 percent from the bottom. He said his lumberprices are still below his costs, but that with the sharply risingprices we had to look out in terms of what that would do to housing.But there was a reluctant optimism--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was lumber you said was up?MR. ROBERTS. Lumber was up 60 percent since October.MR. PARTEE. Lumber or some [wood] products?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The figures don't show that generally, butthey're up sharply; there's no question.MR. ROBERTS. This chap heads the-40-3/28-29/83and he said prices had really taken off and he was gettingsimilar reports from people on the West Coast.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have gone up sharply in price.MR. ROBERTS. My attitude is colored a little by the factthat I just contracted to buy a house in the weak St. Louis marketwhere I found the seller is very, very firm and the price is not weakat all. Housing is very strong, has a largeconsumer oriented company--shoes and recreational products and so on--and he said he's seeing expansion in unit sales across the countryfor the first time; the expansion is concealed a little by the lowerprices. But he really is doing better than when he had higher pricesand the units weren't moving. So, all in all--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now he can convince a few other people ofthat!MR. ROBERTS. I might add that his profits are up verysubstantially with this type of development, so it's veryconstructive. All in all, there is pretty solid and widespreadoptimism but nothing in terms of a soaring economy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is your staff projecting inregard to inflation?MR. ROBERTS. On inflation I believe we had 5 percent. Myown feeling is that we're probably overestimating inflation. With thegood control over compensation per manhour, the good productivityfigures, I think a low increase in prices is in the bag for '83. I'mmore concerned about '84 in terms of this sharp buildup in liquidity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have run through my list. Does anybodyelse want to say anything? I think at this stage we might as wellwait and begin with Mr. Axilrod first thing tomorrow morning. Howlong do you plan to talk, Mr. Axilrod? If people want to stay 5minutes and get this introduction tonight. I'm at your--MR. FORD. He said 10 minutes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you rather stay or go?MR. PARTEE. How about doing half of it?SPEAKER(?). Can't do it.MR. GRAMLEY. To facilitate discussion, I think it's betterif it is fresh in our minds.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. You'd rather have it fresh in yourminds than think about it. That shows you something, Mr. Axilrod.[Meeting recessed]-41-3/28-29/83March 29, 1983--Morning SessionMR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] given a lot of room. Whowould like to comment?MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.MR. RICE. I'd first like to compliment Steve on what I thinkwas an unusually clear analysis of the kinds of issues we face. Thepolicy preference course today seems to depend more than usually onhow one sees the current performance of the economy and how one seesthe economy developing in the near term. If one sees the economy asfragile and the economic recovery as vulnerable and much weaker thanusual--and, of course, sees the inflation rate very low and,therefore, not a major concern--one obviously then would be pushed inthe direction of alternative A and perhaps even a further relaxation.On the other hand, if one sees that the economy is strengtheningrapidly and indeed appears to have a boom momentum and there is astrong fear of the uncertainties of inflation, then obviously onemight be pushed in the direction of alternative C or even morerestraint. I would agree with Governor Partee's statement yesterdayin support of the staff analysis and the staff forecast, which hefound to be in the middle. And I would agree when he says that overthe rest of the year the real GNP could come in 1 percent higher or 1percent lower. But the staff forecast is in the middle.I would agree also with Frank Morris when he says that weneed more data and a little more time before we can be confident aboutthe nature of this recovery. Readily accepting that inventories arelean, that shelves are bare, and that defense spending is strong andrising, it seems to me that one must make some heroic assumptions withregard to consumer expenditures and consumers' willingness to take ondebt in large quantities, given the level of real interest rates.Also [it takes] some expansive assumptions with respect to residentialconstruction in order to see that the economy is recovering stronglyand in danger of causing a boom. I think the worry that the economyis strengthening too quickly would ignore what is best [not]minimized. There are drags on the economy at the present time: thedrag effects of capital spending and the probable composition of thatspending when it turns around and begins to expand, and the drageffects of state and local expenditures as well. While I would agree,as I said, that we need more time and more data to feel confidentabout the nature of the recovery, at this point I'm persuaded that theeconomy still needs nurturing and at the very least does not need anyrestraining influence resulting from a more restrictive monetarypolicy. Now, I would agree that there may have been considerablestimulation in the sense that the underlying rate of growth of theaggregates may well have been very strong. But I think that we haveto see stimulation in relative terms, and we have to see thatstimulation in a situation when real interest rates are negative [and]not quite as sensitive as stimulation in the context of highlypositive real rates of interest. So, I would come out in favor of aposition somewhat between alternative A and alternative B--that is,somewhat of a holding position until the economic picture becomes3/28-29/83clear. And instead of sending up interest rates, I would tend to errslightly on the side of a downward [nudge]. I think that's what theoutlook calls for at the present time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that a strong case can bemade for continuing with a money market directive for the time being.I'm not sure but that it'd be premature to return to targeting even M2and M3 in the short run of the intermeeting period. With a moneymarket directive we could implement an extremely modest tightening,which I think would be indicated under the situation for reasonsEmmett talked about; I doubt that we would respond in a mechanisticway to the short-run targets. So, therefore, we could achieve thesame substantive effect anyway with a money market directive. I'm notsaying that there won't be a point when we would want to return totargeting the aggregates, but at the moment I have an instinct, and Ithink that's all I can actually call it, that a strong case could bemade that it's somewhat premature to do so. It could put us back inthat situation we were in earlier. I'm a little concerned about themarket impression of our going in that direction. Paul made onecasual remark in one sentence in answering a question about Ml growth,namely that it was looking strong, and the market very stronglyoverreacted and people were looking at Ml for quite a few weeks. Ifthey see us now moving back to monetary aggregates targeting, then Ithink they might draw more conclusions from that than would bejustified. I don't think that they would recognize the heavy degreeof judgmental decision components that I assume will go into ourpolicy moves. Even though it may make some sense to target M2 and M3--although I think M3 would be more reliable for the next period andwe might consider just targeting M3 for this short period while we'restill seeing the substantial movement of funds going on--I still thinka case can be made for a money market directive being continued.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.MR. WALLICH. I think that Steve has posed the issue verycorrectly. We have the evidence of a very strong monetary expansion.On the other side is a high real interest rate. Which of the two iswhat really drives the economy? Now, if I were to follow through themonetary implications of the recent monetary upsurge, I would have tosay that the monetarist view is that half a year later the real sectorwould begin to move strongly. If that were to be the case, then we'dsee something stirring now and certainly have very strong second andthird quarters, which we don't seem to expect, and a couple of yearslater prices would begin to expand. This is an empirical finding.There is no logical reason why that should happen unless over twoyears we reach a level of unemployment at which prices do begin toreact to a continued monetary expansion. So, the analysis of whatthis bulge in the money supply is likely to do does not seem to me tobe very plausible at the present time. We don't see the real sectoreffect before us now. And the price effect farther down the roadwould occur, it seems to me, if by that time unemployment had comedown to an inflationary level. But that is not very likely, even overtwo years. So the bulge in the money supply to me seems to be lesspersuasive as a predictor of what is going to happen than is the levelof real interest rates. The level of real interest rates does seem tobe high. It may not be as high as present indexes indicate. I think-43-3/28-29/83people like to think of long-term inflation as well above 5 percent,maybe 6 or maybe 7 percent. That seems to be the findings of theBache-Prudential survey. So, real rates may not be as high as theyseem on the basis of present indexes, but they are still substantial.And that, I think, is what dominates the situation and is giving usprobably a moderate recovery.Why it is that we're experiencing these great increases inthe aggregates is something I don't understand. [I don't know] whythe model predicts so differently what shifts may be taking place.But it doesn't seem to me to be the kind of thing that is likely togenerate the usual future consequences of high money growth. So, Idon't see an immediate need to bring down the growth of the aggregatessharply to within their ranges. On the other hand, I like the idea ofgoing back to a money supply target even though I recognize we can doexactly the same thing with an interest rate target. We can have amoney supply target if we qualify the money supply target adequately.The way the [staff's draft wording] is formulated in the squarebrackets does seem to qualify the money supply targets in a verycomplete form. That is to say: If we undershoot, resist that; if weovershoot, let it run. One could not be more accommodative than Iinterpret that formulation. But I would prefer going back to theaggregates because I feel very uneasy with interest rate pegging juston general principles. It has been an unfortunate thing in the past.Tony may have confidence that we can shift gears in a timely way--andI take it that that's your ultimate intention--but interest ratetargeting has had a bad history. It will not look good in the recordand is I think in the long run surely inflationary. So, I'd ratherget away from it as soon as I can.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] I'm not sure. At leastyou can make a plausible explanation, which Steve touched upon, as towhat is going on in the broader aggregates. I'm not sure you can inthe narrow ones. But it's a fairly straightforward story, if Iunderstand it and if the figures are right, which they may not be. Ifthe credit figure is as low as the estimators now think it is, andthat's subject to considerable uncertainty, we have no great creditexpansion: this figure is about in line with nominal GNP, which iswhat one would expect.MR. AXILROD. It seems to be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we have is a lot more intermediationthrough depository institutions when they are aggressively payinghigher rates relative to credit market instruments, which is I guesswhat one would expect of that. The amount of deposit growth amongindividuals is very large in the first quarter and the amount ofcredit market instrument growth is very small relative to what it hasbeen; that's consistent at least with different pricing. Now, thatdoesn't explain Ml, but it's a reasonably consistent story for M2 andM3, to the extent that M3 is high at all.MR. AXILROD. For the depository institutions, we don't putthe money funds in there, so--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.-44-3/28-29/83MR. PARTEE. Well, I think you put the right slant on it justnow, Paul. It's a situation where the broader the aggregate the lessegregious the situation looks; that's the result. But apparentlytotal bank credit is well within--in fact, slightly below--the rangewe've specified and well within expectations or even on the weak sideso far, if the figures are at all right. Growth of M3 shown here onpage 2 of the Bluebook for the fourth to the first quarter is 9.8percent; for the fourth quarter to March it is 9.7 percent. And[that's about] the way it has been running for some considerableperiod of time. M2 is very large because of the shifts to MMDAsprincipally, I think, but there could be a little more underlyingstrength in there. M1 is impossible to explain. Ml is justextraordinarily strong and has been for a considerable amount of time.And rather than trailing off, it got stronger in February and March.That's the one, of course, that the market is beginning to look at,even though we haven't targeted it as one of our principal variables.And that's the one that gives us all kinds of difficulty. I don'tknow; it may be that one component after all now pays 5-1/4 percent--the NOW accounts. That's about 3 points below the market but 3 pointson an after-tax basis is not much and might lead people to keep excessliquidity in NOW accounts. The other component, Super NOWs, ispresumably right on the market if one allows for the cost of handlingthe transactions activity in an account. And there is no reason atall, assuming that you have a reasonable deal and need some money fortransactions, not to keep your money there rather than in the market.Perhaps that's much of the explanation. I might remind the Committeethat this is also a very volatile series and that we sometimes haveperiods of very large increases and then we have periods of smallincreases or declines. It may be that we're getting here some kind ofa bump in this and that it subsequently will have a low rate ofgrowth. In fact, I'm inclined to think that's what is going tohappen. So, I guess I agree with Emmett: I don't see anything in theeconomy nor in the credit picture nor in the inflation picture to leadone to say that we need to react with great alarm because of theseaggregates. And, therefore, we should not do so. I don't think it'sa time to return [to the old operating technique]. I don't quiteunderstand this discussion of money market versus aggregates. Afterall, we do target the aggregates. If we stop targeting them, we'vegot to tell Congress we are going to stop targeting them.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We didn't target them at the lastmeeting in terms of the short-run targeting.MR. PARTEE. Yes, but we specified target rates of growth forM2 and M3, bank credit and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only indirectly in the last [directive].MR. PARTEE. I don't think we should say we're going to stoptargeting these things. On the other hand, I don't agree with Henrythat we ought to run our policy on the basis of a presumed pathrelative to targets. I think we ought to continue to do about whatwe've been doing because I don't think, Henry, that we should changeback to proximate targeting on the aggregates when we still have thisinexplicable decline in velocity. It seems to me that as soon as wecan see something in terms of a move to a more normative relationship,then we ought to return strictly to monetary targeting, but not now.We have no more reason now than we had last time or in the fourth3/28-29/83quarter, since we're still getting sizable declines in velocity by allevidence. I don't think that we have to go back to the nonborrowedreserve path targeting that we had before; rather we ought to staywith the presumption of a net reserve--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me try to develop the semantics--MR. PARTEE. No, I got a little confused there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --in an acceptable manner. We have twoalternatives here. There obviously are more alternatives, but we havetwo in front of us, which some of the comments have been directed to.I don't think the first alternative has no targets in it but they aredepressed a bit. It says "paths implied by the long-term ranges;" ithas some coloration of a short-term mechanistic following of thetargets, I think. But the only reference to targeting is to thelonger-range paths. The second one is set out in more traditionalquarterly targets. But I don't read that as necessarily implying asmuch as you were suggesting, Chuck, that it is necessarily returningto the operating technique [of recent years]. And I'm not sure Henrywas suggesting that.MR. WALLICH. That's right. We have flexibility.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think these do reflect to some extentdifferent degrees of emphasis, but I--MR. PARTEE. Well, I misunderstood Henry. I wanted to argueagainst returning to the operating technique.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a substantive issue. But Idon't read alternative II as necessarily implying that. Nor doesalternative I imply that we don't look at the targets at all.MR. PARTEE. I see. Well, I come out that we ought to holdabout where we are again for a period, until we can get some ofFrank's new numbers and get some sense of what is occurring andperhaps understand the aggregates a little better than we do now. So,I don't feel that because of market sensitivity we are justified inpushing rates down. I think that would cause considerable alarm atthis point. Nor do I think we ought to return to the old operatingtechnique. I guess that's about alternative B.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm anxious to get to Mr. Morris' newnumbers. I don't know what they are.MR. PARTEE. I meant new monthly numbers. He said we didn'thave enough information yet to know where the economy is.MR. RICE. The numbers that will come out next month.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, okay. I thought I was missingsomething again! Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, let me start by making a coupleof observations about Ml, because I do think in the eyes of thefinancial markets that Ml is the aggregate that is causing the mostproblems in terms of expectations right now. We've done a little look-46-3/28-29/83behind some of the numbers and I must say it leads me to the view thatthe shifting phenomenon as it relates to Super NOW accounts inparticular is having an impact that I think at this point clearlyworks in the direction of overstating Ml. We looked at a sample ofabout 20 banks outside of the Twin Cities in terms of what is going onwith Super NOW accounts, and it's rather revealing because we findthat the average balance in household Super NOW accounts runs in therange of $15,000 to $20,000, which is 3 or 4 times the balance inconventional NOW accounts. In addition, we have found a number ofinstances that involve very, very sizable Super NOW account balances--balances associated with institutions, state and local governments,hospitals, and so on. This is a very limited sample, of course, butin some cases we have seen average balances in individual institutionsas high as several hundred thousand dollars in Super NOW accounts.And we're led to believe from some limited discussions that thosebalances, in particular, were not M1 balances before. Both of thosephenomena, to the extent that they represent anything close to apattern--and obviously I can't draw that conclusion from 20 banks--do suggest to me that the measured growth of Ml may be more affectedthan perhaps we've been thinking. I'm not saying this is rightanalytically, but if you assume that the difference in the averagebalance size in the Super NOW household account as opposed to aconventional NOW account, is a proxy for the additional savingscomponent that's reflected in these NOW accounts and you make any kindof adjustment for the measured growth rate in M1 over the firstquarter for that, it's not very hard to find yourself looking at asituation where shift-adjusted growth in M1 is in fact within theranges that we're talking about for the year. But again, that ishighly speculative and based on a very limited sample. In any event,I am persuaded from this limited exercise that we may have more of aproblem in terms of what Ml is really doing than perhaps we haverecognized up until now. Obviously, to the extent that is right, itcould have quite a bearing in terms of market psychology itself.Just one other quick point on money: I mentioned yesterdayin the context of some of our directors' comments about the economybeing pretty strong that one of the very interesting things that theyreported was a tremendous increase in the use of currency forfinancing retail transactions in size--not toothpaste transactions,but fairly sizable transactions being paid for with the currency ofthe realm. Surprisingly, one person brought it up and several othersimmediately said that they--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These were bankers?MR. PARTEE. The trade people?MR. CORRIGAN. It was both bankers and trade people, as Irecall. But it was interesting because once one person mentioned itseveral others chimed right in and said that they had seen exactly thesame thing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did they have an explanation for that?MR. CORRIGAN. Nope.MS. TEETERS. Currency or checks, Jerry?-47-3/28-29/83MR. CORRIGAN. Currency.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interject here, for anybodywho has not been observing the figures, that we have three months in arow of very high currency growth figures. I think if you go back 20years you can't find another three months like this. It seems to bequite general and nobody has an explanation.MR. CORRIGAN. I was really astonished by these comments. AsI said, they were seeing currency being used to pay for retailtransactions of size. Again, I'm not talking about a tube oftoothpaste or a can of peas.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Have we ever gotten down how muchcurrency is going to Latin American countries?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've looked to see whether there isanything unusual for which we have any specific evidence. They tellme we have no evidence. Now, that doesn't tell us how many LatinAmericans may be holding money in the United States in a safe depositvault, but we haven't any evidence of it flowing in. Maybe it is, butwe have no evidence. It's a very surprising development. I don'tknow why it would go in that direction; I can understand LatinAmericans buying dollars, but we haven't any specific evidence ofthat. I don't know why they should be doing what Mr. Corrigan says.All I know is that the [currency growth] figures show a big bulge.MR. RICE. Maybe the recovery in the underground economy isstronger than--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A very radical difference.MR. GRAMLEY. That won't even show up in Frank's statistics.MR. FORD. Just thinking about it in terms of a priori logic,with real interest rates coming down, I don't see that the cost ofholding cash has changed that much in favor of using more cash. Sothat wouldn't be a [reason].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's not low relative to what it hasbeen in the past when currency wasn't going up this rapidly.MR. FORD. One thing we have noticed in Miami is the cashflowing into the Miami branch. We had a big surplus of cash flowingin versus payouts, on the order of a $6 billion differential in '81.I forget [the exact amount]--I wish I had brought the figures--but Idid notice in reviewing the [more recent] Miami currency report thatwe're getting a slower inflow and Miami is less of a net cashgenerator for our big branch down there. Paul, one possibleexplanation would be that Venezuela, for example, has just put onexchange controls. France is putting on limits as to how much cashone can carry out and Mexico is putting on limits. I'm just thinkingaloud: Could it be that to the extent that dollars show up in theseeconomies through the underground economy, or however they used toremit them back when there was no limit on carrying money in and outof Venezuela, they're stashing more cash down there?3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is conceivable. But we don'tfind any evidence of real cash shipments down there. You would thinkit might be tied in with this international financial and economicdisturbance, but we just can't find direct evidence for it.MR. FORD. Yes, but if you buy the fact that the cash hasbeen flowing that way--for example, into Columbia and Venezuela as aresult of the black market--the cash was going in and then it wouldcome back and end up in our banks and end up in the Miami branch.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be. I don't say you're wrong; Ijust don't know how to find it directly. That kind of explanationsounds more plausible to me than Mr. Corrigan's, but the other thingis that it seems to be happening all over the country. You read thatFederal Reserve notes in all the Federal Reserve Banks are going up.It's a strange phenomenon and I don't know how to approach findingmore information. Just in line with Mr. Corrigan's earlier comments,I think it's worth scratching our heads harder and expending someresources in trying to work on what's going on in Ml in general interms of behavior patterns, particularly Super NOWs.MR. MORRIS. One idea we had--I don't know that it has anymerit or not--is that with the new discounts for cash payment ingasoline stations people are having a tendency to pay in cash ratherthan using a credit card and may be carrying higher balances than theyused to in order to get the discount.MS. TEETERS. Frank, I have a son who works in a gas station.They net between $20 and $40 a day because people don't pick up theircash discount.MR. PARTEE. You mean they charge it still?MS. TEETERS. They are charged the credit price and payingcash and [the attendants] have to figure out what the discount is, andpeople don't wait to get it.MR. GUFFEY. I don't know what the credit card growth is, butanother possible explanation is that the credit card companies all arecharging on a day-of-purchase basis an interest rate something between18 and 22 percent: that makes the cost of holding cash much less atthese current interest rates.MR. CORRIGAN. If you look at it that way, using cash--MR. GUFFEY. You're just substituting cash for credit cardpurchasing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not going to resolve it at thetable this morning, but I think we ought to devote some furtherimagination to trying to figure out what is going on there. But Idon't think you were finished, Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. On policy itself, for reasons that havealready been stated, I would come out somewhere along the lines ofalternative B in the Bluebook. I do have a preference for thealternative II language in the directive as well, for the reasons-49-3/28-29/83cited by both Governor Partee and Governor Wallich. I think they weresaying the same thing; if they were. I agree with both of them.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck was saying stay with theexisting language.MR. PARTEE. I thought I was a little closer to Tony,actually, than to Henry.MR. GRAMLEY. Are you talking about alternative I or II?MR. CORRIGAN. I'm talking about alternative B in thedirective language.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, but I mean in terms of alternative[wording].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're talking about directive II?MR. BLACK. Alternative II, I think.MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, right. Well, in the Bluebook it'salternatives I and II and in the draft that was handed out it'salternatives A and B. I'm talking about the second one. The case forstaying more or less where we are in policy both tactically andoperationally makes a lot of sense to me. The only other point Iwould add is that, looking out from where we are, it really doesstrike me that we're approaching a situation where analytically eachof these money supply measures is just a horse of a totally differentcolor. I must say I am not at all sure what that is going to mean forthe evolution of monetary policy over a long period of time both interms of operating procedures, definitions, and all the rest. I thinkthe day may be at hand when the Committee and the staff have to startto explore some of these questions on a more fundamental basis becausethe point will come when we're going to have to have a better mousetrap. And I just don't know what it's going to be at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we continue to be concerned aboutthe growth of Ml. It seems clear to us that the reported growth hasnot been inflated. Jerry raised some interesting points. If we lookat the money market deposit accounts, in our analysis that provides abig offset, which suggests the shift-adjusted figure is really bigger.And Steve's group has suggested that it's probably largely unaffected,which is probably the most reasonable of all because I'm sure they'velooked at it much more extensively than the rest of us have. If therehas been this upward shift in the demand for money, it seems likely tome that we've pretty well accommodated, if not more than accommodated,the overshoots that we've had. I continue to have a lot of difficultyin understanding why we're placing our main emphasis on M2, which isthe aggregate that seems to be most distorted by these new accountsand one over which we have very little control while Ml in contrast isnow generally thought to be the one least affected. And it's the onethat's most controllable. All the empirical studies to me suggestthat Ml has the best past record for predicting inflation and nominalGNP. Of course, that may change; it certainly is a differentinstrument now. But my feeling would be that the burden of proof3/28-29/83ought to be on those who think it's going to change that much, thoughI realize it certainly can.So, with these points in mind, I feel very strongly that weought to move back toward the old operating procedures, as far as wecan persuade the Committee to do so, that we were using before lastOctober. And in particular, I think we ought to allow the borrowedreserve target and the federal funds rate to vary in reaction to anyovershoots or undershoots above or below the stated path that we have.Now, it might well cause the federal funds rate to rise a little inthe short run, but I think it's unlikely that a moderate increase ofthat sort would seriously undermine the recovery since it seems to meto be pretty firmly [entrenched]. The real issue, as I see it, isthat if we fail to act now, we may have to take a lot stronger actionlater when business confidence and the bond markets may be a lotweaker. And they may be weaker because I think we'll have a revivalof the inflationary expectations--even more so than we have now. So,I lean toward the C alternative and, for obvious reasons, prefer thelanguage of alternative II as shown in the Bluebook and alternative Bas shown in the handout. I would like to eliminate the wording inthat first bracket there; I think that's really unnecessary. And,obviously, I would like equal if not more importance attached to M1.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, we're getting someindications of a divergence of views among the Committee members as towhere the economy is going, and I think that's understandable. Thisis, after all, a recovery that's only just beginning. The evidence onwhere we're going is still fragmentary. And each of us, I think,tends to seize upon a particular number that tends to support his ownview. Not by way of singling out Frank, but Frank for examplementioned that durable goods orders had fallen in February and thatwas disappointing. I could come back and say, yes, now we only have a34 percent annual rate of rise in durable goods orders from the fourthquarter to February. You can take either side of this issue and makesomething of it if you want. I think we ought to recognize that thereare a lot of uncertainties and that means to me among other thingsthat we ought to be cautious. Whatever we do we don't want to go backto a situation in which inadvertently we either let interest ratesdrop a ton or increase a ton. If they move in either direction, we'relikely to find ourselves far from where we want to.The second thing I want to say is that I agree entirely withJerry Corrigan, not just on Ml, but on the Ms generally. I just don'tknow what they mean. Now, it is true that M1 in the past has provento be our faithful friend--more predictable in terms of itsrelationship with GNP and maybe more controllable. I also would wantto remind everybody that since the fourth quarter of 1981 the growthof M1 has just baffled us. We've had a movement of velocity we do notunderstand. In mid to late 1981 and early in 1982 I think we reactedin an overly restrictive direction to the growth of OCDs. We got aneconomy that was a lot sicker in 1982 as a consequence thereof. Tosay that somehow these recent increases in Ml. despite five quartersof very, very puzzling velocity, are going to generate inflation rightaround the corner is a very, very dangerous line of thinking. For themoment, I think we ought to try to look at other things. I agree withBob that we need to start positioning ourselves for where we want to-51-3/28-29/83be in the future. I have come to the conclusion that real interestrates may well need to be moved up to keep this recovery fromstrengthening [too much]. I'm very much impressed by the fact thatthe cost of capital, if you take into account the rise of stockprices, has dropped a lot. And we've added a half a trillion dollarsof wealth. Now, this affects consumption spending, through the costof capital, as well as the outlook for business fixed investment. ButI would want to proceed very slowly and very gradually. I'm inclined,therefore, to think that we ought to go somewhere between "B" and "C."I'm not quite sure what I want by way of initial borrowing, but Iwouldn't mind at all if the federal funds rate were nudged up to 9percent or maybe a little over. As to the alternatives, I don'treally care whether we go with I or II. I'd feel a bit morecomfortable if we begin moving back in the direction of somethingother than a strict money market directive. But I can go with eitherone of those.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I guess I will counterpoint Lyle. I think itwould be a disaster for interest rates to go up. We are at 68-1/2percent capacity utilization and we have 10.4 percent unemployment.We have just the beginnings--at most three months--of signs ofrecovery. If we abort it, we will have major problems not only interms of what it will do to the economy because rising interest ratescan only force capacity utilization lower and the unemployment ratehigher--I think the economic consequences of starting to tighten fromthat particular position are too severe--but I think the politicalconsequences are even worse. If you look at the structure of both ourdomestic and international institutions, again, rising interest ratescould be very difficult to cope with and could only exacerbateproblems that are out there. I've noticed that we have eleveninstitutions on extended borrowing. That's the highest number that Iremember seeing; it may have been higher at other times.MR. PARTEE. They are all banks too, aren't they?MS. TEETERS. Yes, they are all banks. We're going toincrease the strains in the economy by increasing interest rates.And, if anything, I think we ought to be aiming to lower them. Infact, I am very much against this. If snugging went on--however thatterm got into the public press--I am opposed to it. I think therates, if anything, should have been drifting lower and not higherover the intermeeting period. And [the funds rate] certainly shouldnot have been above the discount rate. I also am cautious. I wantmore information. We're running on highly seasonally adjusted numbersat this point and sometimes [the final numbers] don't turn out thatway. I think we do have a backlog in housing and we're probablycatching up on it. But we could destroy any recovery in housing ifthe mortgage rate goes up above 13 percent again. So, I would be withEmmett. I would like to see the [funds] rate come back down to atleast 8-1/2 percent and, if anything, fluctuate between 8 and 8-1/2percent rather than between 8-1/2 and 9 percent. The real interestrate is extraordinarily high. And I don't think that we can get asustained recovery, particularly with the high interest rates thatwe're dealing with at the present time. On the other hand, I realizethat there is still a booming federal deficit out there. And I thinkthere is some movement in Congress to do something about it. But if-52-3/28-29/83we give up too soon, they won't do it. So, I would like to wait formore information. I certainly am opposed to any increase in rates andwould like to see them return to where they were at the time of thelast meeting. I would go for "A" or "B" and I don't think thelanguage makes a lot of difference. If I had to be pushed one way orthe other, I'd go for alternative I, but I don't think that's whatwe're operating on, frankly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.MS. HORN. I would like eventually to get back to targetingthe aggregates and to the previous operating procedures. The way I'dlike to do that is in some long-run sense--saying that by year-endwe'd like to be at such and such a point relative to the ranges. AndI'd like to be able to say that with regard to M1 particularly becauseof its controllability and its historic relationship with GNP. I'muncomfortable with the rate of growth in M1. I am interested inpursuing your analysis further, Jerry, but with the information I hadcoming into the meeting I am uncomfortable with the growth rates inM1. However, two problems I see as being very severe at this meetingare: (1) the velocity problems of Ml; and (2) the great uncertaintiesin the economic outlook. I agree with the staff forecast on theeconomy but I see a lot of downside risks. Of course, in the FourthFederal Reserve District we continue to have pretty dreary reports.So, I'm not ready to argue today for a return to the operatingtechniques that were previously used. I come out for alternative Bbecause of the tremendous uncertainties. I come out for directivelanguage II because I think it's one step toward returning at what Ihope would be an early date to the old operating procedures or to somemodification of the operating procedures. That would cause, perhaps,a slower adjustment to the long-run paths, but I do see that as verydefinitely the direction that we need to go and hopefully will be ableto go sooner rather than later. I'd like to end with a question toPeter, if I might, with regard to the term structure of interestrates. Could you just elaborate on the remarks you made in a coupleof sentences yesterday about short rates versus long rates and soforth? Could you elaborate on how you feel the market might react to,say, a slight increase in the fed funds rate?MR. STERNLIGHT. What I said yesterday, President Horn, isthat I sense a great feeling of uncertainty in the market. As to whatkind of reaction there would be, on some occasions I've gotten thesense that the intermediate and longer end of the market would takequite comfortably--in some cases even welcome--a firming in shortrates as evidence that the Fed was still actively concerned withinflation and wanting to put a lid on monetary growth. But there alsohave been other occasions when the whole market has reacted. LastFriday when Kaufman's report came out--and maybe it was a littleexaggerated when it hit the ticker--the whole rate structure moved abit, both short and long rates. In the preceding week there had beena rather different picture, with short rates edging up but nothing atall happening on the longer rates. I think there was a sense amongsome people who took a somewhat longer, broader view that the highershort rates would not have to impact, even temporarily, on the longerend. So, I'm left in a bit of a quandary on just how the market isreacting.-53-3/28-29/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Isn't there some basis forreconciling the two different reactions in terms of the fact thatKaufman was talking about a very substantial move in short-term rateswhereas the earlier impression in the market was that it was just whatthey called a snugging up--20 to 30 basis points? I think that mayaccount for part of the difference in the reaction in the long end ofthe markets.MR. STERNLIGHT. That could be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I certainly am in agreement that the recovery isin place but I tend to be much more on the cautious side than otherpeople as to just how strong a literal recovery we have. It seems tome that so far the growth has been entirely on the interest sensitiveside of the economy and so far it has been uneven. The capital goodssector continues to be very weak and, therefore, at this point I thinkwe just couldn't run the risk of having rates go up significantly. Bythat I mean that I think the upper end of the fed funds range inalternative C would be unacceptably high. I think we can continue tosustain the recovery if we have fed funds broadly in the area of wherethey are now, in the 8-1/2 to 8-3/4 percent area or something likethat. On the other side, I do think there's an awful lot of noise,and I'm suitably confused by the level of noise in the aggregatenumbers. But there is rather compelling evidence that we have beenthrough a period of pretty rapid expansion and I think we have tobegin to set the stage to react to that at some point lest we let itget out of control. So, I think we ought to become a little moredirected in our language as to what we're going to do. I would be infavor of alternative II. Having said that, though, with regard to thedirective under alternative II, I'd leave in both parentheticalexpressions. I would be in favor of [the specifications of]alternative B, but I would tend to let the initial borrowing level goup to, say, $300 million, or broadly about where it is now. Thatseems to me to be an acceptable course given the circumstances.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It probably will notcome as any surprise that I would join those who would not want to seeinterest rates rise any further. For clarity purposes, because of thestatement I made yesterday, I would agree generally with the staff'sforecast. Then turning to the percentage chance that it's right orwrong, I think the risk is on the down side rather than on the upside. That's particularly true in view of the experience we've hadwith two recessions in the last 3 years. I think we would be taking avery great risk if we [slow] this recovery down so that thepsychological impact on the public is such as to perhaps push us intoanother recession. So, I think the risk is on the down side. Thus, Iwould opt for a policy that would ensure that we would not increaseinterest rates above the present level. Just as a guide, I wouldthink that anything in the range of 9 percent or over in the federalfunds rate increases that risk very measurably and we should not takethat risk. I should also say that if you believe in the staff'sforecast in the Bluebook, for those who are interested in returning tothe targeted ranges of the aggregates that were established for theyear as a whole, you will find that alternative B would return both M2-54-3/28-29/83and M3 to within those ranges by midyear. And for M3 I bet it wouldbe before that. I think that's a pretty good track record,considering the uncertainty that we're facing today. With regard tothe directive, I would like to move back to the targeting of theaggregates sometime in the future. And I would just observe that whatwe're doing today is setting policy for the second quarter as a wholeand that this directive will not become public until after the nextmeeting. As a result, it seems to me that alternative II as adirective would be an appropriate policy.MR. MORRIS. Inappropriate?MR. GUFFEY. It would be an appropriate policy. I would optfor alternative B--for aggregate targeting and a move to alternativeII. I would keep the first parenthetical phrase. To emphasize myfeeling about interest rates and that they not move up, I would evenopt for a 5 to 9 percent federal funds rate range to ensure that therate doesn't go above 9 percent, although I don't think that'snecessary if there's some reasonable agreement around the table as towhat policy should be with respect to interest rates going up. On thepoint about how the market will react to higher interest rates, itseems to me that the earlier episode in which the market reacted to alittle snugging up if you will, in which long rates came down andshort rates went up, reestablished the Fed's credibility with regardto inflation. I don't think we ought to do it again. [Laughter] So,I would opt for alternative B with a borrowing level at $200 to $250million, simply based upon the history of the last 5 weeks ofborrowing. A level of $200 million would be acceptable; $250 millionwould be acceptable. To go above that, I think we would be holdingthe funds rate in the 8-3/4 percent or above range, and I'd feeluncomfortable about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with Roger that themajor risk in the present situation is on the down side. It's a riskof possibly aborting the expansion, and the risk of reigniting double-digit inflation is considerably farther down the road. I think thebroader aggregates do not confirm the proposition that our currentpolicy is too expansionary. They suggest that it ought to be adequateto a produce a sustained upturn, but they are not indicating anexcessively expansionary policy. I've been persuaded by JimDuesenberry that the very rapid rate of M1 growth can be explained bythe very sharp reduction in short-term money rates--that is, the costof holding money in the form of a NOW account is now relatively lowwhereas a year or so ago it was extremely high and, therefore--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say you've been persuaded by Mr.Duesenberry?MR. MORRIS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have to ask what equation Mr.Duesenberry has; our equation doesn't show it.MR. MORRIS. Well, I think it does. Doesn't our equationindicate that you would expect that, given the sharp decline in rates?And one other thing---55-3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It goes in that direction, but it justdoesn't go above--MR. AXILROD. It doesn't have as big an effect. If it wereto explain what happened, the rate effect would have to be bigger thanin fact is built into the equation at the present time.MR. MORRIS. But I wonder about the equation since it wasbased on historical relationships. We've never had such a majordecline in rates before.MR. AXILROD. The deficiency in our equations, or the onesthat fit through 1974, is rather obvious. The staff experimentallyhas been dealing with one fit through 1981, which tries to track OCDsseparately. So far we haven't been able to get a variable in therethat reflects the saving behavior very much. It has a sort oftechnical assumption that it behaves like a transaction account and Idon't think it's working quite right. I have some sympathy for whatyou're saying. Our equation doesn't quite give that result yet; maybeit should, but it doesn't yet. So, we have to explain this as ademand shift.MR. MORRIS. Well, so much for Ml. I'm still uncomfortablewith having an M2 target at this juncture because the second-quartertargets here are based on assumptions as to how rapidly the adjustmentto the money market demand account is going to be completed. Theassumption may be good or it may not be good. It seems to me that inthis period of transition the case for having an M2 target is not verystrong any more. It seems to me we'd be better off with simply an M3target, as Tony has suggested I think. Until we get some furtherevidence to tell us how strong the expansion is going to be--and weshould get that in the next couple of weeks when we get Marchemployment numbers, which ought to be a pretty good indicator--itseems reasonable to hold to the present level of interest rates. ButI would agree with Nancy in the sense that I would urge the Manager,when he has to make a choice, to err on the side of a little moreease. Lately we seem to have be erring on the side of a little morerestraint, which I don't think is particularly appropriate at thisjuncture. I would keep the existing directive language. I don'tthink we're ready yet to move to a strict aggregates targetingapproach.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've run out of volunteers. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly share all of theuncertainties about trying to decipher what information we have. Butemotionally, in giving my view of the economic forecast, I tend toagree with Lyle Gramley and Bob Black that somewhere between "B" and"C" is the more appropriate posture to be in. I recognize the risksthat have been pointed out, but what we have done over the lastseveral weeks seems appropriate. If I were going to err, I would erra bit on the restraint side at this point. So, "B" or somewherebetween "B" and "C" is where I would come out. On the directive, Iwould go to Roman numeral II or alternative B, primarily as anindication, as Karen would say, that we are trying to move back inthat direction.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.-56-3/28-29/83MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I would join those who areweighing the downside risks more heavily than pleasant surprises. Ido not believe the consumer has returned to the counter, except to thecounter in the commercial bank branch to obtain currency! And,therefore, until he or she does return to the retailer's counter, Ithink the fragility of the financial system, domestic andinternational, and the flow of bad news that is going to makefootprints through the reports of commercial banks--[unintelligible]Mexico, and the report of International Harvester, and the series ofbad news that has not yet shown through--are not going to add to theconfidence of the consumer or the depositor.On the other hand, in terms of the operating procedures, Iwould leave the language alone. There's enough confusion out there inthe financial markets for us--in the Chairman's speeches or in the expost review of directives--to look as though we have deemphasized M2at this meeting, just as the rate of growth of that aggregate beginsto come down. I would not favor--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure what you mean by leave thelanguage unchanged; we need more than that.MR. MARTIN. I would leave the directive language, sir.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Meaning alternative I?MR. MARTIN. Yes. I would join Governor Wallich in terms ofthe passthrough, if you will, from large growth rates in M1 and evenM2 through the employment effects and prices. I think the good oldlead/lag relationship of a year or two from the Ms to prices is highlycomplicated now because unemployment is not a function of [lax]aggregate demand, but rather reflects very significantly thestructural changes in our economy, the more effective internationalcompetition, and the changing demographics. I think there are a lotof reasons why the good old correlation is going to have a wider band[of uncertainty] around it now.On these bases, I think alternative C is too dangerous. Iremind the Committee again that the sample of 200 banks shows the MMDArate actually rising 25 basis points to 8.47 percent on a nationalbasis. There's no geographic difference; it's across the country thatthere is a firming of rates on that instrument. It's across sizeclasses; it doesn't matter how big or how small the banks are. Thesample--admittedly it's only 200--shows a firming of those rates. Itshows the Super NOW rate at 7.30 percent. Also, this is occurringsimultaneously with the reduction in [the rate on] Merrill Lynch's CMAaccount, which is a transaction account, of over 50 basis points.Back to the consumer: I don't think the consumer believes that theSocial Security system is safe any more. We all have reviewed thetechnicalities and the funding and assumptions there and have reachedone conclusion; I don't think the ordinary consumer believes it. Iconcede that it might be useful in terms of fiscal policy for us tofirm rates further, because in my conversations with a few people inthe Congress, both in the Senate and the House, it looks as thoughthere's a good deal of pessimism as to any short-run action by theCongress now that the so-called Social Security restructuring hastaken place. It might be useful for us to firm rates and, therefore,put pressure on Congress, but I don't think that's appropriate in3/28-29/83terms of the downside risk that is out there; the price is too high ona benefits/costs basis. I would go, therefore, for alternative B andhaving a good deal of flexibility, which it shows, in the fed fundsrate. There may be times when we want to put a little upward pressureon rates, but not such as to threaten this fragile recovery.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roberts.MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, first, I have 3 comments--ondistortion, velocity, and real rates. My staff looked at thereference to the Board's survey on the effects of MMDAs, which wasreported in The Wall Street Journal, that said 3 percent came from Mlcomponents and 25 percent of the Super NOWS came from nontransactionbalances. And taking just nonseasonally adjusted measures, weconclude from that that the effect--if there has been any distortionat all, it's very modest--has been to increase the rate of growth inMl, either measured from July to February or from December toFebruary. I don't think the distortion is significant on Ml.Secondly, with respect to velocity, I think a question we ought to askourselves is: What is the rapid growth of money having to do with thecollapse of velocity and will that be corrected by a slowing in therate of growth? As to real rates, I think Steve made the point thatreal rates are a function of what prices people are looking at:historical, current, and prospective. And someone made the point thatprospective rates in the minds of the public were still pretty high,so maybe real rates aren't really that high. I don't know what theywill turn out to be eventually, but I believe we've had long periodsof time when real rates were high and economic recovery and expansionoccurred. The 1920s is an example. I've always thought the goal ofthe System is having sustainable economic expansion without undueinflation. And I think that's what we ought to try to do rather thancontrol interest rates. Interest rates often go down in an economicexpansion and it's not unusual that they will fluctuate in theprocess.I believe the economic recovery is well under way and isspreading. I saw an excellent indication of confidence in yesterday'spaper where I noted that a bankrupt company, Chrysler, in a highlycyclical mature industry, sold $400 million worth of stock. Thatseems to me to indicate there is some confidence around. I think thebig risk is a resumption of inflation. And if we keep money growingat the pace that it's growing now, particularly as measured by Ml, weare certain--not in '83 but in '84 and '85--to have excessive priceinflation. And if we're really interested in holding interest ratesdown, the way to do that is to avoid the expansion in money that willlead to higher prices and that will lead to higher mortgage rates andlong-term bond rates. So, my view would be that we need to startslowing the growth of the monetary aggregates, particularly Ml sincethat's the one that's least distorted and most related, with respectto its predictive value, to the economy. I think we have the [growth]rates so high that it would be wrong to jerk them down to a low rate;my view would be that we ought to move gradually to the middle of our4 to 8 percent [Ml] target by the fourth quarter. I would like to seeus move to about a 7 percent level for this quarter and come on downgradually from there over the balance of the year. I'd like to seelanguage in the directive showing a return to emphasis on Ml. And Ithink we should, by all means, avoid interest rate targeting or justsomething called judgment with no standards, because that I think will3/28-29/83create a situation in the market that would be the reverse of what wewould like to have.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Which alternative would that put youon, "B plus"?MR. ROBERTS. "A."MR. PARTEE. You're looking for something around 7 percent?MR. ROBERTS. Right, but for the quarter.MR. PARTEE. I'm not sure that does it, but that's March toJune at 7-1/2 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Which one would give you 7 percent?MR. ROBERTS. Well, "A" is indicated at 7-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're talking about March to June, I takeit, when you say the quarter.MR. ROBERTS. Yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Someone--it may have been Lyle--said that inthis kind of environment one can find evidence to support almost anyposition, and I think that's right. That always happens in periods ofuncertainty. People rely on their basic instincts when there is a lotof uncertainty and in this specific situation I think it comes down tohow much faith one has in Ml--how comfortable one is with judgmentoverriding the rules that have served us reasonably well. It seems tome that if there ever was a strong case for using judgment inoverriding these Ml rules, it's now. All the reasons have been tickedoff: the massive redistribution of funds; the almost unprecedentedcontinuous decline in velocity--on the broader aggregates, the broaderone goes the less of a problem one sees--the high real costs; and thevery moderate recovery. So, it seems to me that judgment leads onerather persuasively for not tightening. On the other hand, there is agreat deal of sensitivity in the market. I think that argues for notloosening. So, I fall into the group that comes out for about nochange. It does seem to me that the snugging up did prove a point.But I would prefer to see the Desk make these decisions a little moreevenhandedly in the coming period and not bias them on the side oftightening up. I would not want to see the funds rate rise to 9percent. I think a rate somewhere in a range of 8-1/2 to 8-3/4percent would be satisfactory. On the wording of the directive, Idon't have strong feelings between I and II; I could live with eitherone. I have some preference for alternative I at this point, largelybecause I think that we're heading into a period where ultimatelywe're going to have to wean the markets from their devotion to Ml.Jerry's comment that we need a new mouse trap is an apt one. I thinkwe're moving into a period when we do need that and I would not wantto make that job more difficult. That would lean me towardalternative I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.-59-3/28-29/83MR. FORD. I agree with the people who see problems invelocity, but as Mr. Roberts put it, we have to be careful how weinterpret what is going on with velocity. In the last 7 months we'vehad double-digit growth in Ml in every month except January, when itwas 9.8 percent. The average is 13 to 14 percent. With regard tovelocity, when money is increasing at that rate I don't see how wecould expect the economy instantly or in a very short period to expandwith a positive velocity on top of that. The point is that just thatrapid growth in money itself is driving the velocity down in the nearterm. And the question is: Will we pay later? Now, being fair tothe other side of this argument and looking at the reduced-form modelsthat attempt to predict that, even over a few months or quarters withthe normal velocity trend Ml does seem to be overpredicting the growthof the nominal GNP. But I think we have to be awfully careful inassuming that this will go on and especially in overinterpreting therelationship. For instance, in February we had a 21.2 percent growthrate of Ml; we have to expect velocity to go down on a current basiswhen we're expanding the money supply like that.With regard to the other thing that everyone is so concernedabout, namely the shift in the composition of the aggregates, I'd liketo make two points. If you just review what we've said at thesemeetings about distortions, I recall that back in September or Octoberwe were saying that we knew we were going to have trouble with M1because of all savers certificates. There were $50 or $60 billion ofthose out there and most of them were coming due in October.Therefore, we expected M1 to go up more sharply than usual in Octoberfor structural reasons. It came in at 14.2 percent. But most of thatmoney was back in by November, and in November we still had vigorousgrowth of 13.6 percent in Ml. Then we said that when the MMDAsstarted we expected them to draw money out of Ml and, if anything, togive us some moderation in M1. That did not happen. Ml continued toexpand in spite of it. Now we're saying, based on Jerry's argument,that we have yet a third argument about what is happeningstructurally--namely, that the Super NOWs are more super than wethought and, therefore, this will be a good reason not to be concernedabout further double-digit growth in Ml. I just think month by monthwe're coming up with some story explaining what it is. Honestly, Ithink we are kidding ourselves. If you go to the reserve base to seewhat we're doing to reserves--and I don't want to be too deferentialto St. Louis, but I think it's the right base to use because it takesaccount of the shift in the composition of deposits--on that basis thereserve base has been going through the roof. And we just keepaccommodating all the demands at the window and allowing for reserveexpansion that's very rapid.So, I think the risk is on the side of our paying later forallowing ourselves to be too persuaded by the velocity argument andthe composition of deposits argument. The risk is that we will get areturn toward normal velocity. It doesn't have to be much when we'retalking about these kinds of growth rates of money; any drift back tonormal velocity could just boom the economy right out into thestratosphere. So, as concerned as I am about unemployment, housing,the fragility in the international markets, and all the other thingswe've said, I think we also have to worry about the other side of it.Unlike Mr. Roberts--I don't know how he comes out with exactly thisline of reasoning and then comes down on "A"--this brings me to apolicy of gradual snugging. I would emphasize what he says: that an-60-3/28-29/83abrupt change from where we are now would be disastrous. A gradualsnugging is called for and a move back toward [aggregates] targetingis called for. I would come down somewhere in the "B" to "C" range toallow for some gradual snugging. According to what I read in theBluebook, that wouldn't necessarily imply any dramatic upward changein interest rates, unless we went all the way to "C." And even thatonly talks about a moderate increase in short rates, the way I readit. So, I'd go for a policy of "B" toward "C," gradually reining ingrowth and version number II of the statement, which moves back towardusing the traditional methods of targeting rather than the purediscretion that we have now. If you look at the changes, we aretargeting interest rates so clearly that it's just amazing how steadyit is. The standard deviation of the weekly average of the daily fedfunds rate has come down by 60 percent since October. It's now downfrom 1/2 to 3/4 of a percent weekly fluctuation to less than 1/4percent, so we're just perfect. We're just shooting right at aninterest rate target. That's what we're doing. And the market isstarting to see that. And I think it's a mistake to go to interestrate targeting, especially in that narrow a band. It's incredible howmuch we are targeting interest rates. We're back to it; it got us introuble last time; and we ought to start leading ourselves away fromit. That's the argument I would make on where to go from here.MR. ROBERTS. Steve, a question: These March-to-June ratesare annual rates, are they not?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. ROBERTS. So M1 at 7-1/2 percent is an annual rate ofgrowth during the quarter.MR. AXILROD. That's right.MR. ROBERTS. So, that would be dropping from 24 percent inFebruary or from 6 months of growth at 14 or 15 percent, which wouldbe a very substantial decline in the rate of growth.MR. AXILROD. That's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have some coffee out there.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've been all over in the variouscomments. I'm not sure anybody is suggesting anything all thatradical, but we've certainly explored every side of the issue. My ownfeeling is that this is not the time for anything too radical oranything radical at all pending a little [more] evidence, as somepeople have said, both about the aggregates and about the economy. Wehave a set of projections; I don't know what weight you put on them--not too much, I guess. The projections for the aggregates lookbeautiful, but they often look more beautiful than the reality. Ijust don't know what weight to give them, but if it all came outwithin the ranges of any of these projections we'd be looking not toobad so far as the aggregates are concerned. It would be interestingto know what will happen on some of the latest economic data. I'msure it always is interesting, but it may be a little more so thanusual. I come away with a rather strong feeling that whatever we do,3/28-29/83we probably ought to be meeting again before May 24th. I would planto have a telephone meeting or something, anyway. Maybe we won't doanything, but at least 3 or 4 weeks from now perhaps we shouldreexamine the situation against the context of, I presume, not doinganything very striking right now. But if we got a combination, let'ssay, of high aggregates and a strong economy, maybe we would have tobe a little more decisive than anything I have heard discussed thismorning. We could have the aggregates coming out as projected and theeconomy not doing much, and then it would look quite different. So, Iwould assume that we can meet again before too long, presumably viathe telephone.I do not think we're in any position--and only one or twopeople suggested it--to go back to a more rigid operating techniqueright now. I think there are a few more fundamental questions for thefuture if these aggregates don't straighten themselves out relative tobusiness activity in the coming months. But we're not going toresolve that question this morning. In the preliminary comments wehad a perfect split, as near as I can see, between those who likealternative I and alternative II as a matter of presentation. Therewere about the same number in favor of one as the other, with somestraddling in the middle. But if one looks at the central tendency ofthe comments, assuming we use alternative II--I don't want toforeclose that question [unintelligible]--something like alternative Bseems to come closest to the center of gravity. There may be a bit ofshading on the up side, depending upon whether you look at the [viewsof] Committee members or the others. There was a feeling that was notunanimous, nor did everybody comment on it--. To put it in a slightlydifferent form, there was a reluctance to precipitate a general changein interest rates, including the prime rate and everything else.Well, we're on the margin of that right now, I suppose. So, leaving abit open the question of which way to phrase it in the directive--although I would assume that maybe a little more straightforward wayis to use the alternative II formulation--let me suggest, whicheverformulation, something like alternative B with the same federal fundsrate range that we've been using and, just to throw out a number, aborrowings figure around $250 million.MS. TEETERS. We had $200 million in the last one, didn't we?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but in fact we've been running aboveit. We've been running above that partly because the excess reservesare much larger than I at least was assuming at the time of the lastmeeting. I assumed that $200 million borrowing level with $300 or$300 plus million excess reserves and implied small free reserves.That's what we were talking about at the last meeting. In fact, wehad a higher borrowing level but also a higher free reserve level thanI assumed we were talking about. How those two things balance out,I'm not quite sure. I think it's fair to say that in the last fewweeks, anyway, we've been a little more concerned about supplying toomany reserves rather than supplying too few, particularly given theexcess reserves we had earlier in the period. That can be changed,but that's the way I think it's fair to say we were leaning to makethe errors--not to aim for errors but to have more assurance againstexcessive excess reserves than the reverse.62-3/28-29/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Nancy, the $250 million borrowingassumption is more likely to result in the present 8-3/4 percent[funds rate] than 8-1/2 percent.MS. TEETERS. That's what I realized. I would much prefer a$175 to $200 million figure in free reserves and then on the basis ofthat take account of the excess as we're doing it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $175 to $200 million in free reserves?MS. TEETERS. No, it would be a negative free reserve figureof $175 to $200 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't want a negative figure there.MS. TEETERS. No, I don't want a negative figure.MR. WALLICH. I don't think we want [to target on] freereserves in principle, whether positive or negative, because theyreally reach far back into the Federal Reserve's past and areassociated with some outstanding misconceptions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It wasn't too bad of a past: 4 percentreal growth and little inflation.MR. PARTEE. Back in the good old days!MR. RICE. [I would prefer] whatever level of reserves isconsistent with an 8-1/2 percent funds rate.MS. TEETERS. I take $250 million to be reaffirming an 8-3/4to 9 percent funds rate and I think that's too tight.MR. AXILROD. Governor Teeters, if I may: I don't know ifMr. Sternlight agrees or not, but I would assume given our pastexperience that if $250 million were attained, and assuming excessreserves came in on a somewhat normal track, that it is more likelythan not that the funds rate would edge back down from this recentlevel. It might not get below 8-1/2 percent, but I would think it'dbe more likely to be edging to an 8-1/2 to 8-3/4 percent range orsomewhere in there. I don't think that would tend to confirm recentexperience as much as, say, $300 to $350 million would. Maybe Mr.Sternlight can--MR. STERNLIGHT. I'd say just about that: that $250 millionin borrowing would tend to give you a funds rate of 8-1/2 to 8-3/4percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends again on what one looksat. If you look at the last 4 weeks, we had borrowings of $415, $331,$568, and $295 million; we've been above, as I said, all along. Butwe've also been above on the excess reserve side by an even moresubstantial margin. So we had significant free reserves during allthat period except one week when we made a mistake--we didn't make amistake but on the last day of the week we had a big shortfall. Wehad practically zero free reserves last week: they were minus one. Itwas the week that we had the shortfall [unintelligible].-63-3/28-29/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The only plausible explanation I'veheard for the high level of excess reserves is that some banks arebeing slow to adjust their planning and their operations to takeaccount of the fact that some of their funds, such as the MMDAs, movedto their reserve free situation. And then there have been otherchanges in reserve requirements. Some banks are slower than others.If that's true, then over a period of time we ought to see a trendingdownward of this tendency toward large excess reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, last week they were just about $300million, which somehow I have in my mind is normal; it hasn't beenvery normal recently. If you go back to February, there were a coupleof weeks that it was $300 million. Well, how satisfactory orunsatisfactory is that?MR. PARTEE. Do you want a show of hands, or what?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether I want a show ofhands just yet. Who has a violent [objection]? We have to figure outthe wording of the directive and any modification of the--MS. TEETERS. Well, I think that $250 million is confirmingthe snugging. It means that we've added 25 and perhaps 50 basispoints to the federal funds rate [and it is] above the discount ratenow. I am opposed to that and I think we should be easing slightly.MR. GRAMLEY. I think that level of borrowing is quite allright. I would note particularly that, although short-term rates area little higher than they were at the time of the last FOMC meeting,longer-term rates--the important ones--are in fact down. So, I thinkwe've not had any additional tightening in any meaningful sense.MR. ROBERTS. Is the assumption that, if the borrowing levelis maintained at that level and credit demands rise, we simplyaccommodate them to hold the interest rates and expand reserves?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That depends upon how much they rise. Itmight be. If the aggregates were running decisively high, obviously,there is some implication that we're going to snug up--to use thatterm. But we don't use an absolutely mechanical formula to do it. Ifthey were lower, with probably some lapse--if it continued to beconfirmed over a few weeks--we would move lower. We would takeaccount of all other evidence we had in that process and, as I said,we will meet again in a month or so. We wouldn't be terribly quick tochange but, yes, we would change though not be mechanical about it.We wouldn't change next week because they were high for one week.MR. MARTIN. But you would avoid a 9 percent funds rate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you say avoid it. It could comealong with this. I don't think it would probably stay there, butagain, if we were absolutely at this borrowing number and if we raisedit because the aggregates were coming in high and the economy wasstrong, it would certainly be there. But it might be there for days,or a week or something. I would not think that that would be likelyin the short run, but I can't say it absolutely wouldn't happen. Iwould think more like Steve: that, if anything, it would come down to8-1/2 percent or a little higher.3/28-29/83MR. WALLICH. Is this your interpretation of thequalifications in alternative II: that is, that somewhat fastermonetary growth would be tolerated?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's not really my interpretationof that sentence. I'm not saying that at this point. I don't knowwhat those continuing distortions would be right now. We can alwayshave an unusual demand for liquidity. But I would say, yes, we wouldexpect M2 to run higher than any of these numbers that we're talkingabout if this new money market deposit account continued to grow at agreat rate of speed--significantly beyond what we're projecting now.I think this sentence was carried over from a period when there weremore distortions than now and I'm not sure it's quite as--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I think if you go--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I would say is that I think we oughtto have some qualitative words that suggest we're not following thetarget mechanically, assuming that we use alternative B.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe you ought to have a show ofhands on alternative I versus alternative II because I thinkalternative I avoids certain of these problems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm afraid the show of hands as to sheerpreference would show an even split, unless somebody has changed hismind. I don't know if anybody who has expressed a preference one wayor the other feels strongly about it, because I think it's a questionof how strongly people feel. If somebody feels strongly about eitheralternative I or II and wants to reiterate a position or change aposition, they ought to say it. Unless people have changed theirminds the sheer preference will be 5, 5, and 2.MR. PARTEE. What you've described sounds a lot more likealternative A than it does alternative B.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Alternative I.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can blend the two by saying "For themore immediate future"--or in the short run or something--"theCommittee seeks to maintain roughly the existing degree of restrainton reserve positions, expecting that would be consistent with...."MR. PARTEE. Now, that's better. I like it. It's moreaccurate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Were you going to say "expecting itwould be consistent with the long-range targets"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I was expecting it would be consistentwith--and I'd put in--the alternative B [specifications] or whatever.MR. WALLICH. Well, I could go along with that.-65-3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That makes them virtually the same exceptit puts in the "existing degree of" words. It tells you whatrestraint there is a little more explicitly.MR. PARTEE. To me alternative B sounds as if it's beingdriven by growth of M2 and M3 and alternative A sounds as if it'sgoing on regardless of Ml, M2 or M3. This says that we have anexpectation. It means we start off with the existing reserveconditions and have an expectation--which may be wrong--that therewill be this performance in M2 and M3. And then if we're wrong aboutthe expectation, it seems to me there would be a basis forreconsidering.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is true.MR. PARTEE. So, I think the blending is literally a moreaccurate representation of what is being proposed here.MR. MARTIN. It avoids getting us committed to annual ratesof 9 and 8 percent, respectively.MR. WALLICH. Whether we committed any--MR. PARTEE. Committed in the sense that we let it drive thereserves.MR. WALLICH. We're proposing exceptions to that.MR. GRAMLEY. One can always reason that even withalternative language, he who seeks may not find.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see anything the matterparticularly with saying the existing degree of reserve restraintwould be appropriate. "The Committee seeks to maintain the existingdegree of restraint"--or roughly the existing degree of restraint orgenerally maybe--"anticipating that restraint would be consistent witha slowing in the growth of M2 and M3 to annual rates of ___ and ___percent, respectively. The Committee also anticipates that Mlgrowth...." It's a rather straightforward blending of the two.MR. ROBERTS. And would those rates, Paul, be the rates outof alternatives A and B and so on?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. That's what I am tentativelyproposing, anyway.MR. ROBERTS. Yes.MR. MARTIN. "A" and "B" or--MR. PARTEE. They'd be 9, 8, and 6 percent, I guess, for "B."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that depends upon what you want toput down, whether it's "B" or some blending of "A" and "B" or someblending of "B" and "C." Other people want some blending of "B" and"C," which seems too low to me. Why do we say "for the more immediatefuture"?-66-3/28-29/83MR. AXILROD. That had grown out of the previous paragraph,which discusses the long-run targets.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that previous paragraph going to be inhere?MR. PARTEE. It's still there.MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's still there. But I think "in theshort run" fits very well also. That had just grown out of theprevious language.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say: "For the short run theCommittee seeks to maintain generally the existing degree of restrainton reserve positions, anticipating...."MR. PARTEE. Why don't you make that "expecting" so we don'trepeat "anticipating"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where do we have that?MR. PARTEE. It's in the next sentence on Ml. "The Committeeanticipates" is in the next sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either way.MR. PARTEE. Oh yes, we could do it either way.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's put anticipating in here;anticipating is a little stronger word. "...anticipating that wouldbe consistent with a slowing from March to June in growth of M2 and M3to annual rates of 9 and 8 percent, respectively" is what "B" says.Then "The Committee expects that Ml growth at an annual rate of aboutpercent would be consistent with its objectives...."MR. AXILROD. Do you want to use the word "objectives" there?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we could leave the next sentence.I'm assuming now that we have the Ml sentence just by changing"anticipates" to "expects."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why don't we say "The Committee makesa guess...."MR. PARTEE. The whole thing is a guess.MR. GRAMLEY. "Speculating wildly, the Committee..."!MR. MORRIS. Why do we need anything about Ml at all, sincewe're not using it as a target?MR. MARTIN. Unbelievable is a 6 percent number!MR. GRAMLEY. You wouldn't abandon your old friend socompletely would you, Frank?MR. ROBERTS. Since that's the only thing we control, itwould be nice to keep it in there.-67-3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, back to Ml: I think it's fair tosay, whatever we say, that it has had an influence on our operations.I don't mind it being there. If Ml had been coming in at half therate that it was in fact coming in, I suspect we would have beeneasier with some confidence. It's not a very fine judgment, but--MR. MARTIN. How about 6 to 7-1/2 percent, combining "B" and"A," if we're going to specify M1 at all?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I would say--MR. PARTEE. I would make it 6 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 6 to 7 or 6 to 8 percent is okay. Ijust don't like the half percents.MR. MARTIN. But not just 6 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about it being 6 to 7 or 6 to8 percent.MR. MARTIN. 6 to 8.MS. TEETERS. The wider we can make it, the safer we're goingto be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm afraid on any of these things that wehave no forecasting record that suggests with any confidence thatwe're going to come within 2 percent, even. But it makes it sound alittle less precise.MR. WALLICH. 6 to 8 percent is getting a little high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 7 percent, I mean.MR. MARTIN. 6 to 7-1/2 percent is in "A."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 7-1/2 connotes a precision that--MR. PARTEE. 5-1/2 to 7-1/2.MR. MARTIN. I think we should use 6 to 8.MR. RICE. I second that.MR. WALLICH. It's more than I like.MR. MARTIN. You didn't like 7-1/2.MR. PARTEE. Are you going to leave "about" in? I think Iwould make it "about 6 to 7 percent."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [About] 6 to 7 percent is all right.MR. PARTEE. And that gives you 5-1/2 to 7-1/2 percenteasily. They're all "about."3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And then do we leave in that next sentenceon lesser restraint? We probably have to say "in the context of amore appreciable slowing" or "a greater slowing" or something.MR. PARTEE. It says "a more pronounced slowing."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, "a more pronounced slowing" or"greater" or something. I think that word "appreciable" ought to bechanged in there. How about "still more pronounced"?MS. TEETERS. Well, it hasn't been overwhelming.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, this is all based upon a projection, Ithink, at this point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or we can say "a furtherappreciable...."MS. TEETERS. Are you reading from alternative II?MR. PARTEE. You're reading from "A," aren't you?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm reading the second sentence inalternative I as it's written.MR. RICE. It's the same as this part; that's in theparenthesis in alternative II.MR. PARTEE. A narrative sentence.MR. GRAMLEY. If you take the sentence from alternative IIinstead, you don't have to worry about it because it says "a morepronounced slowing."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. More pronounced than projected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what about the second part? Irather like leaving the "relative to the paths implied by the long-term ranges." I don't think it has any substance, as opposed to theother wording, but it ties it back to the long-term ranges.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Instead of saying "appreciableslowing" why not take the "more pronounced slowing"?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, put "Lesser restraint would beacceptable in the context of more pronounced slowing of growth in themonetary aggregates relative to the paths implied by the long-termranges." We could put "or indications of a weakening in the pace ofeconomic recovery," as somebody suggested to me at one point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Very common sense.MR. PARTEE. We're not going to have much evidence. It willbe mixed, and depending on which figure one likes to emphasize--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The more we put in, the more likelywe'll be wrong. That's why I don't like short-term targets thereassociated with operations. We're more likely--3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me leave aside the borrowing level atthe moment.MS. TEETERS. I'm not sure I know where you are on thelanguage.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just repeat where I am on thelanguage: "For the short run, the Committee seeks to maintaingenerally the existing degree of restraint on reserve positions,anticipating that would consistent with a slowing from March to Junein growth of M2 and M3 to annual rates of about 9 and 8 percent,respectively. The Committee expects that M1 growth at an annual rateof about 6 to 7 percent would be consistent with its objectives forthe broader aggregates. Lesser restraint would be acceptable in thecontext of more pronounced slowing of growth in the monetaryaggregates relative to the paths implied by the long-term ranges(taking account of the distortions relating to the introduction of newaccounts), or indications of a weakening in the pace of economicrecovery." And then the last sentence remains as it is.MS. TEETERS. Would you read the first sentence over again?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "For the short run the Committee seeks tomaintain generally the existing degree of restraint on reservepositions, anticipating that would be consistent with a slowing fromMarch to June in growth of M2 and M3 to annual rates of about 9 and 8percent, respectively."MR. GUFFEY. You have discarded the first parentheticalsentence in alternative II and you have tried to incorporate anadditional sentence. But wouldn't it be better to keep that firstparenthetical sentence simply to maintain flexibility because of theuncertainty we're looking at in the aggregates?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, just looking at the structure ofthis, I think we would have to make the point in the discussion thatthese projections of 9 and 8 percent, and indeed the Ml projection,assume relatively little distortion--basically none in Ml and whateverwe're assuming for M2.MR. AXILROD. Only about 1 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, it would be clear that if indeed thatassumption were wrong--let's say particularly for M2--and we had somereasonably clear evidence that it was wrong, the 9 percent wouldn't berelevant. It would have to be adjusted; that's implied by thesentence I left in, instead of on the other side. We can make a morecomplicated sentence by saying that would be consistent with a slowingfrom March to June in growth of M2 and M3 to these figures and assumesthat the distortions aren't going to be very great. We could add asentence on there.MR. GUFFEY. That brings it up and highlights the uncertaintyand grants to the Committee and to the Desk the flexibility that wemay need in this period, which is a full quarter.MR. PARTEE. Of course, the first thing we're doing, Roger,is specifying the degree of reserve restraint. That's the basic-703/28-29/83instruction, as I see it, to the Desk. Then it says we expect thatthat's going to be consistent with those M2 and M3 numbers. But ourexpectations could wrong. They could be wrong in part because westill haven't allowed for the distortions. So it seems to me that atthat point we could say we haven't allowed for the distortions; eventhough they are high, we're not going to change this direction to theManager.MR. GUFFEY. The fact of the matter is that the only realpurpose this directive is going to serve is for public consumption.If I understand what the Chairman said earlier, we're not going tochange our operating regime in the intermeeting period and I thinkthat's appropriate. This is going to become public on May 25 or somesuch date. And to the extent that we have done something thatdeviated from what we think we're doing today and from what we hopewill happen in the period ahead, then the flexibility that's builtinto the statement requires less explanation after it becomes public.That's my only point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're right about the operatingtechnique in a narrow sense. But I would assume by putting this inthe directive that, if these aggregates came in significantly higherwithout a clear explanation in terms of distortions, the first part ofthe first sentence might well be overridden.MR. PARTEE. I think that's right if there is no explanation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that amounts to anything, I assume wewould have a Committee meeting. But we are expressing a presumptionhere that with a Committee consultation presumably, if [the growth ofthe aggregates] were significantly above or at all pronounced, our[general] inclination would be to go in that direction.MS. TEETERS. Regardless of what is going on elsewhere?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as I say, with a Committeeconsultation.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Basically you're scrapping the[notion of] unusual demands for liquidity, which gives us completeflexibility on anything. That comes with every possible situation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think Chuck is right: that the firstpart of the sentence is "maintain generally the existing degree ofrestraint," so we wouldn't change it very much without a consultation.But the whole indication is that we would change with a consultationif growth were appreciably above. It can always be overridden later,but that's the bias on it.MR. PARTEE. Or appreciably below.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if it's below, we'd need lessconsultation, I suppose.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that's right: Less consultation ifwe had some news that it's lower and that the economy is suddenlyweakening or something.3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a much easier decision, I suspect.If it's really low and the economy is low, we're going to move.MR. WALLICH. I would favor something that points in thedirection of consultation rather than automaticity if the case arises.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This does, implicitly, doesn't it?MR. WALLICH. Yes. That's what it does and why I favor it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we can put some language in thepolicy record write up. Is this generally acceptable? Do I interpretthe silence in that direction? If the language is all right, let'scome back to the numbers.MR. ROBERTS. This language would include the sentence on fedfunds at the bottom?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's just standard language.MR. ROBERTS. That would be 6 to 10 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, the clear implication is that itwould be 6 to 10 percent. Is that right? Let me check what I assumeis the easy number first; 6 to 10 percent is what we've had. But westill have to decide what numbers to put in there for M2 and M3 andfor M1 and decide on the borrowing assumption. Basically, if weoperated off alternative B, it's going to be 9 and 8 percent and 6 to7 percent, as we just discussed.MR. CORRIGAN. Put 6 to 7 percent for Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that all right? It's 9, 8, and 6 to 7percent. We're down to the borrowing number.MR. PARTEE. I find $250 million acceptable.MR. RICE. I could live with $250 million, but I would preferto err in the direction 8-1/4 percent rather than 8-3/4 percent on thefunds rate.MS. TEETERS. I would be in the same position.MR. GRAMLEY. I would go the other direction.MR. ROBERTS. So would I.MR. WALLICH. We've been at about $250 million for a longtime, so it doesn't hurt much.MR. RICE. I know, but we've also been pushing 8-3/4 and8-7/8 percent.MR. ROBERTS. The problem with $250 million is that unlessone makes an assumption that there has been a distortion that's beenpushing the growth of the aggregates--and that doesn't appear to bethe case with M1--$250 million does not come anywhere near the growthpath that we're talking about.-72-3/28-29/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, according to the staff projection itdoes. It's an entirely different question what weight you put on thestaff projection. The staff projection says $200 million will come inwith that growth path. Let me refine it a bit: If we have to have anassumption, let me presume the assumption is roughly $250 million.But I will tell you, when you're sitting there [and have to make adecision], the mechanical assumption is sometimes not as helpful as itmight be because you have to guess where the errors might be orwhether you should delay today or go ahead tomorrow. It seems to methe obvious point is that--if we said $250 million, for instance, andit was running a little high--consistent with no consultation oranything else, as these figures come out we'd err on the side of itbeing a little more than $250 million. If [money] is coming in low,we'd err on the side of it being below $250 million. The "erring onthe side of" doesn't say that's where it's going to come out. You canget two errors. But in calculating how the Desk leans to minimizebeing off course, the Manager leans a bit toward being slightlytighter if the figure is coming in high and slightly lower if it'scoming in low. And that's all encompassed by the words "generallymaintain the existing degree of restraint."MR. ROBERTS. But the focus is how they're coming in and noton the level of interest rates per se?MS. TEETERS. Well, I would like to focus on the level ofinterest rates per se. I don't want to see them go up. And if wefocus on $200 million in borrowing, I think there's less chance thatwe'll have rising short-term interest rates than falling short-terminterest rates.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But in reality I think it is fair tosay that the fed funds rate gives us a bit of a clue as to whether ourguesses on the reserve situation are erring in one direction or theother. It's one sign of how tight the situation is.MR. ROBERTS. It's a sign, but also if we accommodate a levelregardless--if we keep the borrowings down--we'll provide more money.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're stuck in the short run with the factthat in implementing this from week-to-week the federal funds rate hasa life of its own. It goes where the market expects that it might go.In the space of 3 weeks or something like that we can change that; butif the market is in the mood to fear that it's going to go up, it willgo up. And if they're anticipating it will go down, it's going to godown. I would say right now it's in the mood of thinking the risk isthat it's going to go up, which is why it's where it is.MR. ROBERTS. And if the prime moves up here shortly, weprobably shouldn't try to prevent the funds rate from moving up alittle also.MR. MARTIN(?). It's your [unintelligible] they'll average.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my modification is that we'resomewhere between $200 and $300 million, depending basically on howstrong the aggregates are coming in and whatever qualitative evidencewe have. That's a relatively big range but, in fact, we've been allaround that range in the recent past.-73-3/28-29/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think $250 million is a reasonablecompromise.MR. GUFFEY. I agree.MR. GRAMLEY. Me too.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that kind of gloss I put on it?SPEAKER(?). You're talking $200 to $300 million; I wouldsupport $250 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have any comments? Inthe absence thereof, do we know what we're voting on? If so, we'regoing to vote. Should I read it again?MR. WALLICH. I would like to hear at least the previouslybracketed sentences.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The previously bracketed sentences? I'massuming this is a change in alternative I and am working from there.What I have there now, just to repeat that sentence is: "Lesserrestraint would be acceptable in the context of more pronouncedslowing of growth in the monetary aggregates relative to the pathsimplied by the long-term ranges (taking account of the distortionsrelating to the introduction of new accounts), or indications of aweakening in the pace of economic recovery."MS. TEETERS. Is the economic recovery part within theparentheses?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.MS. TEETERS. Okay.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have anything else on the agenda?MR. BERNARD. Not on the FOMC agenda, no.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we would plan in any event to gettogether in a few weeks by telephone, even if nothing is going on.But certainly, if any pronounced change is in the wind, we would meetin advance of that. So, the Open Market Committee meeting is over.END OF MEETING-74-