Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 23, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 23, 1983, at 9:30 a.m.Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn,Members of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAlternateMessrs. Balles, Black, and Ford, Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Eisenmenger, Prell, Scheld, and Zeisel,Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountPRESENT:8/23/83Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of-GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMessrs. Burns, J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Mullineaux, Parthemos,and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Dallas, Cleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta,Philadelphia, Richmond, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMessrs. Burger, and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of St. Louis, and New York, respectivelyMs. Clarkin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 23, 1983[Secretary's note: The Committee members convened on the afternoon ofAugust 22, 1983 in a session not considered part of the formal FOMCmeeting. In that session, the group held an exploratory discussion ofissues relating to the way the Committee conducts its business. Thetranscript of the discussion is included in the Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Cross, proceed.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What remaining foreign currencybalances does the Treasury have now after paying off the Carter bonds?MR. CROSS. It's about $3-1/2 billion.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's all?MR. CROSS. Yes.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, that's right. The total for all currenciesis $3 billion at current rates and $4 billion at historical rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have a question?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I have a general comment tomake. I think there are two types of intervention: One is [based on]the modest, narrow concept of countering disorderly markets; the otheris when one wants to lean against stronger trends. And the secondreally should be done not only in concert with other key central banksbut in a package approach in which other actions--not justintervention--are taken. I think what was done fell between those twoschools. Now, it still had a useful purpose. I wouldn't agree withsome of the public comment that it was a complete failure. It had thepolitically useful--and I use the word politically in the verybroadest sense of the term--function of demonstrating that the UnitedStates was willing to meet its Williamsburg Summit commitments ofcooperation. And it certainly checked for a few days the very strongupward trend that seemed to be out of all proportion to the upwardmovement in U.S. [interest] rates. It's quite clear that it didn'tleave a good taste in people's mouths, although some people in themarket thought it was a useful thing to do. On balance, I think thegeneral consensus was that it didn't turn out to be very effective.Secondly, I think there was some irritation on the part of Europeancentral banks that on the key night, a Thursday night, we did notfollow through and do any intervention in the Far East--we had noauthority to do that--when there was a very major movement. And thisfollowed a day on which the Bundesbank on its own had asked thecentral banks of many small European countries to join in on theintervention. And, therefore, it left a rather bad taste in theirmouths and they later came out with this statement that Sam referredto, and I think that just about finished the possibility of any reallyeffective concerted intervention. I only make these comments to giveyou my perspective--a report card, so to speak, of this particularincident. I don't know whether Paul agrees or not.8/23/83MS. TEETERS. I didn't realize we didn't have the authorityto intervene in the Far East.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're kept on a very close leash.When I first became Undersecretary of the Treasury and we had the needto intervene, Arthur Burns also would keep the New York Fed on a veryclose leash. That went on for a week or two. He would say that [theDesk] had $25 million and when they used it up they had to come back.And then there would be a consultation with the Treasury. I wasfollowing it very closely and I felt policy with that close a leashdidn't make any sense. So, I said to Arthur Burns that if we wereserious about it, we had to give the New York Desk more room; and heagreed finally. The Desk ended up having a very substantial amount ofdiscretion, including in the Far East, and also with not too small adollar amount. Frequently there was not a dollar limit as such. Justthe process of consultation alone [is cumbersome]. If we need tointervene and are getting close to the end of the money authorizationfor the day--[which might be] $25, $50, or $75 million depending onthe market--by the time we get through to the Treasury and theTreasury consults with the Chairman and then they get back to us, at aminimum that will be 20 minutes; sometimes it can be an hour or two.So, I personally feel that if it's a serious concerted intervention,we have to give a little more discretion to the Desk. I don't thinkthat view is very popular, certainly not in this Treasury. John?MR. BALLES. I saw at least one press report that indicatedthe initial intervention by the Treasury was unilateral and did notinvolve coordination with any foreign central bank. I was just goingto ask, Tony, if it's a fair question: Is that true or not?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, I don't think that's true.MR. CROSS. The first day that we intervened, which occurredrather late in the afternoon, it was intervention by the United States[only] but we had talked with the other central banks about what weintended to do. Then, subsequently, we were acting more or less inconcert.MR. BALLES. Well, as usual, the press got things screwed up.MR. CROSS. Yes, I saw some reports that were wrong.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now, what was a little unusual wasthat the Treasury went out and made an announcement. In hindsight,I'm not so sure that was a great idea. Normally that isn't the way wewould do it unless we were planning a very major effort, which we usedto do by activating swap lines, taking a monetary policy measure--whatI call a package approach. Then when we make an announcement, we getmore credibility. Anyway, that's a minor point. They announced it,or simply after a couple of days answered questions.MR. ROBERTS. Question: Did I hear that the historical costof the currencies we own [is $4 billion and] the current value is $3billion? Does that mean an unrealized loss of a billion dollars oncurrencies?MR. TRUMAN. No, those are the Treasury's losses.8/23/83MR. ROBERTS. I mean for the United States.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. But on the other hand, Ted, wehad made an enormous amount of money in our intervention. Just on theCarter bonds alone--selling those, which is done to get foreigncurrency--not only was there a large interest rate savings but therewas also a big profit.MR. ROBERTS. Where does all that flow through--the ExchangeStabilization Fund?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, and the Exchange StabilizationFund when I was there was in the red. By the time I left it was inthe black because of the profits that we had made, even though not allof the profits went into the Stabilization Fund. Some of them endedup in the general account.MR. PARTEE. We have some book losses, though, don't we,Tony? That's my impression.MR. TRUMAN. The Federal Reserve has about $830 million inunrealized losses at the moment, if you want to call it that. Butunrealized losses of the Treasury are about $900 million.MR. FORD. So that I understand, I'm trying to summarize formyself what you said just now. Would it be fair to say that you'resaying either do it whole hog or don't do it?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think in a case of counteringdisorderly markets, in the very narrow sense of that term, we can dothat on modest basis. That involves more a quasi-continuing presencefrom time-to-time in the market without making a big deal out of it.The second type is concerted intervention or leaning against the wind,which was a situation that was posed to us because in the larger senseof the term one can argue that this was a very disorderly movement.The abruptness and the size of the market movement in response to arelatively modest uptick in U.S. interest rates was out of proportion.Yes, I feel that we shouldn't do that kind of major, concertedintervention unless there's a package approach and we really mean itand don't keep such a close hold on the Desk. That's my own view.MR. PARTEE. But you would still sterilize it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, yes.MS. TEETERS. Tony, what do you consider a majorintervention? This totaled $3.7 billion over those few weeks.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Our share was $300 odd million.MR. CROSS. Our share of the intervention was $250 million.MS. TEETERS. But the total intervention was just over $3.7billion. That looks big to me and just not on the proper scale.MR. CROSS. Intervention by the Europeans and others was $2.4billion.8/23/83MR. RICE. What was the total in 1978?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I can't give you a gross figure forall central banks.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The United States alone did billions.MR. PARTEE. Yes. Of course, the dollar was weak.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We started off without foreigncurrencies so we had to activate the swaps, and I suppose we got inhock by about as much as $8 billion. Sometimes we have to stick withintervention. It's not an easy, simple, black and white thing. Forexample, when we announced that big dollar rescue package onNovember 1, [1978], even though we had a whole package of measures andeven though there was worldwide consultation and even though thedollar turned around very sharply on the first day, we had to make itstick and make the markets believe we meant business and that [what wewere doing] was credible. To give time for the fundamentalimprovement in our balance of payments to become more and moreapparent, we had to stick with substantial intervention all throughNovember and December. On January 2 the markets turned around ontheir own and then there was such an inflow that we were able to repayour swaps and over the year to begin accumulating foreign currenciesbecause the dollar was rising too fast. That was a situation where wehad very effective concerted tactics and yet still neededintervention. Sometimes I hear the argument that [if] it is aneffective concerted package which involves domestic monetary policy,then intervention isn't needed at all. That was a case where we didneed it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We need to] ratify the transactions.MS. TEETERS. So moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection we will ratify thetransactions. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.][CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions?]MR. BALLES. Yes, I have one, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to getPeter's perspective on the new wrinkle added--or should I sayreintroduced--at last month's meeting of the Committee, which was topay attention not just to borrowing but to excess reserves as well.In other words, we were going back to a free reserve or net borrowedreserve concept if I understood that correctly. Just from yourperspective, how if at all does that new wrinkle affect your abilityto carry out the Committee's instructions or goals?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think it worked satisfactorily inthis period. I don't know that it will always be that satisfactory.It depends on the behavior of excess reserves, which tended not to beas high this last period. They averaged a little over $400 million,and we were pretty much programming them in our path-building at the$350 million level. One week we moved that up to $400 million. If we8/23/83were to get weeks when there was a much stronger demand for excessreserves, it could be more troublesome to operate on that basis. Butit has not been a significant problem.MR. BALLES. The reason I raised that question, Mr. Chairman,is that if you go back and look at the history of the relationship ofexcess reserves to the economy, it appears to me at least to betrendless and erratic. I would have to judge that any sustained moveto instruct the Desk to follow free reserve or net borrowed reservetargets would be counterproductive, and I would advise against it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what the basis for thatis. I don't know whether one would get any better results followingborrowings alone; I would suspect not.MR. BALLES. Pay your money and take your choice, I guess.Personally, I'd have more faith in just following the borrowing.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there has been some rise [in excessreserves] this year; it abated a bit in just the last month or so. Weessentially have somewhat higher levels of excess this year thanearlier; and I tend to relate that to some of our Reserve Bankoperational reviews of overdrafts and things like that, which I thinkhave made some bankers want to hold higher levels of excess reserves.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On another matter, in view of theexperience we've had in the last few weeks in the way the marketsabsorbed this large U.S. Treasury borrowing: You said earlier thatthere had been some econometric analysis indicating that if there weresubstantial reductions in the deficit, interest rates might be, say, acouple points lower. Was that analysis done on the basis of currentconditions in the economy or was that analysis based upon a morerobust economy or higher utilization of capacity?MR. KICHLINE. It was done taking the quarterly econometricmodel and keyed off what was the equivalent of the staff's forecast--the one that we had prepared in July--and then taking a $50 billionexpenditure cut. We also did it with a $50 billion tax increase.Essentially the starting point, the initial conditions, would be theJuly staff forecast.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, common sense would tell me thatif a year from now the economy were functioning at a much higher levelof utilization of capacity and you did the same econometric analysis--and at that time we got a major move to reduce the budgetary deficit--we would get an even bigger impact in terms of interest ratereduction. Is that a sensible conclusion?MR. KICHLINE. I think, unfortunately, that's right.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why "unfortunately"?MR. KICHLINE. One of the problems with these exercises isthat they are all dependent on the structure of the model one isusing. Use a different model and get a different answer. It alsodepends on initial conditions. In our model it's a non-linearrelationship so that we get a bigger bang for the buck as we getcloser to potential or full capacity utilization.8/23/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why is that?MR. KICHLINE. It has to do with the non-linear demand formoney function, essentially. The elasticity of money varies overtime, and in that model as we get closer to capacity utilization,short-term rates would be rising substantially. And if you take theheat off in absolute terms--and this is done absolutely, the number ofbasis points involved--short-term rates would drop more than theywould otherwise.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Peter may not agree with me, but whatthe experience of the last few weeks--with this very large Treasuryborrowing in the markets--indicated to me at least is that the otherfactors swamped, or were more important than, the size of theborrowing in ultimately determining the level of interest rates in themarkets. So, even though in the early stages of the borrowing therewere considerable interest rate pressures geared to the size of theborrowing, the whole amount got digested very easily with interestrates ultimately coming down somewhat because of other factors. Itwasn't the size per se that caused that much of a problem in theoverall context of current conditions and perceptions about monetarypolicy. I don't know if you would agree with that or not, Peter.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't entirely. I think the size was afactor in the extent to which the market backed up. It came downagain very fast, but I think it may be premature to say that themarket has really digested this; it may be regurgitated again, too.MR. PARTEE. Of course, we're talking about a very largefinancing. I guess it's true of the particular set of financing thatoccurred, but my recollection of the statistics is that both the monthof July and the third quarter show substantially reduced federalfinancing compared to the second quarter.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The third quarter is going to beabout $50 billion, isn't it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is reduced, seasonally adjusted, fromthe very high seasonally adjusted amount in the second quarter.MR. PARTEE. It was $65 billion or something like that in thesecond quarter. And as a matter of fact, total credit expansion inJuly, for which the Bluebook reports a number, is down considerably.MR. GRAMLEY. Generally speaking, $50 billion a quarter iswhat we'll be looking at.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is because the second quarter was sohigh; I think that's an illusion.MR. PARTEE. Well, that may be because they also had all thattax-exempt financing that went into governments.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No other questions? We'll ratify thetransactions. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]8/23/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The floor is] now open for questions andcomments and disagreements and alternative scenarios.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You seem to be assuming that nextyear we will have a downward drift in long-term interest rates,notwithstanding the improved economy, etc.MR. KICHLINE. That's right. The rates in the forecast arein Appendix I of the Bluebook. We do have in there, for example, inthe mortgage area about a percentage point reduction in rates from thefourth quarter of this year to the end of 1984. We have had this kindof pattern for a while. We also have corporate bond rates driftingdown. It comes out of our forecast; it's sort of an iterativeprocedure. But our major view is that inflation will still be quitemild and that indeed, with the slowing of nominal GNP growth that weforesee, we could have a little drifting down of short rates and stillmeet the Committee's targets and that the good inflation performanceover time ought to show through in some reduction in long rates.MR. PARTEE. Now short rates are down too?MR. KICHLINE. That's right.MR. WALLICH. And this would be about a constant real rate,given some decline in inflation?MR. KICHLINE. Well, we have a decline in real rates impliedbecause inflation this year and next year is about the same.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. An act of faith?MR. KICHLINE. Well, in large part.MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] starting it; there's noquestion about it.MR. KICHLINE. Maybe even when it's econometrically derived,it's an act of faith.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any forecast is an act of faith!MR. GUFFEY. I'd like to step back. You spoke of next year'srates. [In the Bluebook appendix] an increase in rates is shown inthe fourth quarter, which I assume is built into your Greenbookforecast. Can you comment on the background of that assumption?MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I might note that a good part ofmy briefing is devoted to these questions.MR. GUFFEY. I'll wait.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.MR. BALLES. I have a healthy respect for the forecastproduced by the Board staff. In light of yesterday's discussion, Ifeel it necessary to "fess up," as it were: We [in San Francisco] dohave a significantly different forecast, though not for this year,where we come in very close to the [Board staff] forecast. By the8/23/83time we get to 1984 there is a difference that I feel compelled tocomment on. I'll try to explain very briefly why. On real GNP, theBoard staff reduced its forecast for the end of '83 to the end of '84fractionally this time. They were at 4.2 percent in July and they'reat 4 percent in the latest revision; so, they're down fractionally.We had already been higher than they were in our July forecast, whichwas a 5.1 percent increase. Our staff, rightly or wrongly, has nowupped that to a 5.8 percent real GNP gain fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter. In trying to track down the differences--because what Iexpect every time from my staff is some explanation or attemptedreconciliation of differences between their forecast and that of theBoard staff--it gets down to the basic methodology. The Board staffhas a model that's driven by M2 and we're old fashioned enough to beback to using Ml. The reason I feel compelled to comment on this isthat I have in front of me a chart that shows the relationship betweenM2 and personal income going back quite a ways. It tracked prettywell up until 1978 when all these things began to happen to rates paidon various components of the Ms. Since that time any relationshipbetween M2 and income is just invisible. In fact, they quite often goin opposite directions. We have some faith that we're about to see arestoration of normal velocity patterns in Ml.MR. PARTEE. Does Ml look better?MR. BALLES. Yes, except obviously for 1982, when it justfell out of bed and was hopeless. What we're expecting--and it's aforecast not a fact--is that we're in the process of seeing therestoration of the normal velocity trend in Ml which, if realized bythe fourth quarter as we forecast, would mean a considerably fastergrowth of the economy going into 1984. Our specific monetaryassumption is that for the balance of this year Ml will grow at theupper end of its range and that as we move into 1984 it will grow inthe middle of the 4 to 8 percent range. I think your forecast, Jim,was based on M2 in the middle of the range both for the balance ofthis year and next year. So, it's simply the difference inmethodologies. All sorts of details, of course, would have to beexplored, but just in a gross sense that's why we come out with adifferent forecast. Since we have stronger real growth, we have lessunemployment. Time will tell which of these views is correct.MR. CORRIGAN. What does that forecast have for inflation?MR. BALLES. It's a little more than the Board staff has.Specifically, they're expecting 4.3 percent this year, fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter, versus our 5.1 percent; next year they're at 4.4percent and we're at 5.2 percent.SPEAKER(?). What about the interest rates?MR. BALLES. We don't forecast interest rates. We don't knowhow.MR. WALLICH. Do you assume that velocity will grow at thesame old rate hereafter or is it a reduced but stable rate?MR. BALLES. We assume velocity will approximate itshistorical growth rate more than what we saw in 1982. I'm not sure--Idon't think anybody can be, Henry--that it's going to come back right8/23/83on or somewhere around the historical average, but it's certain tobounce back and be reasonably similar to what it used to be--up 2 or 3percent a year.MR. FORD. I'm just looking at the trend for the last fourquarters: Starting with the third quarter of 1982, Ml has grown by6.1, 13, 14, and 12 percent and nominal GNP [growth] was well below itfor the first three of those four quarters. Then in the last quarter,the second quarter of this year, velocity has finally made a comebackand is now running ahead. That reinforces in my thinking what John issaying about the likelihood of a rebound toward more normal velocity.What worries me was that we could really see this surge. M1 wassurging way ahead of nominal GNP and now all of a sudden nominal GNPhas zoomed ahead on a concurrent basis. That obviously isn't theright way to look at it, but that's the way a lot of people aroundhere have been talking about it for the last few quarters. So, if youwant to continue talking in that vein, we should now be concernedabout the fact that the second-quarter nominal GNP went up by 13percent when Ml went up by a little less.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Coming back to the real economy, Jim:What level of housing starts and what level of automobile sales areyou assuming for the fourth quarter?MR. KICHLINE. Housing we have at 1.55 million units at anannual rate; that would be down from our guess of 1.65 million unitsfor the current quarter, which entails some decline for August andSeptember. So, we have a further drop of 100,000 units in the fourthquarter. For auto sales in the fourth quarter we're assuming 9-3/4million units in total, of which domestic sales would be 7.4 million,and that's about where they've been running in the first half of thisquarter to date. We have domestic auto sales at this higher level butnot rising further.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would guess, although it's nothingother than gut instinct, that those levels are somewhat optimistic.Housing transactions are beginning to fall. And as the pent up demandfor automobiles begins to be satisfied to some degree, I have afeeling that that's a very high level of automobile sales to beprojecting for the fourth quarter.MR. MARTIN. I would join Tony only in the comment onhousing. I was convinced yesterday that the interest concessions havebeen so narrow in automobile financing that their removal is not goingto be a material factor in the fourth quarter. But I would argue thathousing in the fourth quarter will be down more likely by 200,000 to250,000 than 100,000 units. The cancellation rates in the escrows inDallas, Chicago, San Diego, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Atlantaare such that the sales will not be completed. The rates are floatingup 150 and in some cases 200 basis points. Those sales are just notgoing to be closed and that, of course, will back up into starts andother housing figures. So, as usual, I would indicate a deeper,further degree of pessimism on the housing front.MR. ROBERTS. Are you referring to single-family primarily?MR. MARTIN. New single-family homes primarily.8/23/83MR. ROBERTS. Isn't there some increase in the multifamilyarea that is partially offsetting that?MR. MARTIN. Yes, but there, Ted, we have the condition ofhigh vacancy rates for apartments in the major markets in the Sunbeltand a very low household formation rate in 1982. There is somecontroversy about what the formation rate was last year; some peoplesay there wasn't any for the first time in twenty-five years orsomething like that. I think that's a bit too pessimistic, but theBoard's staff indicated that it's several hundred thousand households.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is that because of the demographicsor because people aren't getting married, or what?MR. MARTIN. The staff comment yesterday [at the Boardbriefing referred to] the impact of the recession. I think it goesbeyond that. I think there are some changes. Some younger folks arestaying with Momma and Poppa a little longer and I think there's adefinite slowing in the rate of [household] formation.MR. PARTEE. They are spending their money on a new car.MR. MARTIN. Or a new computer. Then there's a question, ofcourse, of the thrift industry problems, if any, at today's interestrates. We had some work done here a while back--I'm not sure that Jimwould still underline that work--in which we second guessed the thriftindustry economists and it came down to this: A very rough figure of100 basis points in weighted average costs for the thrifts means apre-tax impact of about $1 billion. If you remember the rise in ratessince June, which is the month in which we received those data fromthe thrifts and translated that into a post-tax profitability, [itmeans that] they don't have any [profit]. And, of course, for thesavings banks you get a figure that's in the red. But some of you inyour own Districts know that picture of the savings banks a lot betterthan I do.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I thought John Balles was going tomake my speech for me. He started off pretty much the same way, butwe come out with less real growth next year than he did, though a tadmore than the Board staff is projecting. The main difference is thatas we looked at prices next year, we paid right much attention to thebehavior of money in recent months in addition to the effects, as theBoard staff suggested, of a great firming of labor markets, adepreciation of the dollar, and the drought this year. And we believethat's going to result in somewhat higher prices than the staff isprojecting. If I figured it right, they have the implicit deflator[rising] about 4-1/2 percent from the fourth quarter of '83 to thefourth quarter of '84; we think [the increase] might be near 6percent. That's really the significant difference between us andJohn.MR. PARTEE. You have prices and he has real growth.MR. BALLES. I like mine better.MR. BLACK. I hasten to add that I hope we [are wrong]. Ithought we were going to end up the same place but that's exactly thedifference.-10-8/23/83MR. KEEHN. By way of a District report, I must say thateconomic conditions in the Middle West are very significantly improvedand would be broadly consistent with the outline that Jim has given[for the nation]. The only point I'd make--and I think Jim used thephrase "capital goods are poised for recovery"--is that the people whoare running the major capital goods firms in the Middle West reallyare becoming very, very discouraged by the outlook. I'm now talkingabout the heavy capital side: foundry equipment, railroad equipment,and heavy trucks. Though things may look a little better off a veryweak base, people on that side of life are becoming terriblydiscouraged that 1983 is by now largely gone and the early part of1984 is to a large extent gone as well. Most of them say the earliestthey expect recovery is in late 1984. So, they continue to be verypessimistic. Perhaps that's typical for this point in a recovery but,as a consequence of all this, our outlook for 1984 would be modestlylower than the Board staff's outlook.MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I sense a somewhat different tonedeveloping at this meeting in regard to where the economy is goingthan I detected at the last meeting. We have seen some signs ofslowing in retail sales, although it's hard to assess what one month'snumbers mean. Prospectively, in housing we've heard a lotqualitatively about the slowdown in mortgage applications and so on.Still in all, I think it's wise to recall that if anyone had forecast6 months ago that we were going to be looking at a 9 percent real GNPgrowth in the second quarter and 8 percent in the third, he would havebeen considered slightly off his rocker. [The expansion] hasdeveloped much, much more strongly than nearly everybody had foreseen.In my judgment, probably the best single analogy one can use for theeconomy is that of the fly wheel: What happened in this quarter isgoing to happen in the next one. My guess, if I had to make one,would be that we're more likely to see somewhat faster growth than thestaff has forecast for 1984. And I think the big candidate for anoverrun is business investment. It's something I cannot pin downexcept to say that the increase in contracts and orders for plant andequipment in the past two quarters has been very, very substantial,but I have a hunch that more is developing in this area than what wasallowed for.Still in all, if I had to put out a forecast, it wouldn't bedrastically different from what the staff has for next year. It mightbe a half point more or something like that, but certainly nothingthat would change in major ways the outlook for employment and forprices. One of the things that we do need to think about and concernourselves with is what may be happening in the food area. The staffhas a 7 percent rise in food prices fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.Unless we get some rain of substantial magnitude soon, it could be alot more than that. It would be worrisome if that got built into theunderlying inflation. It's awfully hard to keep that from happening.I'm not quite sure what to do about it, but I worry about it.MR. PARTEE. Seed the clouds.MR. MORRIS. Some work I've done is supportive of yourfeeling on the capital goods sector. I've compared the currentexpansion to the expansion of 1975-76 and in general the broadmeasures show that we're tracking very closely to that expansion. Onesector that is different, even though the capital goods people in the-11-8/23/83Middle West may not appreciate it at the moment, is that capital goodsorders are coming in much stronger than they did at the correspondingphase of the 1975-76 expansion.MR. RICE. Isn't the composition different, though?MR. KEEHN. It's a different segment of the capital goodsside. I'm talking about machine tools, foundry equipment; I don'tthink perhaps you are.MR. MORRIS. But doesn't that side hit the lag in any event?MR. KEEHN. Perhaps so, but it has been lagging so long thatthe guys are getting awfully discouraged. For example, to give youjust one quick figure: The delivery of railroad cars this year willbe 5,000 units. It typically runs about 80,000 to 85,000 units and in1980 it ran 120,000. This year's figure will be lower than any yearsince 1933 and I'm not sure the figures in 1933 were that good. Thisprovides the kind of environment in which people are thinking andthey've become very discouraged about it.MR. PARTEE. Is there some increase in orders?MR. KEEHN. No, orders have been absolutely flat. Now, thereare some reasons for that; nonetheless, it provides a very difficultenvironment in which people are operating.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Union Pacific people tell me thatcarloadings have not gone up as much as the rest of the economy andnormal relationships would indicate, although the published data don'tseem to make that very clear.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. While I was on the phone the other day Iwas looking at Business Week, which has this business indicator[measure] on the front page. They compared last month to two monthsago and last year, and they had a comparison with five or seven yearsago. They included the steel industry, which is running 40 percentbelow the figures of five years ago. Every other industry theyincluded was up 30 to 40 percent compared to whatever it was 5 or 7years ago. There's a tremendous contrast between what is going on insteel, as reflected in that, and in the rest of the economy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The barge business is also very, verybad. It has not picked up. There seems to be less movement of coal,heavy material, steel, and even of grain. But coming back to foodprices: I thought we were sitting with such huge surpluses. I'm notquite sure I understand why there is such a big price impact.MR. GRAMLEY. We are, in wheat. But the inventories of cornand soybeans are going to be quite low. If the crop forecast isreduced much further, I think we will get some liquidation oflivestock herds, hogs and cattle both, and then a very large run-up ofmeat prices next year. That is the big risk.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I see. So, it's meat prices ratherthan corn that you think---12-8/23/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just the feeling that everybody buys,including the Russians.MR. GUFFEY. Just to follow up on that comment: Our peoplehad [forecast] an increase in food prices in 1984 of about 5 to 6percent until this drought really hit the corn and small grain crops;now they've moved it up to 7 percent or a little over. And the reasonthe rise is only that modest is the fact that in the early part of1984 there will be a liquidation of red meat [animals], both hogs andcattle. As a result there will be a depressed meat price and theimpact on food prices won't occur until later in 1984. So, the yearlycontribution to inflation [from the food] price increase will bemodest--in the 7 percent range. But by the end of 1984 quite likelywe'll see food prices rising much more rapidly than 7 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they'll get that new crop in by theend of 1984.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. PARTEE. Then people will stop liquidating their meatanimals and that will really push meat prices up.MR. GUFFEY. As somebody observed, the PIK program was illdevised but what they also missed was Mother Nature being aparticipant in it. It essentially has been much more effective inbringing down the excess stocks of corn and other crops that normallywould be harvested in the fall than anybody ever imagined.MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I have a different forecast,which I've had since February. I did have growth of 8-3/4 percent forone quarter, but I think interest rates at these levels will calm downthe economy, bringing it to the levels we had previous to the lastrun-up during the fall. And my real [GNP] forecast for next year isat the bottom of the FOMC [members' range]. I think [GNP growth] willprobably slow down to below 4 percent, fourth quarter-over-fourthquarter, which will both reduce the inflation rate and increaseunemployment next year. We don't have a stable relationship onvelocity. It may return. Until it does, it seems to me that what ismore important is the level of rates and what that does to economicperformance. So, I'm anticipating a much slower recovery, with allthe consequences that go with that slower rate of growth.MR. ROBERTS. Since that hasn't been true up to now--realrates have not slowed the growth at all--why will it be true later inthe year?MS. TEETERS. I think there was a great deal of pent updemand, particularly in the housing and automobile areas, that cameout in the early parts of the recovery. As that pent up demand is metand as the rate [increases are felt]--obviously, [housing] is verysensitive to a mortgage rate somewhere between 12-1/2 and 14 percent--we also are going to run out of people who qualify for mortgages atthis level or even at 12-1/2 percent as we move further into therecovery. So, I think that we will see a moderation in housing demandand that automobile demand probably will moderate also. GM, as youknow, raised its prices about 2 percent today. Well, 2 percent, giventhe level they're starting from, makes the real cost of owning an-13-8/23/83automobile very high and rising. And I think people are responding tothat in a very economic way.MR. ROBERTS. We should keep in mind, though, that thehousing recovery started at a higher level of mortgage rates thanyou're suggesting would be a problem.MS. TEETERS. Well, it means that more people who couldqualify have been wiped out already.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Did you really have an 8 percentthird-quarter projection back in February?MS. TEETERS. No, for the second quarter.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even when you were so worried aboutinterest rates back in February?MS. TEETERS. Yes. It was obvious what the inventories weregoing to do.MR. PARTEE. I sort of agree with Nancy but for differentreasons. And that is--though I realize Jim has put the saving rateback [up] some--that I just think the projected saving rate is toolow. For the projection period it's around 4-1/2 percent as we gothrough 1984. I think that's an extraordinarily low rate. And it'snot consistent with all the incentives to save that the government hasprovided with IRAs and deferred compensation. I'm not sure whetherthe problem is that income is being understated--it could be--in theforecast. But that means stronger plant and equipment or something toprovide the income that will make for a higher saving rate. Or maybeconsumption is too high. I realize that people, because of pent updemand, can go in and use credit actively and draw down theirfinancial assets in order to take care of their needs; [but] as soonas that's over, I should think that the saving rate would be around 6percent. Therefore, I would come in with a little lower forecast forthe year from the fourth quarter of '83 to the fourth quarter of '84--certainly lower than John Balles has, and lower I think than Lyle has.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How much of the increased spending doyou attribute to the stock market and bonds?MR. KICHLINE. I can't answer explicitly in terms of anumber. I don't know what the model has on that; I don't remember. Ido think that part of what we saw in the second quarter was a wealtheffect, and that was important in the kind of forecast that we have.It's hard to see stock prices zooming on up in the near term; thatmarket has cooled a bit. So, I would use that wealth effect argumentas helping to explain the second quarter. And that [effect] isweakening now, given what is happening in the market.MR. MARTIN. Jim, in terms of wealth effects for middleincome consumers, their assets are tied up in a single-familyresidence, which they can't sell. In city after city those people aresitting there with a number on paper or in their minds as to what theequity in their home is and they can't realize it. So, I wonder howimportant the stock market is to the middle of the pyramid.-14-8/23/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Peter Fousek from New York has someprojections, which I forgot. I don't have any here. You can answerit, can't you?MR. FOUSEK(?). [Unintelligible] impact of the total rise inconsumer spending, 30 percent is attributed to the stock market.MR. FORD. Nationwide?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The change from the second quarter of1982 was a rise of some 57 percent in the stock market.SPEAKER(?). What was the 30 percent?MR. FOUSEK. Of the excess increase of the--MR. FORD. It seems high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's this excess increase?MS. TEETERS. Yes, what's this excess?MR. FOUSEK. Well, all our past relationships would havesuggested about half--MR. MARTIN. And what was the offsetting decrease? I don'thave our [forecast] here so I can't--. There was a decrease in thevalue of the equity of housing of $30 to $40 billion for households.Is there an offset? They have a perception of a decrease in theirwealth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why?MR. PARTEE. That's not in this period, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have a decrease in their rate ofreturn.MR. MARTIN. They've had a decrease in the real value oftheir housing and, therefore, their equity. They're heavily borrowed.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not for the second quarter of '82 tothe second quarter of '83.MR. MARTIN. I believe that's exactly--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Housing prices [were] firm.MR. GRAMLEY. I think the statistics show that householdwealth has gone up somewhere between 3/4 of a trillion and a trilliondollars in the past year, taking the two things together. Now, thedistribution of this is another question. But certainly the householdwealth statistics have looked much, much better in the past year. Howmuch of that one can really expect to influence consumption is hard tosay because it is rather narrowly distributed among a small---15-8/23/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You have to look at the volume ofrefinancing of existing house mortgages to begin to get some kind ofclue as to whether it influences consumer spending or not.MR. PARTEE. And there you're talking about 14 percentinterest rates.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had a number of different viewsexpressed here about the outlook. Out of curiosity, how many peoplewould have a forecast significantly higher than the staff forecast? Iwill define significantly higher as roughly 1/2 percent or more on therate of growth over the next 18 months. [Secretary's note: Messrs.Balles, Black, Gramley, Ms. Horn, Mr. Morris, and perhaps a fewothers.] How many would have a significantly lower forecast?[Secretary's note: Messrs. Partee, Rice, and Ms. Teeters.]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are a couple of us left whomore or less agree with it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's quite possible. Whydon't we turn to Mr. Axilrod.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. BOEHNE. Steve, what has been the pattern of growth forthe old M1A?MR. AXILROD. The quarterly figures, starting with the thirdquarter of 1982 are: 2.4 percent; 7.8 percent; 5.6 percent--held downby shifts, I think, but I don't know the exact amounts--and 6.7percent. And it looks like Q3 1983 will be 6.9 percent.MR. BOEHNE. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions? Mr. Axilrod answeredall the possible--MR. BALLES. Steve, may I ask: What is your velocityforecast or expectation for Ml for the fourth quarter?MR. AXILROD. It's around 2 percent or that order ofmagnitude for current M1.MR. BALLES. The historical average was how much higher?MR. AXILROD. Well, if you use Ml without NOW accounts, whichis what we used to have, the history is that in the fourth quarter ofa recovery, its growth is around 7 percent or something like that.Take out [unintelligible] and it'll be lower--more like 6 to 7percent.MR. BALLES. True, but is that a fair comparison? That iskind of old M1 with--MR. AXILROD. No, that's what I was trying to say. I don'tthink it is. I don't think you would then reason that the 2 percentis too low.-16-8/23/83MR. BALLES. What I'm trying to get is: What would be thecomparable figure of the old Ml velocity given the new M1 content?Would it be 3 percent or 2 percent or what?MR. MORRIS. We don't know.MR. BALLES. I'm just trying to smoke out, if we can, whatSteve meant by "velocity is recovering but it will remain low." Ithink those are the words you used.MR. AXILROD. What I meant was, if you go back to historywhen Ml had a different composition, the numbers in the fourth quarterof a recovery run around 5 or 6 or 7 percent. What we have now, basedon our current estimates, is something on the order of 2 percent,which will mean GNP doesn't pick up and Ml doesn't pick up with it.If you use the old M1A, you'd have something like 4 or 5 percent,which would be more in line with past cycles. It just says it's somesort of a residual transaction element if this keeps up and old M1A ismoving like it used to. One conclusion I drew from that is that thenew Ml does have this additional element, which is holding down itsvelocity. So, one might not want to extrapolate from that to highernominal GNP a few quarters ahead. Velocity is behaving a littledifferently; that could change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.MR. FORD. Since you asked yesterday for some comparisons: Idon't know how many of the models you follow, but we do that all thetime. And I feel great listening to Steve and Jim and so on, if onecan only believe all this. The others that we track, such asTownsend-Greenspan, DRI, and Harris--your alma mater is forecastingeven lower rates, as you must know--and Chase all are giving forecastsvery similar to what the staff has. So, that kind of alternativemakes one feel better. I think it would be beautiful if it comestrue, but--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It could just be that everybody iswrong.MR. FORD. That's what worries me.MR. ROBERTS. But so far the consensus is better than theindividual forecasts; that's been the experience of this guy out inArizona.MR. RICE. But isn't it true that the majority of outsideforecasters expect higher interest rates?MR. FORD. No.MR. RICE. Don't they expect higher long-term rates in 1984?MR. FORD. Well, I just have the T-bill and the prime rates.All four of those outsiders expect, by the second quarter of 1984, theprime to be the same as it is this quarter on average and T-bill ratesto be maybe 1/2 percentage point or more lower. I don't know aboutbond rates; I didn't get that.-17-8/23/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other questions addressed toMr. Axilrod?MR. PARTEE. Did I understand, Steve, that you wereexpressing the view that foreign demand for U.S. investments affectsU.S. interest rates rather than U.S. exchange rates?MR. AXILROD. I think they are probably not unrelated. I wasassuming that the large capital inflow we've had this time, without asharp depreciation in the dollar so far, reflected a willingness ofthe foreigners to put their money here not [wholly] independent ofinterest rates but more or less independent of interest rates--thatis, there is a wide range of interest rates that wouldn't havemattered. But that willingness really meant that the exchange ratestayed higher than it would otherwise be instead of depreciating.That kept our prices from being higher than they would otherwise beand it was the price effect in my mind that kept the interest ratesfrom being higher. It's somewhat like in the olden days of fixedexchange rates when we could run big balance of payments deficits andlose [foreign] exchange reserves and in some sense have biggerdomestic purchases without getting right away the inflationary impactof the purchases. And in my head, subject to Ted's contradiction,something like that has been going on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why wouldn't it have a direct effect oninterest rates as well?MR. AXILROD. Well, yes. One would think so.MR. PARTEE. I'd understood this as a circularity question.I'd really dismissed foreign demands ebbing and flowing as having aneffect on U.S. interest rates because of the circularity of flow.MR. TRUMAN. It depends a bit on what you--. You get thesame results as Steve's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There isn't circularity when you'rerunning great big current account deficits.MR. GRAMLEY. If you think [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be caused by the exchange rate.MR. TRUMAN. It's a question of how you break into thecircle. If you think the current account deficit to some extent hasbeen pushed by fiscal policy or an increase in aggregate demand in theUnited States, then to the extent that you can open as opposed to notbeing able to open up a current account deficit, in effect the savingthat comes in does damp the rise in interest rates that a givenimpetus to domestic demands would give you in a closed economycontext. That's a slightly different way of putting the same pointthat Steve was making, though you obviously know, Mr. Chairman, thatone has to say where one is going to start the circle.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other questions, we'll goand have some doughnuts.[Coffee break]-18-8/23/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had some differences of opinionexpressed about the business outlook. There are some indications of alittle slowing [in the recovery] from the pace to date. Differencesof opinion on the outlook seem to be rooted in [unintelligible].There are some tentative signs of a little slowing in Ml; M2 and M3are doing pretty well in terms of the objectives. It doesn'tnecessarily strike me as a time for pronounced moves, but I'm open tocomments.MR. PARTEE. Let's vote on alternative B and go home!SEVERAL. I'll second that.MR. ROBERTS. Well, I'd like to suggest that alternative Cwould be no change. We agreed last time that we wanted 7 percentgrowth in Ml and alternative C would take us there. I think theeconomy is doing great and we shouldn't change what we're doing, whichis working. And I would recommend that we go to alternative C.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't think we have to arguereally about whether it's "B" or "C." We maintain the sameoperational paragraph and simply say we maintain the existing degreeof reserve restraint. And we assume [borrowing of] $700 to $900million. I guess that's the difference between us. If we go all theway down to alternative C, that assumes a borrowing range as high as$1 to $1-1/4 billion, and then we would be pushing up the federalfunds rate to 9-3/4 percent plus, whereas if we stick with $700 to$900 million, then it's about 9-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. You're objecting to the Ml number, isn't thatright? You would rather have the old Ml range. That's all he'stalking about.MR. MORRIS. I would remind you, Ted, that we're nottargeting Ml; we're only monitoring it.MR. ROBERTS. It seems we could use our monitoring a littlemore sensitively, though, which I'd appreciate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The operational paragraph says 8-1/2and 8 percent for M2 and M3 and it says 7 percent for Ml. I don't seethat we have to change any language, but I feel very strongly that wenot go higher than $700 to $900 million on the initial borrowing.MR. GUFFEY. I would agree.MR. ROBERTS. Well, I don't know what the right level is.You remember the discussion the last time; we were so panicked overgoing to $400 million and nothing dreadful seemed to have [happened]in the market when we went to $900 million. In fact, the rates havesubsided here. I'd let the borrowing go up if necessary to maintainthe path.MR. PARTEE. Well, the rates did go up a half point, Ted.MS. TEETERS. Including long-term rates.-19-8/23/83MR. MORRIS. Net, I don't think it's a half point except forthe prime rate and the funds rate; the bill rate went up 25 basis.MR. WALLICH. This isn't the time, really, to make a change.Two weeks ago, I must say, I would have thought we should tighten up alittle, but the data that have come in have made me think we'd betterwait--as Steve said in his final remarks, wait and be cautious. Itlooks almost too good to be true that we can get off this bulge of Mlwith no further increase in interest rates. And, if true, it makes methink that something is happening to M1 in that it fails to send us avery useful message. But both from the point of view of the monetaryaggregates and the point of view of the economy, the right thing to meseems to be to go with "B," leave things as they are, and hope that[the forecast] as projected here is true.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's reinforced by the factthat we're getting credit--I'm not sure we deserve it--in that there'sa widespread perception in the financial community that it was ourtightening that started correcting that bulge. Whether it's true ornot true, we're getting the credit for it.MR. PARTEE. We deserve anything we can get!MR. GRAMLEY. I think Henry is probably right and that thingsaren't really as nice as they seem, but I'd just like to relax andenjoy it awhile.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether these viewsthat are expressed are the consensus, but I have a certain aversion tomaking unnecessary changes in these targets in the middle of thequarter. That appears to be an extreme fine-tuning. All we reallyhave to do, if this is the course we want to go, is say "The Committeeseeks in the short run to maintain the existing degree of reserverestraint." We'll discuss how that gets interpreted. Maybe we saythat the action is expected to be associated with growth in M2 and M3at around 8 percent--that's about what we have--and leave in the 7percent for Ml.MESSRS. GUFFEY, FORD, and CORRIGAN. Yes. Let's go home.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to discuss just preciselywhat we mean by the borrowing assumption. As Steve suggested, allthings considered, the $700 to $900 million might be appropriate. Itis $100 million higher than we set before, but it encompasses therange that we've actually had.MR. PARTEE. It's $100 million higher? Is that because youthink that the demand for borrowing is a little higher?MR. AXILROD. It has been running, generally, quite a lothigher. This week it's running over $1 billion; even taking out acouple of what I think are special cases it would be running $800 to$900 million. And the federal funds rate is at 9-1/2 percent. Itseems that the demand for borrowing is running a little higher than wethought.MR. WALLICH. Would that be matched by higher excess reservesthan usual?-20-8/23/83MR. AXILROD. I was looking at the $350 million; I was notnecessarily assuming that, Governor Wallich. I assumed that the rangewould encompass some variation in excess reserves.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're still talking specificallyof excess reserves in the $350 to perhaps $400 million area when wemake that borrowing assumption.MS. TEETERS. Well, they've been running $650 million in thelast two weeks on the chart.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What--excess reserves?MS. TEETERS. No, the net borrowing ran about $650 million.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This would imply [excess reserves of] $350to $550 million.MR. BOEHNE. What set of numbers would keep the funds ratemore or less around 9-1/2 percent?MR. AXILROD. I would say somewhere between $700 and $900million on borrowing, but one can't be absolutely certain. Mr.Sternlight?MR. STERNLIGHT. I agree with that. And I agree with somelooseness of that relationship, because we seem to be gettingborrowing a little over $1 billion and yet the funds rate looks as ifit's going to average a little under 9-1/2 percent. When I look backat some rough equations I tried to draw up, $700 to $900 million mightsuggest to me 9-1/2 percent or a little higher on average, but it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where the funds rate is in the short run,I suspect, is partly affected by whether the market thinks interestrates are going to go up or down. If they think they're going up, thefunds rate will be higher; if they think they're going down, the fundsrate will be lower.MR. BOEHNE. Borrowing of $700 to $900 million seems like areasonable starting point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Also, we have a fairly long time beforethe next meeting. I thought we ought to have some sort of aconsultation in between.MR. BOEHNE. It's October 4th, I think. Yes.MR. PARTEE. I think it's an ordinary six-week interval.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have the question of the federal fundsrate range. We left it at 6 to 10 percent last time and I don't knowif there's any great reason to change it. I think its only relevancewill be when it is published.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd leave it alone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't want to conclude thediscussion prematurely.-21-8/23/83SPEAKER(?). That's a blessing!MR. BALLES. I'll start an argument here, just so that we canhave something to do between now and lunch time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have some other things we can talkabout, though. I don't want to encourage it unnecessarily.MR. BALLES. Based on the San Francisco money market model,we do not share the view that Ml is in the process of slowing down.Therefore, that leads me to wonder whether the 10 percent funds rateis going to be enough to contain Ml anywhere near the path that wehave set for this quarter. We've already overshot as it is and Iwould expect some further overshoot based on our analysis. That leadsme in the direction of at least "B-" if not all the way to "C."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But how can you get that significanta move upward for it to go over 10 percent if we're running policy aswe are and interpreting it as maintaining the existing degree ofreserve restraint? That's the operative sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if the aggregates ran high, we couldtighten up on this.MR. PARTEE. But our main aggregates are M2 and M3, which arewithin their ranges.MR. BALLES. I guess I'm quarreling about whether "existingdegree of reserve restraint" is in fact what we need or whether weneed a bit more restraint.MS. HORN. It comes down in part to whether we trustourselves to deal with the problem you raise when it happens, doesn'tit, John?MR. BALLES. That's right. We have two choices: We can putour confidence in the forecast, which may be wrong, or wait to seewhat happens, in which case it may be too late.MR. PARTEE. Well, since you're the one who has that forecast--Steve doesn't have the same forecast--it's putting our trust in yourforecast as against Steve's forecast.MR. AXILROD. That was one of the two models I referred tothat did run higher.MR. GUFFEY. I would just change the focus a little. Itisn't clear to me what establishment of a borrowing figure by thisCommittee really means. We've been operating on nonborrowed reservesor net borrowed reserves. It appears to me that what we're doing issimply pegging the funds rate at some level and turning over to theDesk and in a sense to you, Mr. Chairman, where that funds rate willrest on a week-to-week basis. I guess I'm raising a question on theoperational procedures that are being followed. If we're following aregime of merely pegging the funds rate, then establishing a borrowinglevel isn't very meaningful because it all cues off of what Peter andSteve believe will give us a 9-1/2 percent funds rate. And then it is-22-8/23/83adjusted from there depending on, I guess, their judgment and theChairman's judgment.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, there is some variation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much weight you put on the funds rateis in our minds when we make the decision. And we're obviouslyconstraining the funds rate in some sense but we're not aiming at aparticular funds rate. The funds rate came out a little higher--aquarter point maybe--than we anticipated at the last meeting.MR. GUFFEY. Well, to illustrate the point, the fact is thatthe funds rate ran up in the last two weeks; it then came back down,to be sure. It may have been affected by technical considerations ofthe [Treasury] refunding and other things. But as a member of thisCommittee, I have a very difficult time saying that $700 to $900million is the right borrowing figure when it is meaningless after thefirst day, if you will, after the paths are built. I'd rather talkabout some appropriate funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can talk about what you want totalk about or what you want to aim at, but I don't think it'smeaningless after the first day. We haven't basically changed that.We could change it in light of all these factors mentioned here.MR. GUFFEY. When borrowing ran at the $900 to $1 billionlevel, we did not follow the regime of earlier days by adjusting thenonborrowed reserve path.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But in planning the nonborrowedreserve path you still have been using the assumption for everythingyou've said, haven't you, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Irrespective of the fact that someweeks borrowing comes in higher or lower.MR. GUFFEY. [Unintelligible] and then you accommodate thatborrowing.MR. ROBERTS. Well, it looks to me as if we've had aconstructive effect. The policy has resulted in a path that hasslowed the [growth of the] monetary base, which is getting reflectedhere in a slowing in the stock of money.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's a larger question. He'stalking about a narrower question.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, I am.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not on the phone every day, butmy understanding--if I'm wrong, Steve or Peter ought to speak up--isthat they are following the Committee's guidance in calculating thenonborrowed reserve path. They are not adjusting the nonborrowedreserve path to the actual borrowing that happened to occur in aparticular week.-23-8/23/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Except that, as kind of a footnote, theyhave had these weeks when [borrowing] came in very high early in theweek and the market may get pretty [unintelligible]. We get a lot ofexcess reserves as a result. The Desk hasn't been driven to supply alot of money to get the borrowings way down to balance off whathappened in the first half of the week on some occasions.MR. GUFFEY. But those weeks have followed one after theother; that is my point. It's not just one week in isolation.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, there were several weeks.MR. STERNLIGHT. We got a lot of borrowing early in the week.There was one week when we were just about explicitly making the kindof adjustment that President Guffey referred to. We were prepared toaccommodate--to make some allowance for the high level of borrowing inthat week, as it closed out. We were going to make an allowance forhigh excess reserves as we were closing out the week but then itturned out that the reserve factors caused a big miss that pretty muchoffset the kind of allowance we thought we were making there.MR. PARTEE. Consider that confirmation!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's clear that members of theCommittee, in varying degrees, have the level of the funds rate inmind when they think about the borrowing level. But we're notstrictly adjusting the operations so that we are aiming at aparticular federal funds rate.MR. GUFFEY. Well, you try to hit a net borrowed reservefigure that will give you a [particular] funds rate, though, if Iunderstand the way you've been operating most recently.MR. STERNLIGHT. Right. But that net borrowed reserve figurecomes out of the Committee's discussion on borrowing and--MR. PARTEE. I guess, though, that I can understand Roger'spoint. Another way to put it, precisely, is that you think $700 to$900 million is closer to giving us a 9-1/2 percent funds rate than$600 to $800 million was. So, Roger's point is: Well, why not justspecify a 9-1/2 percent funds rate and forget about the borrowingnumber? There's some logic to that, I think.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do that, but that's not what we aredoing.MR. WALLICH. It is true that we don't operate on theautomatic system where a rise in money supply and, therefore, demandfor reserves automatically leads to a rise in the funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's why we changed the paragraphto put emphasis on the degree of tightening--or maintaining orloosening, even--of reserve restraint.MR. WALLICH. I think that is what Roger is saying, if Iunderstand him correctly.-24-8/23/83MR. GUFFEY. That's correct.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It certainly limits the amount ofvariability in the fed funds rate. There's no question about that.But I think it's also correct to say that we're not pegging it. We'veseen within a week a considerable movement in the funds rate.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that clarification or lack thereof, Iguess where we are specifically is that we replace "increase slightlyfurther" with "maintain the existing degree of reserve restraint." Iwould just summarize that 8-1/2 and 8 percent by saying 8 percent [forboth M2 and M3] and take out the "respectively." We leave in the 7percent for M1 and I guess we're leaving in the 6 to 10 percent forthe federal funds range. And we are assuming a borrowing level of$700 to $900 million, unless these other factors suggest that thatshould be changed.MR. GUFFEY. And this implies a funds rate of around 9-1/2percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's where they are guessing, that'sright.MR. GUFFEY. Or a little less. [Laughter.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shall we vote? Somebody is pointingsomething out. What is this about?MR. BERNARD. The interest rate sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not true, is it? Mr. Bernard islooking at the last sentence of the boilerplate on interest rates."Interest rates rose appreciably through most of the intermeetingperiod but recently market rates have retraced much of their rise."We should just be putting in "all of their rise." Is that correct?SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. MARTIN. Some, but not all.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "much" is the way it is now.MR. AXILROD. Much or most?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll make it "most."MR. PARTEE. It depends on what rates did in the last fewdays.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That gives us two "mosts" in thatsentence. Say "through much of the"--MR. AXILROD. I would say it is more than a large part,Governor; in many cases they're within 5 basis points. It really isthe bulk or something--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where it says "most" up above we'll changeit to "much." We'll reverse the "most" and "much."-25-8/23/83MR. MARTIN. Give them something to work on, right!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I guess we'll vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All we have left is the confirmation ofthe date for the next meeting, October 4. And we may have aconsultation before then.END OF MEETING-26-