Federal Open Market CommitteeConference CallJune 23, 1983Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Black, and Ford, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Atlanta,respectivelyMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Mr. Ettin, Associate EconomistMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Meek and Soss, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Bank of New YorkPRESENT:Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Callof June 23, 1983CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it would be appropriate toreview the situation and confirm or review our decisions on whatdegree of slight firming is appropriate and whether we're within thedirective.[Secretary's note: Messrs. Kichline, Cross, Ettin, andSternlight reported to the Committee on recent developments. Theircomments were not transcribed. A summary of those reports, based onstaff notes, is included in the Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Turning to the decision process, I do notmyself feel--as a matter of preference--that we need any vote or newdecision today. But I want to confirm that we have a somewhat higherborrowing level than the $350 million that we talked about. As Petersaid, after one week where it went somewhat the other way, we havebeen playing it cautiously--particularly against the background of thehigher aggregates and the better business news and not wanting tomislead the market the other way--and ended up with a somewhat higherlevel of borrowings. It seems to me appropriate to maintain thatlevel, which I interpret as in the $400 to $500 million range at thispoint. That's what I would like to get some judgment on, given thebackground. And I think that is not out of keeping with the generaldirective and not out of keeping with the basic guidelines on monetaryexpansion that were established at the previous meeting. But that's amatter of taste. I would just look for concurrence, if that's yourwish, on that kind of borrowing level, taking account of fluctuationsin excess reserves and the rest.MR. WALLICH. This is Henry Wallich. The question is whetherthe borrowing is going to remain at these levels. In that case therehas been an implicit move, which I think has been in the rightdirection.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I'm talking about is maintainingroughly these levels which, as I say, I interpret as $400 to $500million. The actual level of borrowings, if we get a big bulge inexcess reserves or something, is different. But I'm talking in termsof making the path something like $100 million higher, more or less,than the one we were talking about before.MR. GUFFEY. What's the implication for the funds rate?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll let Peter address that.MR. STERNLIGHT. I can chime in on that. With regard to theChairman's suggestion of $400 to $500 million, I would associate thatwith a funds rate around 9 percent or a little higher.MR. KEEHN. [Unintelligible] conversation, but what part ofthe borrowing would you interpret, Peter, [as related] to variouscomputer and systems problems that we've experienced?MR. STERNLIGHT. A little, but not a major part recently. Ithink some of the higher borrowing, particularly in the first coupleweeks in June, was associated with reserve shortfalls for various6/23/83reasons--mostly some high Treasury balances and on occasionunexpectedly high demands for excess reserves. I don't have arecollection of any major computer-related or wire problems in thelast two weeks.MR. KEEHN. At the last meeting there was some considerablesentiment by a number of people to move toward a higher borrowinglevel. And we finally did compromise at the $350 million level. Butit seems to me that events that have transpired since then would beconsistent with your suggestion that we move the borrowing level up tothe $400 to $500 million area. So, I would be in favor of that.MR. PARTEE. Si, this is Chuck Partee. I agree with you. Ithink that everything that has occurred has been a little strongerthan we anticipated at the last meeting and that the third quarter isdeveloping as a very, very good quarter indeed in terms of final salesprospectively. Although Jim didn't put a figure on it, I think it'sgoing to be much stronger. The aggregates are all a little on thehigh side. Ml is very much on the high side. So, I don't think weought to back down a bit from where we are. My only question iswhether we ought to move further. I would agree with the Chairman,though, that we would want to be gradualist about this and that wehave a meeting coming up not too long from now, so $400 to $500million is acceptable to me.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, this is Tony Solomon.I think that $400 to $500 million is reasonable under today'sconditions. It would mean that there wouldn't be any further movementunless anticipations carried it somewhat further than the 9 to 9-1/4percent that Peter Sternlight was talking about. I think it'sreasonable and consistent enough with the majority view on a slightincrease in restraint that I don't think there needs to be a rewritingof the [directive]. I agree with you, therefore, that this can simplybe a consultation in which we agreed on this somewhat higher level ofthe borrowing assumption.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that connection, what I would beinclined to do--though it could be done another way--is not, as yousay, rewrite the directive because I think this is generally withinthe scope [of the existing directive]. But I would include in thewritten record that there was a consultation and that we confirmedthat a slight increase in pressures was appropriate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Does that get published?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, it doesn't have to. We coulddo it either way. But we have some precedent for publishing somethinglike that, and it might be useful.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think we have to indicate that there wasa [consultation].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, does that raise the question of avote?SPEAKER(?). No, I don't think so.6/23/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. We have precedents for all differentways. We can have a vote; then we have to rewrite the directive.Well, we don't have to rewrite the whole directive but we have to havesomething to vote on--a specific sentence. We can just do what Isuggested, which amounts to pretty much the same thing except we don'tlist a vote. The bottom line would be that we reviewed the businesssituation, the aggregates, and the international situation.Everything looked a bit stronger and the Committee consensus was that,consistent with the directive, pressures would be slightly tightened.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though your voice faded, we didget the last sentence. I agree with the approach you outlined. Ithink it's a moderate response, but I'd go along with it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other alternative, just to complete mythought--and we have precedents for this--is that we can have aconsultation and not say we had a consultation. I don't know why, butmy instinct is that we might as well say we had one.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's because we never mentionin our record, as I remember, what the borrowing assumption is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh no, we wouldn't cite that anyway. Itwould be some language to the effect that we're operating consistentlywith a slight increase in reserve pressures. That's all it would say.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, if it's not published, it's allright. But if it were to be published, then that would sound like afurther increase in restraint and that is beyond what the majoritydecided last time.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it would be stated as consistent withthe directive. And we have a directive that says "slight increase."All we're doing is consulting about what a slight increase is, inthese terms. I think it's consistent with what we've done at times inthe past. As I say, we have alternatives all over.MR. WALLICH. I think there would be some merit in this casein having a public record. There is enough of a movement so we shouldrecognize it--without changing the directive, however.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is my instinct. I don't know quitewhy I feel that way, but it just seems natural to say we have thisunder review. We have a pretty vague directive, so we're justindicating publicly that we've kept it under review between meetingsand reconfirmed the idea of a slight increase in pressures. But theemphasis would be on "reconfirmed."MR. MARTIN. I think the advantage in some careful publicindication of this kind is in the reduction of the fear that is in themarket that we will not take gradual and careful interim steps, but onthe contrary that we will sometime down the road, as in the commonexpression, "slam on the brakes." This would be a good signal, ifcarefully enunciated, to minimize that fear that is in the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get too bogged down onprocedures at this point. Let's return to the substance. Doesanybody else have any comments?6/23/83MR. BLACK. Bob Black, Mr. Chairman. I agree with youcompletely. And I would favor showing it in the record. It will looka lot better if it's as strong as it appears to be to show that we metand did something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments? In the absence of acomment, I will interpret it as a consensus, which is the way therecord of the consultation will be written.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey. Do I understandthat what you plan to show publicly is that the Committee met andconfirmed the slight firming that has already taken place?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't word it just that way. I wouldjust say that we met, we reviewed the business situation and thestrong news that was reported. We reviewed the aggregates and theylooked a little stronger. In the light of all these facts, theCommittee consensus was to confirm its decision that a slight firmingin reserve pressures is desirable.MS. TEETERS. You're not going to take a reported vote on it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I wouldn't have a vote. It will justbe reported as a consensus that a slight firming was consistent withthe directive we already have.MR. GUFFEY. What has already happened?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in fact, it has already happened,but this--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I must be dense. It seems tome that what you're doing is leaving it open to ambiguousinterpretation, which may be just as well. But it could either be aslight firming, which doesn't go beyond the firming that was in thelast directive, or it could be a slight additional firming even thoughit's still consistent with the last directive. Am I correct that itis open to both of those interpretations?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think probably so, and I'm not sure Isee the damage in that ambiguity.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not sure either, but I think itis ambiguous. Okay.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn. We're in themiddle of a director's meeting and I wonder if I could be excused toget back there before--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can be, if it's agreeable that this isthe consensus. Hearing no objection, I think you can go, Si. I'lljust ask whether anybody else has anything else they want to bring upand you go.MR. KEEHN. Okay, thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not hearing any other business before thehouse, we will stop. Thank you.6/23/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, your voice fades. TheWashington end fades very, very frequently. Maybe somebody ought totake a look at the system again.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to take a look at the systemfor various reasons. The more we look at it the worse it seems toget. But we'll try once again.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is that the Federal Reserve System orthe communication system?SPEAKER(?). Both!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That comment refers to the communicationsystem. Okay.END OF SESSION