Federal Open Market CommitteeConference CallJanuary 14, 1983PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. BallesMr. BlackMr. FordMr. GramleyMrs. HornMr. MartinMr. ParteeMr. RiceMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and RoosAlternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMr. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bankof PhiladelphiaTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Callof January 14, 1983MR. ALTMANN. To make sure that all the Presidents are on theline, I'll be calling the roll by Reserve Bank. Please respond byidentifying yourselves so we know for sure who is on, given this newsystem we're using. [Secretary's note: Mr. Altmann then called theroll and all Reserve Banks were represented except Cleveland.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everybody's on here?MR. PARTEE. Cleveland is missing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we might as well proceed with Mr.Axilrod telling us where we are.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I'd like first to give theclearest thing I can give, which is where we've been. For the fourthquarter of 1982, the Committee had an objective for M2 of around 9-1/2percent and for M3 [of about 8 percent]. The actual results are thatM2 did grow 9-1/2 percent from September to December and M3 grew 7percent. So, in terms of the fourth-quarter objectives that were setat the beginning of the fourth quarter, those are the latest numbers.We will be publishing the December figures today and they will showfor M1 an increase of 9.1 percent, which will give us an increase forthe year of 8-1/2 percent; they will show an M2 increase of 8-1/2percent, which will give a yearly increase of 9.9 percent; and theywill show an M3 increase of only 2.3 percent, which will give a yearlyincrease of 10.4 percent. We believe the M2 increase in December wasimpacted to a sizable degree by the money market deposit accounts. Asof the latest specific data we have, which is the week of January 5th,these money market deposit accounts had grown to a level of $111billion. Making a reasonable estimate for the [week of the] 12th fromthe savings deposit figures we have, which include the MMDAs, wouldconservatively put them at a level of $130 billion. So, they'recoming very close already to the level that the staff had assumed wasconsistent with a 3 percent shift adjustment for the first quarter.That is, if your underlying--MR. ALTMANN. Excuse me. Could you hold it a minute. Let mesee who's coming in on this other line.SPEAKER(?). Cleveland operator for Mr. Altmann.MR. AXILROD. With this rapid growth in the MMDAs, we made avery definite attempt, based on what are rather rough data, to see howmuch of those funds shifted out of non-M2 sources. The only way wecan do it at the moment is by a residual method. It involves goingthrough the M2 weekly data, which aren't necessarily complete, anddeciding what they otherwise would have done and seeing what they did,and then assuming that that difference goes into MMDAs. That thenleaves a residual that comes from market sources. Our estimate of theamount that would have come from market sources in December would tendto raise M2 growth on the order of 3 to 4 percentage points at anannual rate. So that would suggest, if that number is right, thatunderlying M2 growth was somewhere around 5 to 5-1/2 percent inDecember. We've also looked at December in other ways. We have takenthe nonpersonal MMDAs out of M2 just to see what that would have1/14/83 -2-given; and that would have produced a 4-1/2 percent rate of growth inM2 in December. That assumes nonpersonal MMDAs are something likelarge CDs; that's probably not right because they include other kindsof things such as business savings deposits, but that would have beenthe result for M2 growth in December. We have a survey in which webegan to get data on MMDAs maturing in 7 days or more that are over$100,000. That survey has not indicated that there are very many ofthose. The first week's data show only $100 million, so that wouldn'thave any effect on M2. Looking ahead, given the strength that we nowhave, because the growth in December was very rapid in M2--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have an interruption here for somereason.MR. ALTMANN. President Horn, are you there?MS. HORN. Hello. Yes, this is Karen.MR. ALTMANN. Okay, thank you. We're in process.MR. AXILROD. We had, of course, more rapid growth inDecember in the MMDAs than was implicit in the Committee's target, orreally even in the staff's estimate. As I said, we have virtuallyreached the midpoint of the staff's estimated range now; we're veryclose to it. Unless this slows down perceptibly or very rapidly, it'sgrowing at least more toward the upper ends of the staff's estimatesand probably well above what had been included in the 9-1/2 percent M2growth that the Committee voted on, which included a modest increasein shifts. Given what happened in December, that carries throughsomewhat into January because the level is being raised very rapidly;and simply carrying through that higher level raises the growth forthe quarter on our estimate of the shift by about 2 points. So, thatalone would raise the 9-1/2 percent to roughly 11-1/2 percent withoutshifts being even greater from there on in than [assumed] in theCommittee target. So, without an ability at this point to beextremely specific, I would say that fairly clearly, for reasons ofthe shifts, we're running above the 9-1/2 percent. To get at the so-called underlying strength of M2--[to determine] whether we're runningabove because of underlying strength as well--is really verydifficult. Given what we have so far in January and assuming over thebalance of January increases in M2 that are normal, as if there wereno shifts--in the $2 or $3 billion or $4 billion range weekly--we comeout with a very high M2 in January. To give you a rough idea of therange of possibilities, we have [an estimate] on the order of 28percent; the New York estimator has [an estimate] on the order of 20percent. So, I think growth somewhere in the 20 to 30 percent rangehere is certainly more than possible, it's probable.MR. GRAMLEY. This is after allowance--MR. AXILROD. No, gross.MR. GRAMLEY. Gross.MR. AXILROD. And 7-1/4 points of that is simply carryingthrough the December level that had been shifted. Given our estimateof the amount that shifted--from this residual method we've assumed 16percent of the MMDAs are shifted--and our projection for January over1/14/83the balance of the month, we would be reducing that 28 percent by only11.6 percentage points. The reason I'm that specific is that thatlooks way too high as a January underlying [growth rate]. It justdoesn't make sense. So we tried to undertake some [analysis of] thenumbers to see how sensitive things were. And it's so sensitive thatit's very difficult to guide ourselves in any very technical way. Ifwe had assumed that 25 percent shifted out of market instruments,which is not unreasonable--one could get that out of the numbers andI'm told that some market people think it's that high--then we wouldbe subtracting 17 to 18 points at an annual rate in January from theactual growth. So, [the rate of growth] is very sensitive to what onethinks has shifted, and we don't have a particularly firm way ofcoming up with an estimate of the amount of the shift.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which seems to be the understatement youhave made!MR. AXILROD. But, Mr. Chairman, the one thing I can say tothe Committee with a reasonable degree of certainty is that the 9-1/2percent is too low relative to the amount of shift we've already seen.So from that alone one would expect growth above 9-1/2 percent, andthere is some growth above that that represents shift.MR. GRAMLEY. It's further shift?MR. AXILROD. The shift we've already seen. The shift we'vealready seen adds 2-1/2 points to the first quarter. If you had an 8percent underlying growth, it would be at 10-1/2 percent; and I thinkthe Committee added roughly another one in there, so that got me to11-1/2 percent.MS. TEETERS. Steve, of the $130 billion you're estimatingfor January 12th, in dollar terms how much of it came out of non-M2components?MR. AXILROD. It's 16-1/2 percent of that. All I have hereare growth rates that have been translated from it. But it's 16-1/2percent of that number. What we worked out through January 5th was aspecific number of $18 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After that enlightening discussion of M2,what is going on with M3?MR. AXILROD. For M3, we've had a considerable weakness inlarge CDs, so we had that weak December growth. And it looks as ifgrowth in M3 in January will strengthen considerably, largely becauseof this huge M2. If M2 is up in the 20 to 30 percent range, I wouldassume that something like at least half of the growth will be in M3.And we're assuming large CDs are not going to be quite as weak as theywere. So, partly from the carry-through effect on that, we get a verylarge M3.Mr. Chairman, there's one other point I should make and thatis with regard to Ml. I'm afraid, again, that all it's going to showis how little we can say about these numbers. We're publishing a $300million decline for the week of January 5th. But in the week ofJanuary 12th, for which we do have preliminary data--and that's thefirst full week of Super NOW accounts--our preliminary data show a1/14/83$6.6 billion increase. One would think that that might be the SuperNOW account effect, and maybe it will turn out to be that. I'll getseparate weekly data on Super NOWs a week from today for these fewweeks. But in the week of the 12th the figures show the seasonallyunadjusted NOW accounts increased only $2.7 billion, little differentfrom their increase in the previous week. So the seasonal factor istransforming this into a fairly big increase.MR. GRAMLEY. Does that include the Super NOWs?MR. AXILROD. Yes, they are in there. It doesn't lookstrong. And the old M1-A in that week is increasing $1.8 billion onthese preliminary numbers. So it's not clear from the data that we'rehaving any substantial effect from the Super NOWs as of now. We havebuilt some effect into the rest of January on that assumption; that'swhy we have a January estimate, based on what we have through the 12thfor Ml, on the order of 15 percent. We've assumed some further rathermoderate increase in the course of the month from the Super NOWs; ifthe Super NOWs take off, we'd have a much bigger number.MR. ROOS. Wouldn't that mean, Steve, if the Super NOWs don'ttake off, that Ml adjusted would be a more reliable target than eitherM2 or M3?MR. AXILROD. I don't have an Ml adjusted. I did not workthrough these data, such as they are. Ml adjusted is affected inanother way; some of the Ml would go into MMDAs.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is Ml adjusted?MR. AXILROD. I assumed President Roos was thinking of somesort of shift-adjusted Ml. We don't have one. What I was trying tosay was that Super NOWs would tend to increase Ml but the shifts intoMMDAs would tend to decrease it. We assume very little shift intoMMDAs from Ml because we couldn't see much actual change--an overtobvious effect--in the weekly figures. If you had assumed that Ml wasotherwise even stronger than we had in December, then you could put alot of shift in. We were reluctant to make that assumption. So, Ihave not worked through to get at what Ml would look like if youabstracted from all these shifts, which affect it in differentdirections.MR. BALLES. Steve, you might be interested to know that atour board meeting yesterday the bank directors from all around theWest were pretty unanimous in the view that so far the Super NOWs havebeen essentially a nonevent. Banks weren't promoting them veryheavily nor were customers very interested, and not much was going on.MR. AXILROD. That's [about] what our one week of datasuggested.MR. BLACK. The same is true in Richmond.MR. GUFFEY. The same is true in Kansas City.MR. BOEHNE. Also Philadelphia.MR. FORD. Ditto Atlanta.1/14/83 -5-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who can make sense out of all thesefigures?MR. BALLES. We were counting on you!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you're counting on me, you'repremature in getting any answer at the least. I think this isterribly confusing analytically and factually. It just makes our jobin following these figures worse than it looked like [it would be] atthe Committee meeting, I would say. Beyond that, I don't know what toconclude other than that it's more difficult. All these figures lookhigh; I don't deny that. Whatever kind of adjustment one makes--unless there's something that we're missing here entirely--it's hardto say they look on the low side. I'm a little surprised about whatyou said about M3 in January; to the extent that this shift in M2comes out of M3, which some of it certainly does, you just don't addthe bulge in M2 on to the M3 figure.MR. AXILROD. No, that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the latest data you had for M3 werenot particularly strong, were they?MR. AXILROD. Well, I was looking at the large time deposits.We're assuming a drop in the course of January--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Forget everything you're assuming.Assumptions aren't very good these days. The last figures on M3 arenot nearly as strong as the M2 figures, are they?MR. AXILROD. In December, that's right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know December, but haven't you anythingfor January?MR. AXILROD. We don't really have weekly M3 data. Well, Ihave sort of an experimental look and based on that they tend to goup. They are very strong in the first 2 weeks largely because--if youbelieve what I have for the first two weeks in January--we have a $39billion increase in M2 and the M3 increase is $23 billion. It's not abad relationship; that is, you're taking off $16 billion of the stuffin [unintelligible]. That's why I said if M2 is really going to be upin the 20 percent range, M3 would be high.MR. GRAMLEY. You must be looking at an increase on averagein January of maybe $40 billion in MMDAs--December-to-January. If wehad 10 percent of the increase in MMDAs coming from market securities,that's $4 billion that comes out of market securities. Multiply thatby 12 and you get a [$48] billion dollar annual rate of increase, andthat's a lot in M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He was assuming more than that.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, I know. That's why I say if only 10percent came from that amount--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he's assuming more than that. Thefigure isn't all that low to say the least.1/14/83MR. AXILROD. We have [assumed] more out of market securitiesthan out of large time. Who knows how that will work out! As I say,it's a pretty big reduction in the components of M3. But it can'toffset the big increase in M2 entirely, by any means.MR. PARTEE. Well, Steve, we could have a big decline in CDs.That is, I would think that a well funded bank would simply let itslarge CDs run off. Now, maybe you need to include Federal Home LoanBank borrowing in the adjustment there too, because some of it hasgone to savings and loans. And they may be letting their own HomeLoan Bank borrowings go down pretty fast.MR. GRAMLEY. But you can't adjust CDs that rapidly. Atleast it seems to me that if they are not maturing right away--MR. PARTEE. But usually the maturity schedules have shownquite a concentration in short maturities.MR. AXILROD. Well, in the week of December 22nd, the rate ofdecline in large CDs in the net component of the money stock, after itabstracts from the money market fund holdings, was $6 billion. Well,when we started this in the week of December 15th, it was $1.7billion; then the [first] full-week effect was $6 billion; then in theweek of the 29th it dropped to $3.1 billion; in the week of January5th it dropped to $1 billion. We have a much bigger drop coming up;we estimate a drop of $7 billion in the week of the 12th and then westay with declines of $3 billion. We're not really out of the patternhere at all, so it could drop sensationally more but it would have tobe quite a sensational drop.MR. BALLES. Steve, John Balles. I have a bit of anecdotalevidence from a California bank president's group that I am meetingwith and talked to last night. A number of banks on the West Coastand maybe around the rest of the country, as you know, have beenoffering premium rates on their MMDAs. As a result, they're havingtrouble [lending out] that money profitably, so they have plenty ofincentive for the moment to let their big CDs run off. They aretrying to find ways to put all this money in the MMDAs to work.MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. There could be a much morerapid runoff than we've had, which would lower the growth of M3 some.But I think we'd still have a fairly big M3 growth here--bigger thanDecember for sure.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see why they are having anytrouble making money, John, when they're offering 11-1/4 percent and abonus and the prime rate is 11 percent. You just do enough of thatand you make a lot of money.MR. BALLES. Not according to them.MR. PARTEE. What, on the compensating balance?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question. You probably don'thave any feel for this, but one of the unknowns here is that weexpected some limited but still significant portion of these MMDAs tocome out of NOW accounts or demand deposits. On the face of it, the1/14/83figures don't seem to suggest that. Does anybody have a feel forthat?MR. TIMLEN. Paul, in New York we only have information from2 or 3 banks and it's all switching basically within the M2 category,with very little from the Ml. That is just from 2 or 3 specific banksthat have told us what their situation is.MR. BLACK. Paul, Bob Black. We have [responses] from only17 banks so far on our survey, but it appears that 13 percent came outof old Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My word! If it was that much, it could bea huge amount.MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. BLACK. Yes, that's right. It's only 17 banks, but we doknow--don't we Steve?--that the shift-adjusted rate was probably wellin excess of 9.1 percent in December.MR. AXILROD. Well, it's very sensitive to these percentages.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you assumed any of it came out of Ml,you would get "shift adjustment" of more than what the actual figurewas.MR. AXILROD. Do you mean on Ml?MR. BLACK. I'm just saying M1 was somewhere in the double-digit range for December. How high, nobody knows. If any change--MR. AXILROD. Yes, probably. We have assumed very littleshift, but I'm sure whatever little shift there was could push itcloser to the double-digits.MR. BLACK. We just did some figures on this and [I don'tknow] if they amount to anything, but we came up with some shift-adjusted figures that were way up in the double-digit range dependingon what assumptions we used. One came out 25 percent and one came out28 percent. But I wouldn't put much credence in those because this isa very small sample.MR. AXILROD. Our figures on the shift out of Ml came nowherenear yours, Bob. Our estimate is really below 5 percent; it's morelike 2 or 3 percent.MR. BLACK. You have more data; that's probably morerealistic. But [unintelligible] on the shift-adjusted rate forDecember, unfortunately.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any more enlightening comments on thesefigures?MR. BALLES. Well, Paul, just a reaction to these figuresSteve has been reporting: The one that surprised me, at least basedon what we thought might happen when we were looking forward at theDecember FOMC meeting, is how much M2 seems to have been impacted1/14/83here. It's certainly more than I had expected. I find that Steve'sevidence, which is admittedly and necessarily somewhat rough, isfairly persuasive in the sense that certainly to some extent M2 hasbeen impacted and that, therefore, the target that we had set for theDecember-to-March period probably needs some upward adjustment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't disagree with that as aqualitative conclusion. I don't quite know what to do about itbecause I don't have any confidence whatsoever about what other numberwe would put down. What I would suggest in that connection is that welook at this for another week and see whether we can make any moresense out of it. I'm not terribly sanguine in that respect but[suppose] we just sit here and not do much; we're not taking anyaction to ease beyond what we discussed at the last Committee meeting.I don't know whether we [should] take some moderate action in theother direction, but I'd just be inclined to sit here for another weekand see whether we can make any sense out of this instead of thinkingof revising a directive in our ignorant state at the moment. Let's atleast wait another week.MR. BALLES. Well, Paul, I would certainly agree with that.I guess where I would come out--to put it a bit differently--is that Iwould be reluctant to act too quickly here to clamp down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I certainly share that view. And that'sequivalent, or the substantive result, of what I'm suggesting for thenext week anyway.MS. TEETERS. What does this imply for the operation of theDesk, Steve?MR. AXILROD. Well, we have been going along with the $200million assumption that the Committee had set on borrowing. So, we'vebeen accommodating the nonborrowed to whatever changes in reserverequirements and aggregates have been involved in these figures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Altmann has to interrupt again forsome reason.MR. ALTMANN. Yes, President Horn.OPERATOR. Did she get through to you?MR. ALTMANN. No, sorry.OPERATOR. She's going to dial you directly.MR. ALTMANN. Well, I think it's a bit late now, anyway.OPERATOR. All right, I'll tell her.MR. ALTMANN. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it's late ornot.MR. ALTMANN. All right, have her dial.1/14/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to raise another matter.OPERATOR. All right, she'll be calling.MR. ALTMANN. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We did, of course, contemplate thissituation in the directive. I don't think we contemplated it in quitethe degree to which it exists, but there is an escape clause in thedirective for the moment. If that's the general view, I would not doanything at the moment, but continue to look at this. I have to begone the first part of the week, in Europe, but maybe we should bethinking about having a further conversation next Friday.MR. PARTEE. I think that's certainly the right course, Paul.We can't make heads or tails out of these figures. There's a bigshift adjustment occurring because the institutions have chosen to getback their rightful share of the market. It's impossible to see whatthe stock adjustment is and it's certainly incorrect to annualize it,whatever it is.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever you say, even if we could makeout these numbers, my suspicion is they're going to look high. As Isaid before, they've been running high for some months. Put thattogether with economic activity and it looks to me like we are goingto get, even on an adjusted basis, a further decline in velocity whichwill make the sixth consecutive quarter--I guess not technicallyconsecutive because there's one quarter that interrupted it slightly--of a downward trend of some size in velocity. That is unprecedentedand brings me back to our yearly problem as opposed to our weeklyproblem. I don't know whether anybody has any bright new ideas onthat. Steve did write something, which I have seen. The course thathe chose, maybe sensibly, was writing something that isn't quite adirective, but a basic summary as nearly as he judged any consensus ofwhat our conclusion might be on this matter. I think it's areasonable sense of what that discussion was. Whether it's reasonablein face of the problems that we have for 1983 in judging precisely howwe want to approach this, I don't know, considering what is going on.But it may be worthwhile, if you agree, just to send out somethinglike this to you. It's not a draft of anything, really, although italmost sounds that way. But I don't consider it a draft of anything.I'd like to see to what degree this captures the spirit of what peoplewere talking about as a focus for making any other telephonic commentsthat people want to make before we meet again. Does that sound like auseful or a counterproductive idea?MR. BLACK. It sounds useful to me, Mr. Chairman.SPEAKER(?). I agree.MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.MS. TEETERS. I'm just curious whether any of you havenoticed any problems in the money market mutual funds as they unwindand disinvest?1/14/83MR. STERNLIGHT. Peter Sternlight on this. We've beentalking to some of them, especially in that first week or two whenthey had heavy outflows, and it looked like they were coping with itpretty well through having positioned themselves to have greater-than-normal liquidity. And in the last couple of weeks, as you have seen,those outflows have tapered off a good bit. And we even hear from themarket that some of the funds are beginning to reach out a little, ina gingerly way, to get somewhat longer maturities. So, they seem tofeel that the worst of their hemorrhaging is over.MS. TEETERS. Thank you.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody wasscratching their heads over the holiday season and beyond and whetheranybody has anything they want to comment on in terms of our generalproblem for 1983. Let me ask that general kind of structural approachquestion. And if anybody also wants to make any comments about whatthey see going on in the economy, this is the appropriate time to doit. [Secretary's note: Silence.] I see you all were working verydiligently and were filled with new ideas during Christmas and NewYear's and beyond! I draw a complete blank?MR. MORRIS. Well, Paul, this is Frank Morris. I don't haveany new ideas but I have some old ones to state.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's fair enough. Do you want to repeatan old one with greater intensity?MR. MORRIS. Very simply, what we're doing here in trying toassess the significance of these numbers as they come in continues tosuggest to me that M1 and M2 are no longer going to be reliableyardsticks for monetary policy, not only now but in the future. Inaddition to these new accounts, we're seeing the money market mutualfunds begin to respond--and I think that response will broaden--byoffering unlimited checking on money market funds. So, this willfurther confuse the situation. I think we should not assume that oncethese new accounts settle down all further innovation in the waypeople manage their cash balances is going to come to a screaming haltand that, therefore, M1 and M2 will be useful guidelines for thefuture. I think until we face up to that fact, we're going to havecontinued trouble.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But is the operational conclusion you drawfrom that more emphasis on M3 and C and L or something different fromthat?MR. MORRIS. I would say "yes" with regard to M3, which Ithink is the only reasonably unimpaired monetary aggregate that wehave left, although it is subject to shifts out of market instrumentsinto the new accounts as well as the other aggregates. But adding tothat some measure of total liquid assets or total debt will get usaway from these enormous shifts due to financial innovation.MR. WALLICH. Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.1/14/83MR. WALLICH. You remember that the textbook says that whenthere's a shock to the money supply side, go with interest rates. Ina way this is what has been happening. Now, the shock may settle downat the new higher level and then one can demonstrate that the demandfor money has increased, everything else constant. One can go on fromthere and go back to the aggregates. If it turns out that the demandfor money comes down again from this shock level, then one would haveto take account of that and settle on new aggregate targets at a lowerlevel. It would be very difficult to diagnose. But right now we'reclearly in a situation of a money supply shock situation, which weshouldn't allow to feed through to the real sector.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody want to make any comments onthe business situation? Does anybody see any signs of change therefrom what they thought before?MR. BOEHNE. I'm seeing more of what I saw before Christmas--very slight improvement in the tone. I think it's mostly at thepsychological level yet. Nobody has a lot of hard evidence thatbusiness is picking up, but there's a feeling that things probablywill get a little better and the reports from the field seem to lookup. But it's a very tenuous type of thing and it wouldn't take muchto upset it. And I think any kind of significant backup in rates orany sense that the Fed may be tightening would kill it in its tracksbecause I don't think it's that strong yet.MR. MORRIS. This is Frank Morris. I would second EdBoehne's diagnosis. I think the economy is turning around here.We're seeing a pretty widespread improvement in the leading indicatorsand, of course, continued strength in the housing sector. But we'renot going to get, at least on the basis of present evidence, the sortof strong cyclical upturn that we've seen in typical past recessions.And I think it would be vulnerable to any backing up in rates.MR. BALLES. John Balles. I agree with what has just beensaid both by Ed and Frank.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have any sense of anyconviction on the inventory situation? We've seen some reductionsrecently, obviously. And production has clearly been running belowconsumption just recently. But we could still be a long way from aturnaround there or we could not be. I just don't have any strongfeel one way or the other. I don't know whether anybody has anyconviction on that score.MR. KEEHN. This is Si Keehn. The people I talk with saythat they have their inventories down at such a very, very low levelthat any increase in final demand at all would result in a pickup intheir production. On the capital goods side, they don't yet see that[pickup].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was talking to a lot of capital goodsmanufacturers the other day and none of them said they saw an increasein orders at this point. Does anybody have any questions?MR. FORD. This is Bill Ford in Atlanta. I'm in the middleof a board meeting right now that I had to step out of, and ourdirectors just reported that in the Southeast we are starting to see-11 -1/14/83some pickup in forest products and that in certain regions around herethere are some very sharp improvements in housing conditions and soon. But I guess I'd go along with the consensus that says any sharptightening in response to these money numbers would certainly bequestionable policy. On the other hand, looking at what is happeningto sensitive commodity prices, including gold, silver, copper, andvarious other things, and the dollar against certain currencies, Ithink it would also be a serious blunder at this point to give anysign of pushing rates down further in the context of the uncertaintythat we're facing as to what's happening both in the real economy andwith the money numbers. So where I'd come out would be to even keelit for awhile until we have better information.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I appreciate it. If there are noother comments, tentatively anyway, we'll plan to do something likethis next Friday. We'll send something out to you. Thank you.END OF SESSION-12-