Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 12-13, 1983A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., starting on Tuesday, July 12, 1983, at 2:30 p.m.,and continuing on Wednesday, July 13, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. GramleyMr. GuffeyMr. KeehnMr. MartinMr. MorrisMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. RobertsMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of the Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco and Richmond, respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff Director and SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele,l/ Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Oltman,l/ Deputy General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach,l/ R. Davis,l/ T. Davis,1/ Eisenmenger,1/Ettin,l/ Prell,l/ Scheld,l/ Siegman,1/ and Zeisel,l/Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1/ Attended Tuesday session.PRESENT:7/12-13/83Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill,l/ Senior Associate Director, Divisionof International Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn,l/ Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey,l/ Deputy Associate Director, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Jensen,l/ Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Rosine,1/ Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMr. Forrestal, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of AtlantaMessrs. Burns,l/ J. Davis,l/ Keran,l/ Koch,l/ Mullineaux,l/and Stern,l/ Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Dallas, Cleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta,Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus,l/ Meek, and Soss, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York,and New York, respectivelyMr. McCurdy,l/ Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York1/ Attended Tuesday session only.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 12-13, 1983July 12--Afternoon Session[Secretary's note: The meeting began with an executivesession, which was not transcribed.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say now to the assembled group,with a certain amount of sadness, that we just had a little discussionabout a problem that has become all too recurrent: either leaks orgossip to the press about our meetings. I think we're going to haveto establish some firmer guidelines, which we will discuss at the nextmeeting. But for the time being I'm afraid that I want to return,reluctantly, to the practice that we adopted a few meetings ago of, ineffect, having executive sessions or quasi-executive sessions for thepolicy discussion. So, during the meeting itself, at the appropriatetime we will have a smaller group.Let me just say one thing further about this while the wholegroup is here. I find this most distasteful and destructive to themission of the Federal Reserve. I don't think we can operateeffectively if we get conflicting, inaccurate, or on some occasionseven accurate stories in the press that are not appropriately timedand don't have the appropriate imprimatur of officially designatedCommittee statements. Through the years I think there has been a gooddeal of appreciation of this within the Federal Reserve System. Insome sense we are probably under quite a lot more pressure currentlyin terms of the interest in our behavior and decisions, both in marketterms and I suppose in political terms. In my opinion, it puts a verylarge burden on all of us, if we're going to operate effectively, topreserve the confidentiality of what we do and make our statements inthe appropriate setting. It is obviously a consideration that widerparticipation rather than limited participation is desirable. Iunderstand that. But I have to balance these considerations. Thewider participation is fully appropriate when I have a reasonabledegree of confidence that the confidentiality will be preserved.Obviously, this has nothing to do with particular individuals. I madethe point earlier that a lot of this may come from people who aren'teven in this room but who have some sense subsequently, accurately orinaccurately, of what went on and may not feel the same degree ofrestraint. So, it is a problem of the whole organization in thatsense. But if we can't be at these meetings with a feeling ofsecurity and respect, I think it's damaging and ultimately damaging tothe policy-making process. Now I will ask for approval of theminutes.MR. MARTIN. Moved.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll turn to the staff report on theeconomic situation.MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have budgetary projections beyond1984?7/12-13/83MR. KICHLINE. No, we have not done that. We did some ofthose exercises in February, but we have not done anything later thanthat. As you remember, those exercises did provide for a decline inthe actual budget deficit as the economy recovered but a rise in thestructural deficit to levels well over $100 billion. We have notupdated those figures; I presume they would roughly be the same.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Our figures show a projected fiscaldeficit in 1984 of $225 billion, significantly higher than yours. Andthen there are some moderate increases in the few years thereafter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Assuming continued growth in the two yearsthere?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Assuming 4 percent growth.MS. TEETERS. Jim, when does the indexing start?MR. KICHLINE. 1985.MS. TEETERS. And how much does that take out of revenue?MR. KICHLINE. There are lots of things I remember, but thatI don't remember. I'm sorry. It obviously hinges on one's inflationprojection. If we were to run with very mild inflation projections--that is, in the 4 to 5 percent range--it would not be large early on.As you recognize, that cumulates over time in terms of substantiallosses. But I would presume that with small rates of inflation, as wecould conceivably have for 1985, it would not be huge. This is thelast year. That is, the July tax cut [unintelligible] but the fulleffect of it will be felt in the 1984 fiscal year. I'm sorry, but Idon't have a dollar estimate.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to ask a question. I'm surethis has something to do with statistical intricacies. On thecontribution of selected components to real GNP, as I understand it,even though there is a deteriorating export performance you show apositive contribution of net exports in 1984 as contrasted to 1983.Could you explain that to me?MR. WALLICH. That's when it stops getting worse.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, it does get some--MR. ZEISEL. It goes slightly positive, President Solomon.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But why?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What he's saying is that the currentaccount estimate shows it worse.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, because that's the effect of the pricechange. We have a [terms of] trade loss, so the import prices risemuch more rapidly than the export prices. That's why imports arelarger to begin with. So in real terms the net export positionimproves in 1984, as shown in Jerry's figures, but in nominal terms itgets worse because of the terms of trade loss. The latter adds to our7/12-13/83nominal current account dollar deficit; it doesn't add to our netexports.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Did you say this assumes a 15 percentor a 10 percent depreciation of the dollar?MR. TRUMAN. It's 15 percent by the end of 1984.MR. BOEHNE. In the state and local area, that chart thatshows surpluses of the state and local governments struck me as beingat odds with what one normally perceives [the situation] to be. In myarea of New Jersey and Pennsylvania it's quite the contrary; the stateand local deficits are quite large. I just have an impression fromthe national press that there are problems nationwide yet the chartshows a surplus and the surplus is getting bigger. I'm sure you haveto be right, but I wonder if you could [explain it].MR. MORRIS. It's pension plans, which are carried in astate's budget as an expense.MR. PRELL. These are the operating budgets, taking out thoseretirement plans. I think what has happened in many locales--New YorkCity, for example--is that the financial situation has improved muchmore rapidly than had been expected. Of course, there have beensizable tax increases; in the aggregate I think they're on the orderof $5 to $6 billion. And the cumulative effect of all this has been asignificant swing into what is a relatively sizable operating surplus,according to the data we have.MR. KICHLINE. All of the quarters in 1982 on that basis weredeficit quarters, but the current figures show they were in surplus inthe first quarter [of 1983] and the second quarter as well.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are national income accountingfigures?MR. KICHLINE. Correct.MR. MARTIN. Jim, I wonder if you could enlighten me a littlewith regard to the interest rate assumptions consistent with the[Greenbook GNP projection] as shown in Appendix I in the Bluebook. Itseems to me that the projected increase in interest rates,particularly for the Aaa utilities and the fixed rate mortgages, israther modest. It's an increase of 5/8 point or 60 basis points orsomething of that sort. That seems to me to be a relatively lowthreshold for these rates to achieve. Can you help me understand whyyou have such low ceilings as your--?MR. KICHLINE. Well, as you can appreciate, things have beenhappening since we put this forecast together. When I looked at thischart on interest rates, as a matter of fact, I had in mind thatinterest rates would be moving up about a percentage point. But as ofyesterday it was about forty-five basis points for the bill ratebecause that rate already had taken a 50 basis point increase alongthe way. So, part of the answer is that just in the last few weeksmarket rates, indeed, have been moving up. The numbers that we havein the forecast are the ones shown in Appendix I. Some of those ratesin long markets and the mortgage market in particular clearly have7/12-13/83been moving up. They are almost to the levels we had envisaged as anaverage rate for the third quarter. So, implicitly, what we arethinking is that the rate moves that would be encompassed in thisforecast would allow room for some further rise in rates but not agreat deal.MR. MARTIN. So, indeed, if the structure has a higherthreshold than you've shown, wouldn't that cast some doubt over thehousing forecast and particularly the less creditworthy bank borrowerswho resort to the commercial bank window as you've indicated they willbe pushing to do in 1984? And that perhaps would affect the volume ofconsumer borrowing. It's all on the negative side.MR. KICHLINE. I must say, though, that if you look back overthe performance of the last six months, we clearly have raised our[forecast of] real GNP and we have raised our view on the Ms as wellas the interest rates that go with the forecast. We did not have aclear interpretation of what rate levels or changes in rates would beconsistent with activity in the first half. It turned out that theywere consistent with much stronger activity. So, we believe that thatwill be at work in the future. But one of the arguments for amoderation in growth of economic activity late this year, andespecially in 1984, comes from the financial side. The explanation isthat those rates, in our view, should be high enough to damp activitya bit.MR. ROBERTS. You mentioned a revision in manufacturingcapacity. Could you comment on that?MR. KICHLINE. I think Jerry mentioned it, so we'll let himcomment.MR. ZEISEL. Thank you. This is part of a series of suchadjustments that have occurred over the years, periodically. We willbe bringing the new numbers out later this month. They involve anadjustment in capital and capacity utilization figures, utilizing allsorts of data that we can put our hands on: industry data, surveydata from McGraw-Hill, data from our own Census Bureau survey, and soon. It involves a revision of capital stock, which raises thecapacity utilization rate by 1-2/3 percentage points at the currenttime. There are substantially larger increases in some industries,particularly some hard goods industries, but on balance it reallydoesn't change the situation dramatically. I might say that we've hadto be rather conservative in the way we approach these adjustments,particularly in the middle of a contraction phase of the cycle,because what firms say they are putting out of production today theymay change their minds on six months down the line if productionincreases considerably. So, we tend to be rather cautious about it.But, generally, that is the nature of the adjustment.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How much are you reducing thecapacity of the steel industry?MR. ZEISEL. I think the capacity utilization rate changes 5percentage points. But, of course, it remains relatively low, so that[the reduction] doesn't have any particular significance for pressureson that industry.7/12-13/83 -5-MR. BALLES. Jim, I'd like to ask a question, if I may, onthe federal government share of total credit flows, which was[depicted in] the lower half of the first chart that Mike Prellreferred to. I believe that has quite a bearing on the outlook forinterest rates, real and nominal. My question specifically, Mike, is:Do you have anything in here other than the unified budget deficit?That is, have you included off-budget deficits and mortgage pools andguaranteed loans? Just what is in this measurement?MR. PRELL. This measurement is borrowing by the U.S.Treasury, which covers both the unified deficit and the off-budgetdeficit. It does not include government guaranteed or sponsoredagency issues.MR. BALLES. All right, thank you.MR. WALLICH. When I look at your chart on GNP prices andunit labor costs, they've been moving closely together since 1977 andthat suggests that there's a basis for your declining inflationprojection. But there are many other forecasters who have aprojection of rising inflation. Do they have different assumptions asto unit labor costs that are necessary in [arriving at] suchforecasts?MR. ZEISEL. I don't think it's a fundamental [difference in]unit labor costs trends, although there are differences in the viewsof productivity trends. We may be a little more optimistic in ourview of productivity than some, but not a great deal because we remainrather conservative. Our view is that long-term productivity growthat this point is just a little over 1 percent, up about a half pointfrom where it was assumed to be but certainly nothing like the kindsof productivity [trends] that we had earlier. I think it's more afunction of a reading of the implications of the speed of recovery andits effect on wage adjustments and pricing performance. I must saythat our staff, in evaluating past performance and utilizing whateverquantitative tools we have available, tends to come out with ratheroptimistic results about the inflation outlook--somewhat moreoptimistic, in fact, than we have incorporated here.MS. TEETERS. Jerry, you have non-oil import prices here.What assumption do you have on imported oil prices?MR. ZEISEL. I think those are relatively stable in realterms.MR. TRUMAN. No, they are stable in nominal terms, as Imentioned. Essentially, the assumption underlying the forecast isthat oil prices will be unchanged throughout the projection [period];we have built in a small adjustment for the very slight rise ofsomething like 50 cents a barrel from currently recorded figures, butthat [reflects] a tightening of spot [prices].VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Coming back to Governor Wallich'spoint: Most forecasters are projecting a higher rate of inflationthan we are. Certainly, that's the feeling in the financialcommunity; they are looking toward inflation of 5 to 6 percent insteadof around 4 percent. Is it that their assumptions and models aredifferent or is it that they are factoring in, in an intangible way,7/12-13/83psychological expectations, commodity prices, etcetera, and are notbasing it primarily on unit labor costs? How does the CEA come outwith a higher inflation [projection]?MR. KICHLINE. Well, that one is easy to answer. That tracksright into the budget numbers that one is going to display. Indeveloping the Administration forecast, a number of the participantsargued for lower rates in their belief that there will be a betterinflation [outcome], but that of course drives up the budget deficit.I think the answer is that a number things are important ininfluencing expectations. One is the dollar and one is the notion of[the economy] growing rapidly; there will be speed limit effects andwe will have lessened slack by 1984. It's very difficult to use pastexperience and come up with a substantial acceleration in wage ratesin the future. If you want to argue the case, you could say that alot of the good performance we've had recently represents concessionsand that as soon as profits pick up that's going to disappear. Thatmay be the case. But we've just seen in the second quarter morecompanies added to the list of those still [getting] concessions andthree-year contracts with no wage increases. We have a view that,yes, there are cyclical effects here but that we will have enoughslack, judged in terms of the level of underutilized resources, tokeep putting downward pressure on wage rates. We view that as afundamental.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Have you fed back in Ted Truman's 15percent depreciation of the dollar?MR. KICHLINE. Yes. He's causing us difficulty, obviously.Without Ted Truman we would have lower rates of inflation! We dobelieve that to be a very important argument for 1985. That is onething I should note: The partial dollar impact that we have ondomestic prices in 1984 would build in 1985 and would have a largereffect.MR. TRUMAN. That's the reason why we had that alternativechart there.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We all have been assuming adepreciation of the dollar and factoring it in for the last year, andit hasn't come about.MR. MORRIS. You're showing in 1984 a drop of 0.8 in theunemployment rate associated with a 4.2 percent real growth rate. Mystaff suggests that that is a rather large drop in the unemploymentrate historically for a 4.2 percent real growth rate. Are youassuming labor force growth is dropping off sharply or what is it?MR. ZEISEL. No, labor force growth doesn't drop off sharply;actually, it increases quite a bit. We feel that a 4-1/4 percentincrease in GNP is close to 2 percent above capacity growth and thatthis decline in the unemployment rate of about 3/4 of a point ishistorically reasonable using something like an Okun's lawcalculation.MR. MORRIS. Really? As a matter of fact, our staff thinksit's high.7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a very low productivity growth in1984 compared to historical cyclical experience, don't you?MR. ZEISEL. Our productivity is low, certainly based onearlier postwar experience, [such as] in the '60s when productivitywas rising [unintelligible] percent or so. It is now in the [1-1/4]percent range. But it is higher than it was running in the 1970s; itis twice as high, and that of course plays a role. That is, in fact,relatively low productivity. But incorporating that productivitytrend into the calculation--if one wants to take this kind ofmechanical, that is, purely the Okun's law approach--I think does giveus a decline of something like that magnitude for a rate of [GNP]increase of 4-1/4 percent.MR. PRELL. In mechanical terms, if we move above thecyclical trend in the early part of recovery, as the recovery matureswe are going to have a period when productivity growth is somewhatbelow the trend rate of growth so as to return to the trend line.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Haven't we begun to see that already?In recent months hasn't productivity declined?MR. ZEISEL. No, I don't think so. We still have fairlyvigorous productivity gains. In manufacturing, productivity is risingcertainly 4 percent or [even] above that.MR. KEEHN. May I go back to capacity utilization? You showa reasonably good increase in capacity utilization in 1983 and 1984.The capital expenditure line looks awfully steep. Do you have apretty good confidence factor on that?MR. ZEISEL. The growth in capital outlays? Well, the onlything we have hard evidence on at the moment is new orders fornondefense capital equipment, which shows a pretty vigorousturnaround. Now, that doesn't tell us much about what is going tohappen in 1984 but it tends to be a reasonably good lead indicator forthe near term.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are those new orders in relation tosales?MR. GRAMLEY. Are unfilled orders rising or falling at thispoint?MR. ZEISEL. I think they have started to fall. Excuse me,they have turned around.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just by a little. Aren't the new ordersbarely above sales?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, but they were running the other way andthere is a hint that we have reached the bottom and there is a turnwhere new orders--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, if you want to be pessimistic, youcan say this order increase is necessary to maintain the current levelof sales.7/12-13/83MR. ZEISEL. Yes, you can. Our forecasts for capitalspending are based upon relationships with real output and themultiple effects of demand on capital outlays. And in this case theyare pretty much in line with past performance.MR. KEEHN. Your confidence factor is pretty high?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, given interest rates now. In answer toyour question, there are some things going on behind this that we tryto take into account. One is that we have petroleum drilling, whichgets wrapped up in these numbers, rising but not a lot because wethink that market is going to be rather depressed given the oil pricesituation. We do think that in many areas of the country a majorcollapse is underway in certain commercial and office buildingconstruction, and that is likely to be negative going into 1984 forsome time. In the past what has happened, however, is that equipmentpurchases have been the first to pick up and we have seen a good dealof that. Now, early on, the [sales of] autos collapsed and they were[selling] at a discount. And they get wrapped up in these numbers.But office equipment, computer-related products, have been verystrong. So, that is the sustaining force early on. But [ourforecast] is conservative, I think, in the sense that most of themodels say--and certainly the cyclical experience says--that we'rerunning a little below what has happened in past cycles.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This new orders figure is for plant aswell as equipment?MR. ZEISEL. No, the new orders figure is for nondefenseequipment alone.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have one other question, which I willinsert. You have credit growth rising more rapidly than GNP and yousay that is contrary to usual cyclical experience. Why?MR. PRELL. We go through this on a sector-by-sector basis,as well as looking at it in the aggregate. Taking existing balancesheet positions as a start, trying to maintain reasonable levels ofliquidity in the business sector and building up all these flows, thisis what we come up with. Going back and then looking at that againand asking whether we are comfortable with this, I guess we'vesuggested before that we don't have any great theory of creditaggregate behavior. What we're left with is the feeling that giventhe size of the federal deficit and the kind of spending and borrowingrelationships that might come from that, this relatively rapid growthof debt is sensible. I would note that we were expecting a somewhatbigger gap than seems to be materializing this year. But there is,nonetheless, this gap. We don't see the development thus far thisyear of what would be a normal pattern where, on average, creditgrowth is falling short of GNP growth by a couple percentage points inthe first year of recovery. We think it probably has something to dowith this very large government borrowing.MR. PARTEE. That could be a result of government borrowingnot being as stimulative as private borrowing. That could be becauseit's mainly receipts reduction. And it could have a flow-througheffect on savings, although the saving rate is awfully low in yourforecast, which was the point I was going to make. It seems to me7/12-13/83that you have a rather low saving rate for the next 6 quarterscompared to historical experience. There is no evidence whatsoever ofsavings being stimulated by tax incentives and so forth, from what Ican see.MR. PRELL. Well, it could be that there is something goingon in the disinflationary process, for example, that makes people wantto hold more financial assets relative to income than had been truepreviously. Essentially, we had a very big accumulation of financialassets relative to income last year. There's an enormous gap, andwe're carrying this through; it's not going away. We have in ourforecast a continuing moderate inflation picture; we have regulatorychanges that make some forms of financial assets more attractive onthe whole.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're taking a position that all thisliquidity isn't going to be reflected in a higher GNP.MR. PRELL. Implicitly--in the same way that we don't have atremendous reversal of the velocity behavior of the last year.MR. BALLES. I'd like to ask Jim another question or twoabout the first page of his charts, the lower panel that dealt withinterest rates. Do you care to share with us, Jim, your explanation,or rationale if you have one, of the underlying cause of this rise ininterest rates shown for midyear up to the fourth quarter and then adecline by the fourth quarter of next year? That's a tough one.MR. KICHLINE. Well, for one, it has something to do withmonetary policy assumptions. That's a place one might start. It alsohas something to do, obviously, with our view that at the present timewe have strong underlying demands for spending and credit and that thecombination of those things, given our monetary policy assumption,will likely result in some upward drift [in rates]. I noted beforethat these charts may give one the feeling that there is more movementhere than is in fact in store, because some of it already hasoccurred. The 1984 projection on interest rates comes out of aconsidered judgment and a great deal of thought and hope on our part.But I'm not so sure I can say more than that. What has influenced us,particularly on long rates, is the feeling that we are most likely tosee a much better inflation performance than markets generallyanticipate and that, as each month goes by and we see low rates ofinflation, double digit long rates indeed will look pretty attractiveso that there is room [for some decline] in 1984. In addition, wethink the higher rate levels that have occurred now will lead to somematuring of the expansion and to some slowing and thus take a littleof the pressure off of the credit markets. But I would not wish tostake all of what we said this morning on the basis of these interestrate forecasts for that year. That's a central area.MR. BALLES. I appreciate your sharing those thoughts withus. I gather, based on your remarks, that you share to some extentthe view that long rates are influenced considerably by inflationexpectations. And yet the pattern that we see both in your chart aswell as in Appendix I in the Bluebook shows short rates and long ratesgenerally moving up and down together. If you look back a few years,the [unintelligible] doctrine was that if we could convince marketsthat we were going to pursue anti-inflationary policies on into the7/12-13/83future, we would reduce inflation expectations and have downwardpressure on long rates. The thing I'm agonizing about the most, and Iguess a lot of people around the table are, is: What in the heck hascaused this serious increase in long rates since the middle of May orfor about 2 months now? Have inflation expectations worsened or arewe in a new era where if short rates go up, the arbitrage effects aregoing to cause long rates to go up right along with them irrespectiveof any changes or lack thereof in inflation expectations?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I could say something, but maybe Steveor Paul would want to comment on their interpretation of the marketsin terms of what has happened in the very short run.MR. AXILROD. President Balles, even some years ago shortrates and long rates tended to move together in differing degrees. Inthe very recent period, actually, long rates have moved up about asmuch as short rates. I myself think it's somewhat surprising, and Ithink that [reflects] an anticipation or fear of further monetarytightening. I would dare say that if the short rates went down in asustained way, there would be a very sharp drop in long rates. Idon't think at this very moment that this is reflecting a change ininflationary expectations. Now, the level of long rates--being highin real terms--might have something to do with the budget deficit andthe fact that you need higher real rates when the government is thepropelling force than you do when private expenditures are thepropelling force, with the same level of real GNP. At least most ofour big models would give that result. So, private spending wouldn'tbe so high at this level of real rates, independently, without thegovernment stimulus.MR. MEEK. I'd just add one market factor, which is that theTreasury in the third quarter, for example, will be selling about $60billion of coupon issues to replace approximately $23 billion thatmature. We're really getting a lot of supply and the markets arehaving trouble finding a widening circle of buyers for that supply.MR. BALLES. Well, that's right. And it comes back to apoint made in that first chart that Mike Prell showed: that thepercent of total credit flows being taken by the federal government,as projected forward a year to the fourth quarter of 1984, apparentlyisn't going to come down nearly as much as it usually does followingan economic recovery. We have this new structural deficit in therethat's keeping that share up. Is that the way you'd interpret it,Mike? And that, in turn, could have an effect of keeping interestrates up, I guess.MR. BOEHNE. Why wouldn't that argue for higher rates in 1984rather than lower rates?MR. PARTEE. Well, the GNP increase is not all that large in1984, if you look at it. They have 4-1/4 percent real and around 8percent nominal. If, in the abstract, somebody said there was goingto be an 8 percent increase in nominal GNP, I don't think you'd betalking about higher rates.MR. CORRIGAN. I think the market thinks you're talking abouthigher rates.-10-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think I have on my desk a study from theTreasury saying that government deficits don't have any influence oninterest rates. I haven't read the study yet; I just read thenewspaper reports earlier. I now have the study. Have you seen that?MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we got it last evening. I've had a lotto read in the last few days. I'm not sure it quite says that. Ithink what it says is that pure theory can't give you an answer--thatone can construct alternative views of the world in which governmentdeficits have no impact on interest rates or inflation. It also saysthat under certain assumptions those are quite reasonable, but it doesnot come to any definitive conclusion and to some extent depends onrather extreme assumptions. One critical one, for example--ahypothesis that has been floating around for some time--says interestrates are invariant no matter what level of deficit you have. Thatproposition is simply that individuals see through this veil ofgovernment debt financing and know that in their lifetime or theirchildren's lifetimes somebody will have to repay it, so they willsimply increase their saving to exactly offset it--deficit saving.MR. WALLICH. That's why the saving rate goes down!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is not an econometric study?MR. KICHLINE. No, it's not.MS. TEETERS. Well, one of the problems is that our hugedeficits have always occurred in recessions. If they took periods oftime in which there were large deficits and high utilization, I thinkthey'd find a different result.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Exactly.MR. PRELL. As Jim was saying, it's largely an analyticalstudy as opposed to an econometric one.MR. WALLICH. If one does a sufficiently poor job of takingout the cycle, one would find that the high deficits are associatedwith low interest rates. If you take out the cycle properly, I don'tbelieve you get that result.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a chart on deficits which showsthe current cycle against the median of previous postwar cycles. Whatwould it look like in 1975 and the subsequent expansion?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't believe I have the individualcycle data with me. No, I don't. But as I remember, the rebate cameearly in the spring of 1975, so we would have had an actual budgetdeficit decline at that time but then economic activity continued torise. As I remember, the 1975 cycle does indeed approximate thisupper line; it's below the black line for the median of previouscycles, but the first quarter into the cycle there is this plunge whenwe had the $50 rebate or whatever, and then it goes back on track--that is, it's going toward a surplus.MR. CORRIGAN. The earlier period is shown in this otherchart, isn't it, Jim?-11-7/12-13/83MR. PRELL. That shows a proportion of credit.MR. KICHLINE. It's going down; you're correct.MR. BOEHNE. My question has already been answered.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have had all the specificquestions and we have all the projections, so presumably we have astatistical analysis of what everybody thinks. Those should be lookedat again for any changes you want to make subsequent to our decisions.You have to send in any revisions you want to make in a hurry so wecan prepare the [Humphrey-Hawkins report]. I just glanced at these,and there may be some obvious explanation, but I think the Boardmembers are in a relatively narrow range of 5 to 6 percent, fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter, but with half the year over they are 3 to 5percent on the annual average. It doesn't seem mathematicallyconsistent to me somehow.MR. PARTEE. I didn't provide an annual average because Ididn't have the resources to figure it out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did they put you in as zero? Is that whatbrought the average down? Something there looks [wrong]; people maywant to examine the consistency. Maybe I'm wrong and there is someobvious statistical explanation, but with half the year gone and asimilar range for fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter, I don't know howit comes up so differently on the annual average.MS. TEETERS. A 3-1/4 percent annual average is consistentwith the 5-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The problem is the 5 percent.MR. PARTEE. It depends so much on the quarterly pattern onehas.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it might be useful, after allthese specific questions, for people to express any views they have--and there must be some that affect one's judgment--as to either adifference of opinion in general or whether the risks lie on the upside or the down side and how that relates to monetary policy.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me say that I think theprojection of 7.1 percent real GNP for the third quarter is a bit onthe high side, or at least that the risk is that it won't be thatstrong. It seems very high with the bulk of the inventory adjustmentbeing completed in the second quarter.MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, we have the tax cut.MR. ZEISEL. Obviously, we really don't have a great deal togo on, but we had some data for June employment and related productiondata. They already indicated that we're coming into the third quarterwith a very considerable degree of momentum. We ran through somearithmetic exercises making rather conservative assumptions about thenext couple of months. They provide the basis for, I think, aconservative estimate of the GNP increase or at least an increase innon-agricultural output of this general magnitude.-12-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a longer-range question. Manypeople have expressed the thought, including me upon occasion, thatgiven these interest rates--and you have essentially flat interestrates--it proved fine in the early stages of recovery that you andeverybody else overestimated the restraining effect. We have pent updemand for housing and we have an inventory reversal that comes alongearly in the recovery; but once we get through that, which may beafter the third or fourth quarter, the economy cannot continue toexpand at this rate of speed at those interest rates.MR. KICHLINE. I think that's a relevant concern. Inaddressing that, I think we have to ask ourselves the question "Whydid we miss over the last couple of quarters?" Is it because weunderestimated the effect of a change in interest rates and that thelevel is still biting? Is it just that we had some pent up demandsand that a change in rates permitted some things to be accomplished,particularly in the housing market and consumer durables, but thelevel is still binding so that the effect of an interest rate declinewears out and we're going to find that the recovery slows rathersharply? That's the way we had thought about it. We tried to put onefoot on each side. We think that probably we underestimated therestraining effect of the level and underestimated as well the effectsof the rate of change. So, for 1984 we have a smaller rate ofincrease in real GNP now than we did previously, but we have a higherlevel of activity because we have allowed 1983 to show through interms of this higher level. I would say that there is a seriousquestion on that rate effect, particularly in interest-sensitivesectors, which is where I might tend to put the downside risks;housing is one of those. On the other hand, there are a lot of thingsone can point to that could be potential offsets. But if you begin tothink in terms of changing attitudes, we now are entering a periodafter four very lean years in consumer spending and lots of otherthings. It seems to me that there is the potential for substantialspending in a variety of sectors, particularly those that are lessinterest-sensitive.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments or observations?MR. PARTEE. I would say that I think this is a reasonableworking hypothesis. To me, the most important feature of theprojection is the slowing rate of increase that you are speaking ofthat sets in by the fourth quarter. I think that's terribly importantto us from the standpoint of conducting monetary policy because itcould be argued that this is an explosive and self-building recoverythat will accelerate longer than that and create real pressures. Butthis doesn't have it. I would have been inclined to slow the rate ofincrease a little more, just along the lines you have been discussing,Paul. Also, the export market is an awfully important variable here,and there is an important and so far incorrect expectation of asharply declining dollar. That's important to getting that secondhalf of 1984 still to show a good increase, and I'm not at all surethat will occur. So, I would have put that a little lower. But Iagree with the basic premise that what we are seeing right now is asecond-quarter inventory upsurge and a third-quarter carrying throughof the income effects on spending of that and of the tax cut and thatthere will be a slowing in the rate of increase later on. The levelsof the markets that have been mentioned, I would point out, are notnotably high. Housing starts are up nicely but they are a half-13-7/12-13/83million below what they were in previous booms. Car sales are upnicely but we used to talk about 11 million cars a year and this iswell below 11 million cars at its best point. I guess that's anexpression of the high real interest rate, which is offset in theaggregate statistics by the effect of the stimulus of the governmentdeficit. I think it's pretty reasonable.One other comment I might make, just to be complete about it,is that on balance I would be inclined to feel a little lessoptimistic about the price outlook in 1984 than the staff. I thinksomething could break here in agriculture; with all these efforts toraise farm prices, they might actually manage to do it and we mightget more inflation in that area. I also am concerned, if we do get adecline in the dollar, about the effects on domestic pricing that adecline in the dollar would make possible; that is, higher importprices would make it possible, in terms of retaliation efforts, forbusinesses here to restore margins. So, I would come in with a littlehigher price increase than the staff has. But the general profile, Ithink, is really quite reasonable. And I can't detect whether themajor risk is that we might have more expansion or less expansion thanshown here.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with much of what Chuck has said. Itseems to me that the risk of a runaway boom is very small. We mayhave a little more growth or we may have a little less. The prospectsof a runaway boom strike me as being very low, largely because of therestraint of interest rates. I don't think it would take very much ofan increase in rates to cut housing down sharply. We've already seenin some areas an increase of 100 basis points or so in mortgage rates.I'm told that on a typical $60,000 mortgage, 100 basis points is $45or $50 a month on a monthly payment, which is a substantial amount ina tight consumer budget. We've seen how sensitive auto sales are tointerest rates. We're certainly not at boom levels there. I think itwould not take much of an increase in interest rates to cutsubstantially into that whole psychological area of consumerattitudes. The improvement of business attitudes, I think, has beenconditioned to a great extent on the drop in interest rates. Areversal of that to any significant degree over a year's horizon,let's say, would quickly damp that. So, I think it is a reasonableforecast. And I put a very low probability [on the prospect] that wewill have to be concerned here about a runaway boom.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Runaway boom" is pretty extreme.Moderating the wording "runaway boom," is there agreement with thatproposition?MR. MORRIS. I would agree with that proposition.MR. PARTEE. An "accelerating recovery."MR. BOEHNE. I'm about to fall asleep; I wanted to use alittle more--MR. MORRIS. One newspaper article I saw that I thought wasrather interesting talked about the second quarter as the strongestquarter we've had since the first quarter of 1981--not that I'msuggesting the second quarter is going to be similar. But it seems tome that the risks of aborting the recovery are still pretty high.-14-7/12-13/83MR. WALLICH. I would like to come in on the other side. Asmuch as I believe that monetary policy is effective, with a $200billion deficit and no increase in savings I don't see how we couldhelp but get a very strong economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had a certain amount of monetarygrowth too.MR. GRAMLEY. I agree with the staff's forecast for thisyear, and I don't think we're looking at a runaway boom. I wouldthink the case for some deceleration of growth in 1984 is a strongone, given the net export picture we're looking at. The question ishow much deceleration. And I think the area where the staff may haveunderestimated the amount of strength is in the business fixedinvestment area where the magnitude of the increase over the fourquarters of next year is 7-3/4 percent. That's rather weak relativeto what we typically see. I know one can make a case for it in termsof the weakness in the nonresidential construction area. But to turnto your question about interest rates, this is why I think you'rereally going to have to look harder. The survey of inflationexpectations that we get from this guy Hoey came in today; we get acopy of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't seen it.MR. GRAMLEY. It turns out that in the last quarterinflationary expectations worsened somewhat over every time horizon,and the 5- and 10-year expectations of inflation are in the range of6-1/2 to 7 percent. If you take today's interest rates on corporatebonds and put them on an after-tax basis to compare with that kind ofinflation expectation, you don't have any positive real interest rateat all. The corporate bonds are forecast at [unintelligible] aftertaxes. So, I'm not inclined to the view that the economy is going tostop in its tracks at the present level of interest rates. I thinkthere is a case that could be made that we may have somewhat more of abuildup of business fixed investment plans this year than the staffhas forecast.MR. MORRIS. Of course, most corporate bonds are bought bypension funds that don't pay any taxes.MR. GRAMLEY. I was looking at it from the borrower'sviewpoint in thinking about this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's a tricky concept. Aborrower's income is taxable too [unintelligible] corporation. We'renot getting into that today. Mr. Corrigan.MR. PARTEE. Twelve percent drops to seven, say, with therate of inflation at 6.35 percent or whatever we have for the tenyears. You get very little positive--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Matching it against the return from a newinvestment [unintelligible] to do it after taxes. Mr. Corrigan.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I look at the situation asa Catch-22. By way of a preparatory remark, I don't have a great dealof problem with the staff's forecast in terms of real economic-15-7/12-13/83activity. I'm also somewhat influenced by what Mr. Prell said earlierabout this tremendous buildup in liquid asset holdings of the public;whether they're in the form of things we count in Ml or "M21," they'reall there. Against that background, a lot has been said about thedeficit. I don't know about this Treasury paper, but it seems to methat we unambiguously have a situation in which the structural deficitis increasing when most of us were hoping a year or two ago that itwould be decreasing. Now, there are a lot of ways to measure it, butone interesting way that I came across, which somebody on my staff[worked out], was to use the CBO estimates all the way out to 1988.And what is interesting about that is that they have the unemploymentrate in 1988 basically the same as it was in 1980, about 7.4 percent,but they have the deficit in 1988 at 5.6 percent of GNP as opposed tothe 2.3 percent in 1980. That's at least one measure of where thingsstand with regard to the deficit.I also am inclined to think that a number of people,including the Chairman, have done such a good job of educating peopleabout at least a potential for crowding out that, Treasury studiesnotwithstanding, the [perceptions] of crowding out and theimplications for interest rates are very, very real. I don't have ananswer for that quandary, but clearly the potential for anything beingdone about the deficit for at least 18 months is slim to none. I hadfelt that we had some breathing room in regard to how much pressurethat deficit was going to put on the financial markets and interestrates over the forecast period, but I am no longer sure of that. Idon't know how you look at it, Mike, but I observe that private creditdemands right now are rising in this cycle as fast as they have inpostwar cycles as a whole. And if that continues for any period oftime when we have the Treasury borrowing where it is, my hope that wehad some room there becomes rather diminished.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that fact is true, I'd like to knowabout it by the time I have to appear in public.MR. CORRIGAN. We did it on one of those trough-to-cyclepeaks, Mike. We took the average for the postwar recoveries, and Ithink it's true that the lines are pretty close together. Well,that's part of my Catch-22. The other part is that even in thecontext of the staff forecast, which is very much like my own, I amworried about the potential for some adverse developments on the upside with regard to inflation. I also think it's true that taking thepostwar cycles as a group we have a situation in this recovery whereraw industrial prices and foodstuff prices are actually rising fasterthan they did in the postwar recoveries even though crude materialsare rising a bit more slowly. We have rapid money growth. The staffis assuming, among other things, that we can hold compensation coststo 5 percent. Maybe we can, but maybe we can't. We're going to get atremendous burst in profits in this quarter and next quarter and howdurable that more moderate rate of wage increases is going to prove tobe is a big question.More generally, again looking back at history for what ittells us, we find that in the second year of recoveries the spread ofprice increases over unit labor costs tends to be about 2 percent,roughly. Again, the staff forecast and my own forecast essentiallyassume that that spread is close to zero in 1984. What that impliesabout pressures on the part of corporations that raise prices is a-16-7/12-13/83good question. It seems to me that the only real hope in terms ofmitigating some of those pressures is that we may get productivitybehavior that's a good deal stronger than what is implied in thestaff's forecast, recognizing that it has its own tradeoffs withregard to how fast unemployment can come down. Now, my concern aboutthose considerations is fundamentally based in a deeper concern that Ihave, and that is that looking out to 1984 in the context in which thedeficit situation and the financing requirements of the Treasury arewhat they are, it seems to me that there is at least a risk, howeversmall, that if inflation started to move up, it could jump up rathersharply. Instead of getting the nice little modest 1/2 point or 1point acceleration in inflation, we could get something well in excessof that in a context in which we would already have enormous pressureson interest rates and in a situation in which financial deregulationhas made it almost an absolute necessity that banks and otherfinancial intermediaries pass through the full cost of higher interestrates onto the borrowers who, in turn, pass them onto the consumerthrough their products. I don't equate that, to take Mr. Boehne'sphrase, with the potential for a runaway boom--MR. PARTEE. That sounds the opposite of a runaway boom tome.MR. BOEHNE. In more professional language, an acceleratingrecovery.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, in the short run, it's a situation thatto me holds the potential for a heck of a collision out there, to putit mildly. That's why I look at it as a Catch-22, because even in thecontext of the staff's forecast I can see where we could run into somevery, very nasty problems.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we always can run into problemson either side. You said no matter how low the probability. Are yousaying that the probability of a sudden pickup in inflation is low?MR. CORRIGAN. I'm not saying it's 50-50, but I'm not sayingit's 90-10, either.MR. MARTIN. I would echo the comments that have been madewith regard to the staff forecast for the balance of this year. Butin answer to your question, Mr. Chairman, I have some problems withthe projection for '84 in specific areas. As far as housing isconcerned, it seems to me that this sector is as usual very vulnerableto the level of rates [rising] 25 or 50 basis points [as shown in theBluebook] in Appendix I. So far as the housing boom--and that's whatit has been, conceding it started from very low levels--almost half ofit has been a function of the first-time home buyer. And it has beenfueled particularly by the fixed rate, fixed term mortgage, whose usethe various housing financial agencies are now attempting to decreaseas strongly as they can--I take it without much attention to what itmight do to the total economy, but hoping that it will solve someproblems that the thrift institutions have. Given a slightly higherset of interest rate assumptions, we can recall the already redfigures for the thrift industry; that sort of impact, of course, isitself a downside factor.-17-7/12-13/83Moving on from housing, we have not talked extensively aboutthe [interest rate] implications for export markets. Indeed, if theinterest rate projections here are on the low side, that would reflecta considerably higher interest burden on both our trading partners onthe one hand and the developing countries' potentials on the other.The impact of these rates on business borrowing I have alluded tobefore. If you take the Aaa figures here and increase them some, thathas employment implications which, in turn, obviously have otherpotential downside effects. What I'm getting at is that if it is truethat small business firms are the source of much of the increase inemployment, which is to say the decrease in the unemployment rate,then somewhat higher rates than these admittedly increased rates haveboth business investment implications--as far as the smaller firms areconcerned there will be less of that--and employment implications withregard to '84, not '83. In other words, it seems to me that we doface a dilemma here in that the interest-sensitive areas are carryingthe increase in economic activity and, therefore, a substantialincrease in economic recovery does indeed have a very low probability,and we have some downside implications that I think we need to be veryaware of as we examine the alternatives for monetary policy for 1984.If we together choose one of the alternatives that is going to push uprates, I think we need to be fully aware of the implications--thesocial costs, if you will, or at least the costs in an economic sensethat we will pay in terms of housing, small business, exportindustries, and other interest-sensitive areas.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On this debt figure: You have an enormouscurrent account deficit projected. Is debt in those figures when it'sheld by foreigners?MR. TRUMAN. Payment of interest on them?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, these outstanding credit figures thatwe have.MR. PRELL. The credit aggregate excludes foreign borrowing.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you already have a high figure forcredit, excluding that $75 billion or whatever it is of foreignholdings.MR. MORRIS. That excludes foreign borrowing; it doesn'texclude foreign investment.MR. PRELL. No, it doesn't. Indeed, part of the counterpartin the current account deficit will have to be a substantial flow offunds into the U.S. Treasury.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that included in those credit figures?That's what I'm asking.MR. PRELL. Well, it's the supply side, and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The credit figures are built up from thedebtor not from the creditor. It says domestic.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, domestic borrowing.-18-7/12-13/83MR. WALLICH. Regardless of who holds the debt.MR. PRELL. That's right.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we have been for some time morebullish than the staff and we still are a tad more bullish for 1983.It seems to me that every time we get a wave of new statistics theysuggest that there is more strength out there than we had previouslyassumed. So, we end up with a slightly larger real GNP for 1983 and abit more inflation, although as the days go by and the [inflation]figures have come in better than I thought, I have less confidence inthat for the short run. We do not have significant differences in1983 but when we move into 1984 we begin to show many more differencesbecause we believe we're going to have to pay the piper somewherealong the way for the large growth in Ml. So, we end up withapproximately the same kind of real growth but a larger implicitdeflator. I don't know really how to answer [the question of] what ismost likely until we deal with this policy problem. We're assumingcertain things in regard to the behavior of the aggregates and we alsoassume more or less a return to normal velocity behavior, which may ormay not occur. Until we know the answer to that, I don't think we'regoing to know the answer to where we will end up. But so far as theimplications for policy that you asked us to address earlier, theimplication I draw from that is that we're going to have to move tosome degree against this burst in Ml that we have had.MS. TEETERS. I came out with almost exactly what the staffdid for the calendar year 1983 but I am lower for 1984 because I thinkthe level of interest rates will bite once [unintelligible]accommodated. Consequently, I think interest rates will have to godown if we're going to keep [the recovery] going. However, I thinkthe most important assumption here on inflation is the constant levelof oil prices. I think it's a reasonable assumption because of theexcess capacity that's available in the world and the conservationthat has occurred over these 4 or 5 years. If oil prices break loosefor whatever reason, then all of our forecasts are going to be wrong.And that has been the major source of much of the inflation in thepast 10 years. So, I can accept the staff's forecast, but I do thinkthere's more of a problem of slower growth in the year 1984 than theyare currently forecasting.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if that concludes the comments thatpeople want to make, we can turn to Mr. Axilrod and we can havetechnical questions anyway on his proposals and comments. We'll quitat 5 o'clock.MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I understood that next to thelast sentence.MR. AXILROD. Well, there is some question, at least in mymind, that the rate of real growth might not be as high as we haveprojected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say that inflation might then behigher?-19-7/12-13/83MR. AXILROD. To lower the level of real rates--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose velocity were lower?MR. AXILROD. If velocity were lower? Well, I think velocitythen would be higher, if we have higher price increases.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we don't have higher prices butlower; that could be some funny kind of outlook if we got lower realgrowth and more inflation.MR. AXILROD. Lower real growth than projected and moreinflation than projected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're assuming you know what nominal GNPis, I guess.MR. AXILROD. No, I was making an assumption that the realinterest rates in our forecast and the real GNP in our forecast mightbe inconsistent and that to make them consistent I would have to lowerthe real interest rates. I could lower them in one of two ways:either by raising prices, which might be a very reasonable outcome, orby lowering the level of nominal interest rates to make this level ofreal GNP more sustainable if prices are indeed as low as projected.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You raise a great many questions aboutvelocity. Let's maybe take the next 5 or 10 minutes for hearing whatanybody has to say about it.MR. GRAMLEY. I'd like to ask a question. What specificallydo you assume for Ml velocity for the latter half of this year?MR. AXILROD. That was in Mr. Lindsey's [memo]; let me justtrack it down. It's an average of around 2-1/2 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. I got a little shaky when I read his number.MR. PARTEE. Compared to a cyclical [average] of 5 or 6percent?MR. AXILROD. Oh yes, it's much lower, but it's still a lotstronger than in the first half of this year.MR. GRAMLEY. I thought I saw a number that said 5.MR. AXILROD. You did; for the fourth quarter you saw a 5.MR. GRAMLEY. So, you have a zero in the third quarter and a5 in the fourth quarter.MR. AXILROD. Yes. And I would say, if anything, that wouldtend to be high. That assumes a very low growth rate in the fourthquarter and assumes some considerable responsiveness to somewhathigher interest rates, which is built into our forecast.MR. BLACK. Steve, excuse me, but are you saying that youthink the velocity forecast may be a little higher than you reallybelieve?-20-7/12-13/83MR. AXILROD. Well, I think the fourth quarter, whichGovernor Gramley was focusing on, may be a little high.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I admire the consistent andpersistent courage of the staff in trying to forecast velocity ofcirculation of Ml. I suppose they have to do it here. The swings areso enormous and so arbitrary and there's so little predictability thatI shudder at the thought that we're really going to come out withmonetary policy conclusions--specifically, targets for M1--based onvelocity of circulation or something.MR. ROBERTS. Are you suggesting that the velocity of M2 ismore stable?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, definitely. I'm not going backover 20 years. I looked at the 20-year average too, but if you lookat it in terms of the last few years and the current situation, M2 andM3 are running at pretty much zero velocity--exact relationships tonominal GNP.MR. PARTEE. There was a decline of 5 to 6 percent last year,as I recall, in M2 velocity.MR. AXILROD. President Solomon, we don't really projectnominal GNP by making assumptions about velocity and tying that intomoney. We tend to do it somewhat more judgmentally and then see whatvelocity results we have and see if that makes a certain sense to us.We have a large range of tolerance around the variations of velocity.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I'm having a hard time trying toreconcile what I thought were the central conclusions of the staffstudies made here at the Board plus staff studies at our Banks withwhat I think I am hearing from Steve and some of the skepticism abouthow much reliance we can have on Ml--whether or not we shouldreinstitute it as a target for monetary policy and return to giving itequal weight. I just wonder if I could raise a few questions to[assemble] some facts or at least some judgments, Steve. Am I wrongin thinking that your findings pretty definitely show, now that wehave the history of this period since the introduction of MMDAs andSuper NOWs behind us, that on balance M1 has not been distorted--thatthe ins and outs just about offset each other, contrary to what mostof us thought would happen a year ago? So, if I'm right on this, wecan no longer take the position that one of the reasons we shoulddeemphasize M1 is that it is being influenced by these institutionaldevelopments and new accounts. That's the first question.MR. AXILROD. Well, on balance, we don't think the measuredlevel of Ml has been distorted by the Super NOWs and MMDAs. We thinkthere generally have been offsetting flows in that respect. We thinkthat M1 was distorted by the introduction of regular NOW accounts atthe beginning of 1981 on a nationwide basis; they introduced a savingscharacter to Ml that it didn't have before. And seemingly, so far aswe can judge from the past year's behavior, that has made Ml intechnical jargon more interest elastic. The reason it has made itmore interest elastic is that unlike demand deposits, these accountshave a 5-1/4 or 5-1/2 percent explicit interest rate, so the fall inmarket rates from 20 to 8 percent has reduced the opportunity cost ofholding these to, say, at the low end, 3 percent--[the difference]-21-7/12-13/83between 8 and 5 percent. So, they have moved more sensitively thanthey would have if they had a zero explicit interest rate; one wouldhave had a much bigger loss involved if one had held [demanddeposits].Now, what I don't know is what happens on the reverse side ofthis. If interest rates begin going up, do we get a fast move out ofthese accounts just as we got a fast move into them? If we do, thenwe would have some hope of NOW account growth slowing and money growthslowing. The second thing that has been a problem in Ml is that wesimply have not forecast or made the judgment that demand depositswould grow as strongly as they have. Demand deposits have grown verystrongly and steadily since late last year, except in January andFebruary. I cannot offer the Committee a very strong explanation forthat. In large part, it might be compensating balances; and it alsomight be a foreshadowing of some transactions needs. So, there is alarge element of uncertainty about Ml because it is a new animal.That's why I sound somewhat ambivalent about whether the Committeeshould or shouldn't go back to it as strongly as before.MS. TEETERS. Steve, if your interest elasticity theory iscorrect and you have a big exodus from M1 as interest rates rise,doesn't that just transfer the more rapid rate of growth to M2?MR. AXILROD. Well, it depends on where it goes. If it goesinto market instruments, no; if it goes into other accounts that arein M2, it's sort of a wash. You're just left with M2--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it goes into other accounts, then theanswer is yes.MR. AXILROD. No, not if it goes into other accounts in M2.It's neutral; it's reducing Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Neutral? If it goes in the market, itwill reduce M2, too.MR. AXILROD. [That] reduces M2; if it goes into otheraccounts in M2, it has no effect on M2.MR. MARTIN. But you're not saying that the demand curve hasshifted. You're saying the demand curve probably has a differentconfiguration.MR. AXILROD. Well, that get's into higher metaphysics insome sense.MR. MARTIN. We're pretty high in metaphysics already!MR. AXILROD. I happen to think that the demand curve haschanged its slope and that maybe we're moving down the slope of adifferent demand curve. Whether that's a shift or not, I don't know.MR. MARTIN. It's not a shift.Balles?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you have further questions, Mr.-22-7/12-13/83MR. BALLES. Well, I think Preston asked the question I hadin mind. In other words, your conclusion--it is mine and if youdisagree, Steve, I hope you would say so--is that what we have seen isthe surge of money responding to the drop in interest rates, andthat's not a shift in demand for money but a moving along a givendemand function. If that is true, based on the experimental Boardmodels that you unveiled for us at the last FOMC meeting and on workthat we've been doing at our Bank, I end up judgmentally concludingthat the demand for money has not really shifted in any basic senserelative to income and interest rates in the last couple of years. Ifthat's true, then I am forced to conclude that from this point on weneed to put more emphasis on the growth rate of Ml. Now, if that iswrong, tell me why you think it's wrong.MR. AXILROD. Whether or not one would tend to put moreweight on Ml, I happen to think that it's different from the way itwas before 1981. I think it's probably more interest sensitive thanit was before. I would not conclude from that that I could use thatsame interest sensitivity in making my judgments in the future becauseSuper NOWs have become more important. And I have a vague feeling inmy gut that when interest rates go up, people, once they have theseNOW accounts, are not going to move as rapidly to get out of them asthey did to get in. Now, that's just a gut feeling. But that, too,would affect these interest rate/money relationships.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we're approaching gut feelings, we'regoing to stop soon! We have Mr. Morris and then Mr. Corrigan.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think there's something new onthe horizon as far as the aggregates are concerned, and that is the 5percent capital limitation on large banks and the impact that may haveonce we get back to an era where we see strong demand for businessloans occurring again at the large banks. I think we will find anumber of banks running into this limitation and doing what they didin 1969--packaging these loans and moving them out into the market.So, what will happen is that we will get a slower rate of growth ofbank liabilities and a larger rate of growth in market instruments,which might impact both M1 and M2 and have some relevance to theusefulness of M3 as a target. Have you given any thought to this?MR. AXILROD. No, not in exactly those terms, PresidentMorris.MR. MORRIS. But would you agree that there is a furtherpotential here for a different kind of bank behavior?MR. AXILROD. Well, you're right that the M2 measure doescover a large variety of financial institutions, including moneymarket funds. If they are packaging those loans and happen to beselling them to instrumentalities other than those covered by M2, wewouldn't particularly get it. My mind is working in other ways. Iwould think that they might be doing that; but if the capital controlswere of real concern, we might at the margin get a little morerationing and a little less interest rate pressures. I know that'snot a popular view, but that is not exactly impossible if the capitalcontrols are very effective.-23-7/12-13/83MR. MORRIS. Yes, but in 1969, when we had a similarsituation whereby the large banks were constrained by Regulation Q, wesaw a big ballooning in open market borrowing by the corporate sector.MR. PARTEE. But they were constrained week-by-week byRegulation Q. This capital ratio is going to be imposed periodically.The first thing I think I would do if I were a big bank would be to beover until the time of the calculation of the ratio and I could adaptand bring it down. I think it would take a while to catch up withthat. I agree with you as to the direction, but I think it will bemuch less marked than the Regulation Q ceiling was.MR. MORRIS. But it could still change the percent of creditraised through the banking system as against the open market.MR. AXILROD. One could have argued in that period, equallyconvincingly, that it was the control of Ml also--it went to almost nogrowth--that got interest rates up. As interest rates went up, whathappened in the financial markets in the distribution of creditbetween banks and others was determined by the Reg. Q ceilings, whichwere an impediment to banks competing. And then that credit gotpushed off into other sectors. Something like that could happen withcapital controls; possibly there could be some degree of rationingthere. But look, what causes the interest rates to rise? That mightbe a question one would have to argue about. It might be that thecontrol of money, somehow defined, causes the interest rates to rise.MR. CORRIGAN. I'd just make a brief comment on this Mlissue. A fellow who works for me did basically the same analysis thatMr. Lindsey did, approaching it in a completely different way, andcame to the same conclusion: that he could explain the growth of Mlby interest rates and income and all the rest of it. My problem isthat I don't believe either one of them. Just to approach it aslightly different way--admittedly, this is a very crude measure--wetook the experience of the Ninth District on the Super NOW accountsand extrapolated it nationwide. We said: What would Ml growth looklike if the average dollar value of Super NOW accounts had stayed justwhere the average dollar value of NOW accounts was, at roughly $5,000as opposed to $16,000? When you do that calculation, at least on thiscrude extrapolation that we did, you end up with the implied Ml growthrate, excluding that marginal savings associated with the higher SuperNOW account balances, of 5 or 6 percent over the first half of theyear. That probably understates it too. But I just cannot believethat one can explain what we've observed in Ml by simply assuming thatthe new shifts into Super NOWs and into MMDAs account for all thatmoving around. I just can't accept it.MR. AXILROD. Well, we have our estimate of the amount ofmoney that goes into the Super NOW accounts from outside Ml. We putit most recently at about 35 percent. The latest Michigan survey, theone we have through May--and they are very variable month-by-monthgiven that it's a small sample--[puts it at] 40 percent; the earlierones had a lower number. So, we said somewhere around 35 percent. Ifyou take 35 percent of something a little over $30 billion and take 3or 4 percent of something over $300 billion, you tend to getoffsetting numbers. That's how we're stuck.-24-7/12-13/83MR. CORRIGAN. I have about as much faith in those numbers asyou do. But even if they offset, it seems to me that you have toconcede that a $15,000 average balance has substantially more of asavings component than a $5,000 balance, much less the balance of anold demand deposit. And that's why I have a great deal of difficultywith Dave's and my staff's analysis.MR. AXILROD. Well, you're left thinking that 65 percent ofthe money shifted from regular NOWs and demand deposits and sort ofskimming off the top.MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but that implies that the underlying--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we will have to continue thisdiscussion at a later date and resume tomorrow at 9 a.m. in executivesession.[Meeting recessed]-25-7/12-13/83July 13, 1983--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can proceed as expeditiously aspossible. When I look at these longer-term ranges, the staff has notgiven us much alternative for M2 and M3. If one takes that as thepoint of departure, in the interest of moving reasonably rapidly,first let me ask the question, just for 1983 now--and I will leave Mluntil later where undoubtedly there will be some differences: Whatabout the proposition of just keeping the same target ranges for M2,M3, and total credit? I understand that we're [near] the top of theM3 range now but within it; I don't know whether we're at the top ornot but we're now basically at the top. We're at about the middle ofthe M2 range. The staff analysis says it's all right. Is thatacceptable? Is it that simple?SPEAKER(?). Yes, maybe.MR. MARTIN. They're wide ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Why don't we just go to 1984,again forgetting about Ml. Here the staff has given us a massivechoice, if we take them literally, of a 1/2 percentage pointdifference in the ranges. I take it the difference here is mainlywhether, in terms of consistency, our long-term posture of pullingthem down by 1/2 percentage point or whatever is worth doing or not.MR. WALLICH. I think we ought to keep pulling them downfirst, because according to the staff nominal GNP growth is slowingand second, just as a general anti-inflationary action.MS. TEETERS. That's fine, Henry, if we don't respond to themwhen they go over the ceiling because if we do, we're going to have tokeep the interest rates up.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not theoretically, if nominal GNP growthis slowing.MR. BOEHNE. Just as a point of fact: Doesn't M2 growbetween 9 and 10 percent almost no matter what we do?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That has been true for the last few years;it's certainly true as an empirical observation.MR. WALLICH. That [reflects] the amount of interest added.If people sit there [earning] 8 percent interest and do nothing,that's how much it grows.MR. RICE. I think that makes sense. I think Henry is rightbecause it would be consistent with what I'd like to see over the longrun when we look at what happens out to 1986. We seem to get the bestresults, from the point of view of both real growth and priceperformance, if we slow growth in the first two years--that is, thelatter part of this year and next year--and permit somewhat fastergrowth in the last two years. And reducing the top side of the rangeswould indicate our intention to reduce money growth during this earlypart of the cyclical expansion.-26-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the nominal GNP growth projected--I didn't bring those figures--for 1984?MR. KICHLINE. The staff has 8-1/4 percent [fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter].MR. MARTIN. But under the unchanged alternative [shown inthe Bluebook] nominal GNP is 8.7 percent for 1984. In other words,we're giving up 1/2 point of nominal growth if we follow theconfiguration of reducing that aggregate.MR. KICHLINE. No, we had an M2 that was about in the middleof that range to begin with.MS. TEETERS. Which range?MR. KICHLINE. For M2 we have 8-1/2 percent, or in the 8 to8-1/2 percent area for 1984.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent--MR. MARTIN. So, we're giving up about 1/2 point of both realgrowth and nominal growth if we adhere to alternative I for 1984,right?MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think the alternative ranges for M2have [nearly] the same numbers, don't they? It's a matter of whereyou might place it in the range. Perhaps I am not--MR. AXILROD. Well, we allege that the long-run ranges foralternative II are consistent with the staff's GNP projection. So, itwould be a dropping of M2 roughly--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Roughly to the midpoint of that.MR. AXILROD. The midpoint of that, we allege, is consistentwith the staff's [nominal] GNP projection of 8.3 percent. As Jim waspointing out, the Committee's GNP projection is somewhat stronger thanthis 8.3 percent.MR. WALLICH. Isn't the projection going through 1983-84 andthen 1985-86 for the unchanged [alternative] 8.5 percent for M2? Itseems to produce a so much better result that I think it is somewhatimplausible. Doesn't that reflect the low sensitivity of the model,which throws all the weight on a reduction in real income and givesvery little to a reduction in inflation?MR. AXILROD. That's right, Governor Wallich. Actually, Ihesitated a lot about whether to present these strategies in thesequantitative terms, which are simply the model's extrapolations from abaseline forecast. I had hoped they would be useful in terms ofgeneral direction but, as we say in the text, there is not much priceeffect from carrying on at 8-1/2 percent [for M2]. And, possibly, themodel also is underestimating the sensitivity of decisionmakers in theeconomy.-27-7/12-13/83MR. MARTIN. That's an appropriate caveat but, nevertheless,for 1985 you have a real growth differential there of 100 basispoints. Is that not right? Our expectation is 100 basis points--MR. AXILROD. Yes, if you are comparing strategies 1 and 2.MR. MARTIN. The difference in the real growth of [strategies1 and 2] is 100 basis points.MR. AXILROD. Oh, sure, off the models.MR. KICHLINE. I'm sorry, yes.MR. MARTIN. That's what we're dealing with. You might notbelieve it, Henry, but that's what we have; that's where we started.MR. AXILROD. Well, these are model results, that's right. Ididn't realize you were comparing those, Governor Martin.MR. MARTIN. I'm just looking at page 11, 1985 real GNP.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 1985?MR. MARTIN. Yes, the percent increase for 1984 and 1985.Comparing the model's output, which we've been properly warned has adispersion around it that's considerable, under the two alternativesfor 1985 the model produces 4.1 percent real versus 3.1 percent--comparing [strategy] 2 with [strategy] 1. And for 1984 the modelproduces 4.6 percent versus 4.2 percent. Also, as Governor Wallichhas pointed out, the model is showing that there's not as large animpact on the deflator as there is on the real GNP growth. And ifthat's quite right, we must accept the caveat that this is the outputof the model.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but wait a minute. If I read thisright--I hate to put all this weight on these things--for 1984 thereare two rows that are consistent with alternative II, right?SPEAKER(?). The ones through 1984, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At least through 1984 you're talking about8-1/2 percent [growth in] M2, if I understand correctly.MR. BLACK. That's the one.MR. AXILROD. In 1984 we're talking about 8 percent for M2and that's consistent with alternative I.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought Mr. Kichline said 8-1/2 percent.MR. KICHLINE. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman.MR. AXILROD. But the one row also assumes further reductionsthereafter. So, it's a much more restrictive policy going out.MR. BALLES. It's down 1/2 percentage point each year.-28-7/12-13/83MR. RICE. Steve, in your judgment, would it be correct tosay that you get these results from the model in part because of thephase of the cycle that we're in? In effect, what seems to be theoutcome is that if you start to slow money growth in the expansionphase and speed money growth just before the rate of real growthbegins to slow down, you get the better result.MR. AXILROD. That's right.MR. RICE. So, if we are in a period that is just on the edgeof contraction, we'd get better results if we increase the rate ofmoney growth.MR. AXILROD. Well,--MR. RICE. I'm just accepting the [model] outcome; this isnot my view.MR. AXILROD. Basically, Governor Rice, the problem withusing the model--and what has always given me some pause at least inpresenting the results the model gives to the Committee--is that themodel has embedded in it a long lag in price effects and a short lagin output effects. And it's not at all clear that that is the way theworld works at this very time. That's essentially why every time wepresent [an alternative] that says money growth is going to bestronger, [the economy] will always look better over the near-termhorizon. Output will always react faster than prices. And, ofcourse, the nearer we are to high levels of unemployment, in practiceone would think that's the most sensible thing. So, that is one ofthe problems in presenting these results; it always looks morefavorable in the near term to raise money growth. I would point outstrategies 3 and 4. Strategy 3 slows M2 growth even more than any ofthe alternatives presented and then speeds it up in the latter part ofthe 4-year period. That, according to the model, has a very favorableeffect on prices by 1986 relative to speeding up now and slowinglater.MR. RICE. Right.MR. AXILROD. And output is no worse off by the end of '86than [under strategy 2], which was a somewhat surprising result to me.MR. MORRIS. I'd like to suggest, Mr. Chairman, that themodel has one basic flaw and that is that the character of M2 in 1983and the years to come is radically different than the character in theyears before. And we have no reason to think that we can anticipatehow the relationship of M2 is likely to behave relative to nominalGNP. That is the thrust of Mr. Lindsey's memorandum. We could verywell see a situation in which we push interest rates up and M2responds by rising, depending on whether the banks want to fundthemselves through money market accounts or large CDs. It seems to methat the model simply doesn't have any rational basis.MR. GRAMLEY. I just wonder if we're not taking this settingof the target for next year a bit too seriously here. We're talkingabout 1/2 percentage point on a 3 percentage point range with avariable whose linkage to GNP is rather uncertain. I think mainlywhat we should be concerned with is the cosmetics of this. We're not-29-7/12-13/83setting policy here for the next 3-1/2 years; we're setting the targetfor M2 for next year.MR. MARTIN. Well, that is--MR. WALLICH. If that is the case, don't you think we shouldhave a declining target?MR. GRAMLEY. I'm inclined to go in that direction, yes. Idon't think the difference between 7 to 10 percent and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent is going to be all that constraining in terms of the course ofpolicy. We could change it next February if we wanted to.MS. TEETERS. We never do, though.MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, we're changing them right now as a matterof fact. That argument is quite incorrect.MR. PARTEE. Nancy is right; we have never increased them.MR. GRAMLEY. We did last year.MS. TEETERS. Last February was [unintelligible].MR. GRAMLEY. We had a target of 6 to 9 percent and this yearwe have 7 to 10 percent. So, I'm reasonably sure that if we have tochange it, we could change it in the future.MR. MORRIS. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My thinking also is that this istactical. No matter what we do on Ml--whether we raise it, rebase it,or suspend it--there's going to be a certain amount of unhappiness.Therefore, it's probably just as well to reduce [the M2 range] 1/2point for next year on account of [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me raise a question about totalcredit. We have this figure running higher than GNP--I forget by howmuch--at least in the projections for this year; but it's peculiar interms of history. And we have a relatively high total credit targetthis year. It may be appropriate or it may not be, but we maintainthat relationship next year if we only reduce that by 1/2 percentagepoint along with everything else, assuming we do that. Is that reallyappropriate? I guess I'm looking at the staff. Wouldn't you expectcredit to move more in line with GNP over time?MR. AXILROD. Do you mean should you reduce it even [more]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Reduce it, say, by 1 point or somethinginstead of 1/2 point.MR. AXILROD. Well, in establishing the [M2] range for thisyear, the Committee had raised it a point from what the staff had[suggested] and the aftermath of it is that it looks rather wise tohave raised it since we are running in the middle of the raised range[and above the midpoint of] what the staff originally had.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either that or we've got the wrong policy.-30-7/12-13/83MR. AXILROD. So, I personally would recommend a bit ofcaution and I would recommend lowering it by the same 1/2 point thatyou're going along [with for the other aggregates] at this point. Itis running a bit strong and I have no reason to think it will dropsubstantially. It ought to drop some.MR. MORRIS. I would agree with that; I think that 11-1/2percent is too high for 1983.MR. PARTEE. I agree with Paul that it ought to be a point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you agree with, [Frank]?MR. MORRIS. I agree with lowering it for 1984 to 11 percent.MR. PARTEE. He wasn't quite sure if you wanted to lower it ahalf or a full point.MR. MORRIS. I think a 1/2 point.MR. PARTEE. I agree with Paul that it ought to be a pointbecause I think we want a smaller growth in nominal GNP.MR. MARTIN. I'm delighted to hear you mention nominal GNP orsomething relating to the real world rather than the Ms. It seems tome that the tactical discussion has had to do with how we appear withregard to targeting on the intermediate basis of the Ms. If there isany strategic aspect through the model's output as delineated on page11 [of the Bluebook], it is that our objectives are nominal GNP andthe other general output data rather than the Ms. So, I go back againto the aggregates [relating]--however weakly in the model--to economicactivity, not the Ms. And I suggest that we look again at thoseaggregate figures for nominal GNP.MR. PARTEE. Well, my point was simply that the staff'sforecast from fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter for nominal GNP is 9.6percent this year and 8.3 percent next year. That seems like a prettyfavorable outcome. In any event, that's a drop of more than a pointin nominal GNP and I think there ought to be a similar reduction inthe credit aggregate itself. So, I think a point [reduction] is theproper amount rather than a half point.MR. MORRIS. But I think we ought to give some weight to thefact that we have a very optimistic inflation forecast in '84.MR. PARTEE. Well, if you thought inflation was going to be[higher], would you want to be easier or tighter?MR. MORRIS. Well, I think one has to make a judgment as towhether a 4-1/2 percent real growth rate would be excessive for '84 orwhether we should allow perhaps for a little less favorable result oninflation than we're forecasting.MR. PARTEE. Well, I have a little less favorable forecastand it still works out with a point reduction in the credit growth.MR. RICE. If the exercise is cosmetic, basically, I think ahalf point is as good as a point.-31-7/12-13/83MR. PARTEE. Well, a point would change it from cosmetics toreal policy.MS. TEETERS. What do you propose to do with that creditaggregate if it doesn't fall within the range? What action wouldthat trigger?MESSRS. PARTEE and MORRIS. A change in interest rates.MS. TEETERS. I'd put it down to [unintelligible]; suppose itfalls at the bottom annually.MR. PARTEE. Lower them.MR. RICE. I don't think you would.MS. TEETERS. I don't think you people know what therelationship of the credit aggregate is to GNP, quite frankly.MR. MORRIS. I think we know a lot more about that than we doabout the new M2 to GNP.MS. TEETERS. That may be, but I think we know an awful lotmore about [the relationship of] interest rates to GNP than we doanything else.MR. MORRIS. The demand for credit is directly related to thelevel of interest rates. The level of M2 may or may not be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we know a lot about therelationship of interest rates to GNP. We didn't have a very goodforecast six months ago.MS. TEETERS. I did.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You would have thought it wouldn't comeout.MR. RICE. Well, I don't think we would take any action atall on the basis of the credit aggregate alone.MS. TEETERS. If we lower these targets at this point intime, we're going to give the impression that we're going to tightennext year. And I'm not sure that that's a good psychological thing todump on this society at this point.MR. RICE. Psychologically, I think it's a good thing.MR. WALLICH. It's hard for me to believe that a more anti-inflationary posture should have a long-run effect of raising interestrates. It might have an immediate market effect, but the setting ofthese targets isn't really an immediate market factor.MR. BLACK. I agree with all this talk about cosmetics, but Icertainly would like to see somebody say something about taking theranges seriously, too, along the way.-32-7/12-13/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why don't we use the word tacticalinstead of cosmetic?MR. MARTIN. Why don't we use the word tactical andconcentrate on the strategic aspects of it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it's just tactical orcosmetic. It depends upon, at least to some extent, indicating one'sconcern about pulling these [ranges] down over time and whether we'reinterested in moving toward price stability or not.MR. BLACK. I'd like to see a large element of that in thetalk. But I do think it has a cosmetic or--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't discuss that subject much, but Ithink it's going to be coming up. To what extent do we really want toget to price stability in the fullness of time?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Coming back to the question ofwhether to lower the credit target 1/2 point or 1 point: If we arelowering the M2 and M3 ranges 1/2 point and we lower the credit targetmore than 1/2 point, it implies a precision and knowledge on our partwhereby we can differentiate between 1/2 point and 1 point. And I'm alittle worried about that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree that that is pseudo-precision.But I think what we would say is that the credit target is a littlehigh this year relative to its long-term trend. We did thatdeliberately. And it appears all right in terms of this year but wedon't want it high relative to its long-term trend indefinitely. Thattarget was temporarily high in some sense relative to the othertargets and we're now putting it back more in line with what we thinkthe long-term trend is in relation to the other targets.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If you feel comfortable and still[think] it is a time of--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it always looked a bit awkward tome. It may be right or wrong this year, but the long-term growthtrends of credit and nominal GNP are pretty even, if I remembercorrectly. And we have a target that implies more [growth in creditthan in nominal GNP]; it's high relative to the other aggregates nowin terms of long-term trends, to the extent one can make any sense outof this. It's just a question of whether to say--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do we know why it's high this year?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I asked that question yesterday.I'm not sure I got a very satisfactory answer, but--MR. RICE. Government borrowing--the deficit.MR. GRAMLEY. Easy money.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. More intermediation and more liquidity isthe answer I got.-33-7/12-13/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But bank lending has been pretty flatand we're still going to have the big federal borrowing next year.And I think bank lending may be stronger; the equity market may not beas strong next year. So, it may very well be that we will still tendto see [growth in] the credit aggregates slightly above that in GNP.MR. MORRIS. But I think the 11 percent [top of the range]will give us plenty of leeway.MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, 11 percent is all right; even 10-1/2percent would be.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're talking about whether to makeit 11 or 10-1/2 percent at this point.MR. AXILROD. Our point estimate, Mr. Chairman, for what it'sworth, is that credit growth fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter in 1984--with our assumption of nominal GNP growth of 8.3 percent--will be9-3/4 percent, which follows our estimate for this year of 10-1/8percent. So you are right: Credit growth is continuing to run about1 to 1-1/2 points above our nominal GNP estimate. If the Committeegoes with its nominal GNP [estimate], it's much more in line.MR. MORRIS. You're right, Paul: It is high relative to theranges for M2 and M3. But that's because we are thinking about themidpoint with respect to debt and we're thinking about the target asthe upper limit with respect to M2 and M3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, not on the staff's forecast; itdepends upon what forecast we have. But I think that is true if youtake the Committee's forecast. If you take the staff's forecast, it'sright at the midpoint, roughly.MS. TEETERS. The midpoint of 7 to 10 percent is what theyhave?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are assuming M2 growth of 8 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. 8 percent in 1984.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which is exactly the midpoint [of the6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent range of alternative II].MR. MORRIS. Yes, but I think you overlook the fact that inthe second year of an expansion the velocity of M2 normally drops.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me divide it up. On M2 and M3we go down by 1/2 point. At least nobody has talked about going downmore than 1/2 point. The question it seems to me is unchanged or down1/2 point for M2 and M3. Is the consensus down 1/2?MS. TEETERS. I'd prefer to leave [the top] at 10 percent.MR. MARTIN. I would too.MR. RICE. I'd prefer to see it down on the top side and notthe bottom--alternative III. [Unintelligible] tactical.MR. PARTEE. That's a pretty good idea.-34-7/12-13/83MR. BLACK. Yes, it is.MR. BALLES. Alternative III makes a lot of sense.MR. BLACK. Nobody says it's the level of--MR. BOEHNE. Well, the only thing to say against that, and Idon't think it's overly persuasive, is that if we narrow the range wesomehow indicate that we have more confidence and more accuracy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a little peculiar.MR. BOEHNE. Yes.MR. BLACK. And it moves the midpoint only 1/4 of a point.MR. PARTEE. Or [it suggests that] we're more worried about arapid expansion so we show our interest by cutting the top end. Incase we get a very rapid expansion, we indicate resistance. I thinkthat's reasonable. I'll go with that.MR. RICE. Except that I'm not worried about a rapidexpansion.MR. BLACK. What would you--?MR. MORRIS. Some people are worried about a rapid expansion.MR. RICE. Some people.MR. PARTEE. Do we want to raise the bottom and leave the topthe same?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it can be rationalized. I think itwill give us a little trouble; it depends on what you think about theamount of emphasis put on this. I can see comments arising such as"Oh, you are even more intense on these aggregates because you havethe range narrower."MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, in the last three expansions, inthe second year of expansion the velocity of M2 declined on theaverage about 2.6 percent.MR. PARTEE. Well, you were making the point earlier, Frank,that we had a different M2 than we did before. And, therefore, thevelocity of M2 won't do what it did before.MR. MORRIS. But if [the premise] is that we don't know whatthe velocity is today, then we shouldn't have a target for M2. Andthat is my position.MR. BLACK. Frank, that's going to lead you down a primrosepath on Ml, to something you don't want, if you look at what itusually does.MR. WALLICH. I think the main principle here is that weought to bring the targets down and avoid fine-tuning. We don't know-35-7/12-13/83enough about it. [Unintelligible] the lower end and the upper end,just mechanically bringing them down.MS. TEETERS. You can take the opposite point of view. If weleave them alone, it shows we're ignoring them.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I heard two people say they didn't wantthem changed at all. Is it only two people? Well, it seems that it'sonly two people. And I haven't heard anybody say he or she wants thetops below 9-1/2 or 9 percent, respectively. Is that true?MR. MORRIS. My position, Mr. Chairman, is that we shouldn'thave a target for M2, but--MR. BOEHNE. My position is that I don't think it makes a lotof difference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are between Bluebookalternatives II and III at this point. There are pluses and minusesfor both of them. The idea of narrowing a range here doesn'tparticularly appeal to me but I guess it can be rationalized.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It doesn't appeal to me either forthe same pseudo-precision reasoning that seems to be implied.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can justify it intellectuallyand say that we don't really conceive of it being below 7 or 6-1/2percent, or whatever, and we're worried on the up side. But it doeshave this feeling of more precision. I don't feel strongly one way orthe other.MR. GUFFEY. I'd prefer to go down on both ends; there's somecomfort in using the [wider] ranges.MR. PARTEE. Well, if you don't have any strong preference,Paul, why don't you get a show of hands?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's have a show of hands. Who wouldprefer alternative II? I'm just talking about M2 and M3--moving themboth down by 1/2 point. Well, I'm not counting; I don't know whetheryou're counting. There seem to be quite a few hands up. How manywant it down 1/2 point on the top and nothing on the bottom? Thatseems to be a clear minority.Now, let me turn to total credit. Nothing here is settledfinally. Just forget about alternative III for the moment. For totalcredit, if we're consistent--well, we don't have to be completelyconsistent between the two, I suppose--the question is whether to godown 1/2 or 1 point.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I would reiterate the point thatin evaluating this it might depend on what GNP forecast the Committeechooses to go with for 1984, because by going down 1 point themidpoint would be below the present Committee forecast for 1984.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] gives you 9 percent asthe midpoint. I don't know how all these forecasts will come out, butwe're going to publish these forecasts as modified in the next day or-36-7/12-13/83two along, [although there are some] people who wouldn't want tomodify them. They must average about 9-5/8 percent or something likethat for nominal GNP.MR. AXILROD. No, that's right; I miscalculated or something.MR. WALLICH. Well, if we don't lower credit by a full point,we're not lowering it relative to the other aggregates. I thought wehad--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the question. Do we wantto lower credit relative to the other aggregates, given that in somelong-term sense it's high now relative to the other aggregates?MR. WALLICH. That is, I think, the logic of the situation.MS. TEETERS. We haven't had deficits of this size as a long-term trend before.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether that's theright interpretation. It may be that these numbers are high becauseof the big deficit and that in a sense we're accommodating some of theconsequences of the deficit. If that's the reason that they're high,then the policy question is whether we want to accommodate that.MR. PARTEE. I think the analysis is that we get less kickfor the debt than we ordinarily do. That is, the relation betweendebt and GNP is off.MR. RICE. Also, there won't be much growth [unintelligible]next year, if we get it all this year.MR. MORRIS. But in any case we wouldn't want to see the rateof growth of debt exceed 11 percent in any scenario I can think of.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we have enoughconfidence in what the future trends are going to be--not only thelarge deficit, but also the changing institutional arrangements in themarkets. So, it seems to me that the question we again come back tois: Why do we imply that we have that much [omniscience] todifferentiate an extra half point on credit?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think this is too big a deal.What we would say is the opposite--that we implied [omniscience] insaying credit was going to be relatively high this year, which may beright, but it's not going to continue next year.MR. WALLICH. Some people think it doesn't make muchdifference; other people think it does. So, I think those who thinkit does should be allowed to set the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well into a recovery--I forget--shouldcredit cyclically be rising faster or slower than GNP typically?MR. MORRIS. In the second year in the last three expansionsthe velocity of debt declined by 1.2 percent and then it approachedzero thereafter.-37-7/12-13/83MR. GRAMLEY. What happens to interest rates, of course, iscritical. And it will work primarily in the areas like the mortgagemarket, where you can have a substantial degree of variance betweenthe amount of borrowing and the amount of residential construction.But I think your reasoning is sound, Mr. Chairman, that the range fordebt is high relative to the broader monetary aggregates and that onewould expect those things to converge eventually. And, therefore, wecould go a percentage point now without too much damage.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who wants to reduce it by a halfpoint, the same [amount] as the others? Who wants to reduce it by onepoint?SPEAKER(?). We have nonmembers voting here, so you'reconfusing--MR. MORRIS. I think one point would be acceptable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's leave that just for the momentand we'll get to Ml. Let me approach M1 by indirection. There's aquestion of what weight to put on Ml and, whether or not it's in thedirective, what we would say about it in the Humphrey-Hawkins report.It may be helpful to approach it in reverse. Look at 1984 first.This proposal of essentially 4 to 8 percent again, which is what wehave now and are widely exceeding, would imply unchanged or a smallincrease in velocity to a sizable increase in velocity but less thantypical.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The midpoint implies plus 2 velocity.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It implies plus 2 or a little more on thestaff forecast. It would imply more on the Committee members'forecasts, which are somewhat higher than the staff forecast.MR. BOEHNE. Are these numbers in the context of giving theimportance to Ml that it has been given the last few months orelevating it somewhat?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're going to have to discuss that,but I--MR. PARTEE. The 8 percent on M1 seems to me a little high, Imust say. Didn't we add to that range in order to allow for specialadjustments this year?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't remember.MR. PARTEE. I think we did, for Super NOWs and[unintelligible]. Well, we certainly didn't add enough. Now, wecould say the relationship has changed and, therefore, we have anentirely different ball game.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with any of these I think we have tosay the relationship has changed; we're uncertain about the degree.But even with the 8 percent we are implying a little increase invelocity. That wouldn't be unusual during this period. But I--MR. PARTEE. No, it's an unusually low increase in velocity.-38-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With 8 percent, but not with 4 percent.MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that under alternative I we'resaying we're not going to pay attention to it because we can't get itback into the 4 to 8 percent range this year, so we have to monitorit, not target it. If we set it at 7 to 11 percent or something likethat, we do something that has to be changed sharply for the followingyear and brought back to 4 to 8 percent or even lower, and I wouldprefer lower for '84. Now, wouldn't it be possible to rebase insteadand not have these vast changes in targets?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's discuss it together. I guess thatis one alternative. We can start out again on Ml and then have thesame target for the next year that we have for this year.MS. TEETERS. May I ask you a question, [Steve]? I got theimpression yesterday when you were talking about the developments inMl that you don't really expect the rate of growth to slow down verymuch. Rebasing would get us out of this trap, but it's notnecessarily going to get us back onto a 4 percent rate of increasefrom this period on, given the nature of the Ml.MR. AXILROD. Governor Teeters, we do expect the growth of Mlto slow down. The various models I've looked at all suggest that invarying degrees--some more rapidly than others. But we had beenexpecting it to slow down in May and June, so I felt somewhat cautiousin light of that behavior. But the models--because the interest rateeffect has worn out and there is some slight increase occurring andbecause nominal GNP growth is slowing--all would have slower Ml intoan area reasonably [consistent] with these targets.MS. TEETERS. So, rebasing would be one way of coping withthe 1983 problem as well as the 1984 problem.MR. AXILROD. Technically, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If he's right, it will all work outnicely. If he's not right, then we will have rebased and be over [therebased range]. I think if we rebase it looks as if we're attachingmore importance to it somehow.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My concern is that, as we've seen inthe last couple of months, the markets have once again attachedenormous importance to Ml. All the speculation that the Fed is goingto have to tighten is really coming from the Ml figure because even ifthere's a justification for some modest tightening from the broaderaggregates, it's Ml that has been the discussion point, contrary tothe period right after the initial Humphrey-Hawkins testimony inFebruary. I think putting a numerical target on M1 [is unwise],whether we call it 8 to 12 percent, 7 to 11 percent, or rebase,although I would agree that rebasing may give a shade of nuance ofextra [emphasis] compared to simply moving up to 7 to 11 percent. Ithink there's much to be said, in view of the arbitrariness and theunpredictability of what it's telling us, for suspending the targetfor Ml for the rest of the year and not at this time coming up with an'84 target range for Ml. We would continue to monitor Ml and when itbecomes a little more predictable then come in [with a range] at thatpoint. I don't know how one gets around that problem.-39-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the extreme view of what we coulddo--not have any target for this year or next year.MR. WALLICH. Well, another alternative would be to widen therange even further. We have widened it from 3 to 4 points; we couldgo from 4 to 5 points. I agree with you when you say that whatever wedo, we are increasing the emphasis if we change it from 4 to 8percent. If we rebase we may be increasing the emphasis beyond whatwe would if we went to 7 to 11 percent. Widening the range I thinkoffsets that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's true.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, it's not just what we say [via] thenumbers, it is what we say. We can say it's a target but we aregiving it whatever weight we want to say.MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that there has been some fear inthe market about the need to come [down] toward the target range.Therefore, people are saying well, even if it were one or two[unintelligible] for the year. So, doing away with the notion thatwe're going to make up the overshoot, if that's our decision, would bea constructive thing for the market.MR. BALLES. I think that's a very good point, if I can breakin and support Chuck's position on that. Moving to the alternative IIrange for M1 shown in the Bluebook for the balance of this year wouldmake a lot of sense, because that range of 7 to 11 percent wouldaccommodate about a 6 percent growth rate or a little better in Mlfrom June to December which, according to our San Francisco model atleast, would provide sustained economic growth and no increase ininflation. We'd come in with over 5 percent real growth, based on ourmodels, for both years. So, I would feel a lot more comfortable, andI would think we might defuse some of the market fears about whatwe're up to, if we were to adopt that. We realize what has gone onthis year so far in Ml and we can't undo that; that would be totallyunrealistic. I think we should defuse some of the market fears aboutwhat we may be doing by forthrightly coming out for a range of 7 to 11percent, which in my view would accommodate the approximately 6percent growth rate in M1 that we happen to think would be aboutoptimal for the balance of this year and through 1984.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to be sure: That 7 to 11 percentimplies 6 percent from now on to hit 11 percent [Ml growth] for theyear?MR. BALLES. Yes, a little better than 6 percent. That'sshown on page 6 in the Bluebook in the final column to the right.MR. GRAMLEY. That's June to December, not second quarter [tofourth quarter].MR. BALLES. Eleven percent for the year would allow 6-1/2percent from June to December.MR. BOEHNE. What about from July, since June--. Oh, June isthe base.-40-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.MR. PARTEE. Well, I must say that I think there's somethinga little unfortunate about the numbers 7 to 11. Also, it soundsawfully high. My instinct would be to rebase.MS. HORN. I favor rebasing, not only because I think itindicates some additional emphasis on Ml, but also because it seems tome to indicate the Committee's recognition of what we've learned aboutvelocity. It may or may not be the start of a rehabilitation of Ml inthat we say we do look at Ml; we do take it seriously, but we makecorrections for velocity from time to time until we're a little moresure of our velocity forecast.MR. GRAMLEY. A range of 4 to 8 percent rebased gives youabout the same as 7 to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably, it's 8.1 percent on a secondquarter-to-fourth quarter basis, which is exactly the--MR. AXILROD. In response to Governor Gramley's comment, itdepends on how you rebase. It doesn't quite [correspond] if you useQ2 to Q4 1983, because of the high growth that has already happened.The rate [of growth] from Q2 to Q4 is 8 percent--MR. GRAMLEY. With an 11 percent--?MR. AXILROD. That's right. So, if you rebased and said--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I understand this, if we rebase at Q2,the 8 percent would be the same as 11 percent for the year.MR. GRAMLEY. I calculated the fourth-quarter levels using 11percent from the fourth quarter of 1982 and 8 percent from the secondquarter of 1983 and I got within $1 billion.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's 8.1 percent.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I had in mind figures very similarto what John Balles mentioned, but I think the real issue is how themarket will react best to what we do. My feeling is that it's betterthat we not rebase, although I understand fully the argument for it.Since you said you thought this would imply more emphasis on Ml, whichis what we also had concluded before we came here, that does argue infavor of [rebasing] from my viewpoint. But I believe the market wouldreact a little better if we kept what we have and you just said thatwe doubt that we will hit it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try this: Suppose we rebaseand use 4 to 8 percent and say that we think velocity has changed somebut we don't know how much. The 8 percent would allow for very littleincrease in velocity, which is possible, given what has happened. The4 percent would allow for an almost normal increase in velocity fromhere on out. So, we're encompassing that kind of range. We're stillquite uncertain about it and--this will be the tricky part--we're notputting full weight [on Ml], certainly. Just how much weight we saywe are putting on it is the fuzzy area, I suppose. We could go allthe way to saying that we're monitoring [Ml] but putting very little-41-7/12-13/83weight on it. That's one extreme. Or we could say we have a prettywide range and we would get concerned if [Ml growth] was too faroutside that range in either direction, but we're not following itmechanically. Some place in that range of--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could we have some further discussionof Bob Black's suggestion? I find myself in a strange alliance withhim in favor of saying that clearly M1 growth is going to be way overour target because of velocity and not offering a rebased or raisedtarget for this year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What would you do for the next year?MR. MORRIS. Same thing.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, my own feeling would be not tooffer [an M1 range for 1984] at this point. But even if the majorityof the Committee preferred to offer a range for next year, thatdoesn't mean we have to come up with a new number for this year.MR. PARTEE. I have a problem with your suggestion, Tony.It's Bob's suggestion too, but I'll address this comment to youbecause I think Bob might like what I would see as the difficulty.What if we get a very, very low rate of money growth? It couldhappen. And in the context of having the 4 to 8 percent range, peoplewould say, fine, we are getting [Ml growth] back down into the range,and yet it might be indicative of a problem developing in the economyand we might want to try to encourage a little more money growth. Ifwe rebase, we have an opportunity to do that; if we don't rebase,people will think we're happy to see M1 growth come down into the oldrange.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't see that as a realconstraint. We are operating, at least most of us here today, on arecognition that we have [to have] some further restraint because ofthe strength of the economy. We're not mechanically reacting to the[monetary growth] outcome.MR. PARTEE. Oh, I understand that, but I think--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And, therefore, if the Chairman keepsenough flexibility, which I think he will, we can react to nominal GNPand the real economy. It seems to me that that would not be aconstraint.MR. PARTEE. When we forecast I think we are slow torecognize a change in the inflection of the economy. We were slow torecognize the rate of increase that is now occurring and that we allsee. We will be slow to recognize the slowing, I think, and I wouldlike to guard against that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The more I think about this, I believe thesimplest thing to do is to rebase, if we're going to have a target fornext year, instead of having a complete hiatus. The key issue is whatwe say about the degree of weight that we give to Ml.MR. MARTIN. I think that's right. And I think the market--almost regardless of what we say unless we just repudiate Ml, which I-42-7/12-13/83don't think is the consensus of this group--is still going to followit, put some weight on it, and think we are putting some weight on it.MR. BLACK. We either rebase now or, if we overshoot ourtarget, we rebase at the end of the year.MR. PARTEE. That's true. That's quite true.MS. TEETERS. We may rebase now and have to do it again atthe end of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, a technical point, which I wasstruggling to say in response to Governor Gramley's comment, has to doin some sense with the psychology of rebasing: Unless it turns outthat the numbers we get very soon show that July is extremely weak, ifyou rebase you still will be starting out well above that rebasedrange. You're above the one now, of course. But in any event, if youbase on the second quarter and plot July, you will be well above therange already. That may or may not have some implications for themarket, depending on how it's expressed and what you say in relationto it. But I think it's a factor that ought to be considered in theanalysis.MR. WALLICH. Rebase on a shorter period.MR. AXILROD. Well, you would have to rebase right on June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure, but I think what you'resaying is that if we had this 7 to 11 percent or whatever it is, we'dalso be above the 11 percent.MR. AXILROD. That's right. It's not any different in fact;it's just the question of psychology.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It wouldn't be as much above the 11percent, I guess.MR. AXILROD. But once you rebase, people will tend to lookat it and think you're much more serious about it, I think.MR. KEEHN. Steve, are you saying that if we rebased usingthe second quarter, July would come in above 8 percent?MR. AXILROD. Well, we're projecting [July growth] well abovethat at this moment. But even if it came in around 8 percent, I thinkMl would be above [the range] given the shape of the second quarter,which was very high toward the end. You are throwing yourselves intohigh--MR. BLACK. The great unknown is what is going to happen tothe velocity of M1.MR. GRAMLEY. I think we ought to listen very carefully tothe substance of what Tony is saying, in the sense that it would be aterrible mistake to impose too much restraint in the second half ofthis year because Ml is going up faster than we now think it might, if-43-7/12-13/83the staff's forecast comes out right. But also, if we seem to saythat we have dismissed altogether the growth of Ml that is likely tobe interpreted, given the present concerns of the market, as [meaning]that we have dismissed any concern about inflation. And that wouldalso be unfortunate. I think we ought to find some way that avoidsboth of those problems.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's also true that while the M1velocity has been off historically, the economy is doing a lot betterthan any other forecast implied except an Ml forecast.MR. GRAMLEY. Any Ml forecasts [unintelligible] would besomething like 6 to 8 percentage points off on nominal GNP growth.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A strict Ml forecast would have given muchhigher [GNP growth] than actually took place, but the fact is we arehigher than other forecasts, which suggests that there's no place in[unintelligible] it.MR. GRAMLEY. To complete my thought, what I would do isrebase and tell the market this: We are not giving Ml any more weightnow than we have all year; our principal focus still is M2 because thevelocity of Ml is so terribly uncertain; there is some indication of areturn toward normalcy, but it is by no means clear.MR. PARTEE. I would rebase and use 4 to 8 percent, but Iwould say to the market that we are still uncertain about velocity,though it looks as if it might be stabilizing and we're going to give[M1] some more weight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Stabilizing probably around a differenttrend.MR. PARTEE. Probably. I agree with that very much.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't know precisely, but what I'd beinclined to say is that the 3 to 4 percent increase in velocity thatwe counted on we no longer count on.SEVERAL. Right.MR. WALLICH. We know in any event that this is a function ofinterest rates; to keep emphasizing the velocity factor confuses thesituation. We don't refer to the interest sensitivity.MR. BLACK. Let me call your attention, if I might, to thelast sentence in Dave Lindsey's memo in which he says it's not clearthat Vl will be less predictable over time than V2 even though Vl maytake on behavioral characteristics that are different from earlierpostwar years.MR. MORRIS. That's faint praise, though.MR. PARTEE. I absolutely agree with that; I think that'sjust what Paul said.MR. BLACK. It has been more predictable over most of ourhistory; it may not be in the future, but I believe the burden of-44-7/12-13/83proof is on those who say it won't be. That's a biased viewpoint, asyou all probably can guess.MR. GRAMLEY. The arrow is nice and straight; we just don'tknow which way it's going.MR. BLACK. I agree with that, but the risk--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The basic difference, or point ofdeparture, is that I am somewhat--in fact, substantially--surprisedthat we would stick our necks out with numbers where I, at least, feelthat we are not stabilizing along a particular trend. The fact thatvelocity was not as negative in the last couple of months as it wasearlier in the year, and granted all the Ms had negative velocity lastyear, [does not alter the fact that] the situation is so sensitive tothe changing way people hold balances. I hear people talk about it inthe banks and in the markets. I don't see how we have even a pretenseof a scientific basis for working with and making projections on thebasis of what may be a very unpredictable velocity situation. I don'tunderstand why we would stick our necks out because we can do enoughtightening based on the movements of M2, M3, and credit and the realeconomy without setting out a series of projections that have betterthan a 50-50 chance of turning out to be wrong again. I don't reallyunderstand; I guess many of you, including maybe the staff, must havemuch more faith that the range of predictability is going to besubstantially narrowed. I don't believe that.MR. WALLICH. I just think that there is such a thing as Mland the market watches it. And [if] we ignore it, we're losingcredibility as well as probably [unintelligible].MR. MORRIS. The market watches it because we watch it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Exactly. Market participants watchit when they think it's influencing our behavior. Secondly, we aregoing to lose credibility with certain kinds of people anyway if wemove to 7 to 11 percent or rebase and wipe out the past. That will begiving Ml more importance, no matter what. Of course, I'll admitthere is a way. Paul could go back to the Humphrey-Hawkins Februaryversion rather than the April version. But even then I think it isgoing to be harder to get back to the February market reaction to Ml.MR. CORRIGAN. The February reaction to Ml was at least inpart couched in terms of what was going on in the economy. Mostpeople thought the economy was still declining in February.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But it is still true that whenyou talk to market people in New York you feel that Ml is halfway backagain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's a combination of the economybeing strong and M1 being so high. People wouldn't be so sensitive ifthe economy were weak and Ml were even 3 percentage points from itsrange.MR. ROBERTS. I don't think it's so much that the market sayswe're watching it as that they say it's something that has to belooked at if the economy is strong and Ml is growing too rapidly.-45-7/12-13/83Whether we're watching it or not, it has become a market influence.You talk to people, as you say; I also talk to people and I get theimpression that they're concerned about what is happening to Mlwhether we are concerned or not.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Sure, you hear various sentiments.But those whom I believe are the more astute observers in thefinancial community make a point of saying that we ought to be moresensitive to the real economy than to Ml. There's a fear around also,and I have that fear, that we ourselves are going to feel--and themarket will perceive us as being--more locked into M1 if we go aheadwith it and dignify what has been happening with--MR. ROBERTS. I think the problem is that the market fearsthat we are getting too far away from Ml; as the economy hasstrengthened and as M1 has grown at too rapid a pace, that hasproduced fears. It's already reflected in a major change in interestrates in the market. If we were to do something to indicate that weare serious about it again, particularly if we were to rebase and havea moderate rate of growth as our target, I think we would see aconstructive effect in the market.MR. PARTEE. Well, there are all kinds of opinions. I thinkyou are both overstating it. You have looked at the extremes. Myview of the matter is that history shows that it's dangerous in anexpansion to rely on setting the federal funds rate. We are nowmoving into expansion. We're talking about the next year and a halfby which time we will be pretty well along in the expansion. Theindication is--certainly over the 20 years that I've seen it--that theCommittee is slow to change the funds rate if the funds rate is whatthe Committee is setting. So, I think there's a basic danger in nothaving something else. Now, something else might be nominal GNP; Idon't think it's real GNP. Or it might be one of the Ms. And if it'sone of the Ms, I think Ml still shows itself as better than any of theother Ms. It could be total credit, but on total credit our problemis that it's too hard to estimate the current numbers. We might useit for confirmation, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me suggest something with greathesitancy because I'm not sure I like it visually but substantively itgives me an easy explanation: Make the range 5 to 9 percent and saythat the 9 percent allows for no change in velocity during theexpansion. Maybe that's the new trend of things and we want to allowfor that possibility. The 5 percent allows for a fairly normal, oralmost normal, cyclical change in velocity from now on. And that'sprecisely why we picked 5 to 9 percent, because the 9 percent allowsfor no change in velocity and the 5 percent allows for a sizablechange in velocity. That still leaves open how much weight we put onit, but we picked 5 to 9 percent because that covers the probablerange of uncertainty that we see in velocity.MR. PARTEE. So, what we have in mind is a 9 percent nominalGNP, right?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, because it is consistent with thenominal GNP growth that we are predicting. Precisely.MR. BLACK. Is that rebased, Mr. Chairman?-46-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.] That is my startingpoint: We are going to be presenting a forecast of roughly 9 percentor a bit more than 9 percent for nominal GNP next year, so we relateit to that.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask a question. Even though Iprefer 5 to 9 percent over 4 to 8 percent, certainly in terms of theimmediate market effect, is it feasible to say that we're coming upwith 5 to 9 percent and yet we are going to continue deemphasizing it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't particularly like showing thishigh a range and that's my reservation about it, but I can see arather pat explanation being given--precisely: We projected, roughly,9 percent nominal GNP growth next year, gentlemen. We think byimplication that that is a satisfactory outcome. We feel that we arein the midst of velocity changes of a continuing sort that we can'tquite identify--or we may say that we're not putting full weight onMl. Based upon everything we've seen so far and assuming we're in aperiod of expansion, we think it's likely that the velocity patternwill not change so greatly that we would actually get a biggerincrease in Ml from now on than in the nominal GNP, so that's why wepicked 9 percent at the top. The 5 percent allows for a less thannormal, but not all that much less than normal, increase in velocityin this particular cyclical period. So, we kind of span as best wecan the range of uncertainty that we have.MR. BALLES. That's a good idea.MR. WALLICH. That seems to say that you are accepting thatthe causal influence goes from GNP to M1 and that there's no counter-flow of causality.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think I quite said that. It mayhave sounded that way when I worded it. But I can word it the otherway: that if there is no change in velocity, the 9 percent would bethe appropriate [number]. That gets the causality the other way. Andif there is a change in velocity, we would want to have a lower M1 andthat's why we have the lower end [at 5 percent].MR. WALLICH. But looking at this as a target, suppose M1were growing at 9 percent but unfortunately velocity was growing at 4percent, as it could. That is what I see as the problem of thistarget.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be too high.MR. PARTEE. I like that the real target is the nominal GNP.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but what I would be saying implicitlyis that if we have 4 percent velocity growth we may not know it untilex post. That's the problem. But if we thought we were getting that,the 9 percent is too high.MS. HORN. We might know it ex post but at least it wouldonly be 4 months ex post, not a half year or a year ex post. So, it'sshortening the period of uncertainty.MR. BALLES. Paul, is this suggestion both for '83 and '84?-47-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as I say, I throw it out as asuggestion. The one thing I don't like about it is that it lookspretty high on the face of it.MR. BLACK. Particularly for next year, I think.MR. BALLES. But was it for both years? Is that afterrebasing 1983?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm attracted to it simply because I thinkit's fairly easy to explain, given the GNP forecast we have--if wethink that's an appropriate GNP forecast. Actually, it's going tocome out 9-1/2 percent, I guess. I don't know where the centraltendency is; we have these medians here. But I'm assuming the centraltendency is someplace around--8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent would be ideal Isuppose--8-3/4 to 9-3/4 percent or 8-3/4 to 9-1/2 percent or someplacein that area.MR. KEEHN. Not to complicate it, but what if we use the 5 to9 percent for this year and then suggest that if velocity begins toreturn to a more normal pattern as we get into 1984 we mightcontemplate a reduction and go back to the 4 to 8 percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's kind of fine-tuning in an uncertainperiod.MS. TEETERS. We could just not even mention a target for1984 and see where we are at the end of the year because we may verywell have to rebase again then if [Ml growth] doesn't come down. Andcertainly the velocity changes are still going on.MR. ROBERTS. But don't we have to talk about next year,Paul?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to talk about next year; we don'tnecessarily have to give an M1 target. But if we didn't give one forthis year, I don't see much reason not to give one for next year. Wecan say we don't pay much attention to it, but--MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that the principle is the one youstate and then, of course, it's subject to review as more evidencecomes in on what velocity is in fact doing.MR. CORRIGAN. That 5 to 9 percent sounds nice but I don'tlike it partly because of where I think the risks are. If there issome strong sympathy that way, I'd rather see us rebase off June anduse 4 to 8 percent, which would give the same practical result anyway.I really think that saying 5 to 9 percent in the context of everythingthat's going on, at least as I look at it, is very troubling.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to have great trouble gettinga central tendency when I look at these numbers. We have a wholebunch at a high level and we have a bunch at a lower level and there'snothing in between. It worked out pretty well last time, but itceratainly doesn't work out very well this time if my glance at theseis clear. The central tendency---48-7/12-13/83MR. BLACK. What may explain some part of that is a differentpolicy [assumption] or something.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The central tendency on the nominal GNPwill come out at 9-1/2 to 10-1/4 percent or maybe even 9-1/2 to 10percent. We have 10 people between 9-1/2 and 10 percent, roughly, or11 people between 9-1/2 and 10.2 percent. So, I guess we can say thecentral tendency is roughly 9-1/2 to 10 percent.MR. BLACK. Well, you can cut that 9 percent down to 8percent by assuming a little pickup in velocity rather than no change.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what we would say with 4 to 8percent in any event is that we are assuming a little increase invelocity.MR. BLACK. You could stress the point that Jerry just made aminute ago in that way, which is not an unreasonable thing to assume.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually 4 percent would give a 5-1/2percent increase in velocity; that's pretty high even by historicalstandards.MR. ROBERTS. I thought it was over 6 percent.MR. AXILROD. Well, if you are talking about the second halfof '83, but if you get into '84, the second year probably--MR. CORRIGAN. It's quite high.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. Maybe I'm beginning to like5 to 9 percent.MR. BLACK. We could go to 10 percent and assume a small dropin velocity.MR. WALLICH. It seems to be mainly accommodative and muchless leaning against the pressures.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's look at what we're saying with 4 to8 percent. If we take the average of these forecasts, we're saying weexpect velocity to be between plus 6 and plus 2. Do you want toadjust the 4 to 8 percent or would you say between plus 5 and plus 1?That's the difference.MR. WALLICH. This could be a period of somewhat risinginterest rates, possibly, and that would accelerate velocity. Thecyclical pattern certainly is one of some velocity gain.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, all of these would allow somevelocity gain. The midpoint would be a plus 3 or 4 velocity gain.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, when you look at velocityhistorically, though, I think the potential for a rise in velocity hasto be related directly to the actual decline in velocity. And thereare all those balances sitting there and we can't ignore them.-49-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you saying velocity may rise more thanthe normal cyclical pattern?MR. CORRIGAN. I think that is a very distinct possibility,yes. We just can't ignore all that money that's sitting there.MR. BLACK. I think that is where the risks lie.MR. CORRIGAN. That's where I think they lie.MR. WALLICH. When this is compared with the old range of2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, people aren't going to keep in mind that thisis a different Ml.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm starting from the point thatI'd like to preserve M1 for some time when it becomes more importantinformationally. But this discussion has just reinforced my view thatwe shouldn't rebase at the moment. We shouldn't be talking about 5 to9 percent or anything else because it gives much more credence tothose numbers than anybody around this table is able to assign tothem, at least by a consensus. And thus it seems to me that we shoulddrop back and use the 7 to 11 percent, which recognizes that we had anovershoot in the first half that we can't explain and we don't knowwhat is going to happen in the second half. An 11 percent topsuggests to anybody who chooses to figure it out--and the monetaristsand market people or others will do so--about a 6-1/2 increase for theremainder of this year. And in view of the uncertainty, that isn'tunreasonable. As a result, I would go to the 7 to 11 percent nowwithout rebasing and maybe talk about it sometime in the future. And[for 1984] I'd go to 4 to 8 percent, which we established in Februaryof this year, in view of the uncertainty. The uncertainty stillexists for 1984 and we will have the opportunity to change it inFebruary of 1984. The result, it seems to me, is that we're accordingless precision to M1 and it's more attuned to the discussion we justhad around this table. Nobody knows. So, why should we elevate it bychanging it and assigning some precision to it, even with all thelanguage that you suggested that if velocity increases at thehistorical rate or if it's at zero--?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think we have to say that anyway fornext year. The official is less different than--MR. GUFFEY. To be sure, the uncertainty involved is velocityand its relationship to income. But to do the things we are talkingabout--one rebasing it and then establishing a 5 to 9 percent rangeand trying to explain it for the remainder of 1983--seems to me to beelevating it beyond the point that I'd like to see.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only difficulty with 4 to 8 percentfor next year--it's not a substantive one, I guess--is that we'regoing to be projecting, unless these [forecasts] change, a 9-3/4 to 10percent average nominal GNP. That projection is going to bepublished. And a 4 to 8 percent range says that velocity is going toincrease by from 2 percent to 6 percent. Is that what we want to say?MR. GUFFEY. Well, as I've just suggested, in February weestablished a 4 to 8 percent range, describing some uncertainty. Andthe report to Congress had nominal GNP of [7-1/4] to 11-1/4 percent.-50-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the average of that was 9 percent,roughly?MR. GUFFEY. 9 percent, roughly.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we said 4 to 8 percent against thebackground of cyclical increases in velocity of 6 percent or more inthe first year recovery. Now we're in the second year of recovery,and we've had two more quarters of low velocity.MR. GUFFEY. Therefore, it gives the background of sayingthat we'll just reestablish the 4 to 8 percent because we don't knowwhat will happen and we'll look at it [again] in February.MR. ROBERTS. We have gone from an 11 percent rate of[velocity] decrease to about a 1 percent rate of decrease in thatperiod, suggesting that it's straightening out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, any of these ranges allows for anincrease in velocity. And they all assume that [some] degree ofnormality will return; it's just a question of the degree.MR. BOEHNE. I think there's something to what Roger says.If the conversation added up to anything around the table, it is thatnobody really knows enough about M1 to be very confident. We couldsay for next year that the Ml range is 4 to 8 percent and that assumesa velocity of 2 to 6--and use whatever rationale you feel comfortablewith to say it--and say that if that doesn't work, we'll simply haveto adjust Ml again. That strikes me as conveying the notion that wehave some expectation that Ml will return to a more normal path, butwe're not very confident of it. And if it doesn't, we are not goingto base monetary policy on something that isn't dependable.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have the figures handy as towhat the velocity has been historically in the second year ofexpansion?MR. MORRIS. For M1 it has been 2.7 in the last threeexpansions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only 2.7?MR. GRAMLEY. In the second year?MR. MORRIS. That's the second year. It's higher in thefirst year; it's 5.2 in the first year.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, the issue here is not to agree on howmuch we know about Ml for this year. I don't think we know a helluvalot about either [year]. But the problem that I think we ought toavoid is having a set of targets that won't provide the opportunity totighten up further if we have to. And if we have targets like 11percent or even 9 percent--MR. BOEHNE. But remember that this Ml number can be put inthe context of a reduction in the targets for the broader aggregates.-51-7/12-13/83MR. CORRIGAN. But the broader aggregates don't reallyprovide much of a mechanism--or they have not provided much of amechanism--to permit this.MR. MORRIS. And Ml has?MR. CORRIGAN. We can use it; we don't have to. I'm notsaying we would. But as a practical matter, it does give us theopportunity to move if we think we have to move. And that's what I'mconcerned about--having a set of targets that gives us the flexibilityeven though we may not use it.MR. PARTEE. I agree with Jerry. I think we ought to rebase,but then I'm scared of the 5 to 9 percent so I'd fuzz a little on thevelocity but say we are keeping it open.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you base it on June, then?MR. PARTEE. Sure. I think the concept here is that what hashappened has been unusual. And now we're going to be following Ml inthe expectation that there will be some small rise in velocity.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The whole spectrum of short-terminterest rates is really behaving as though the fed funds rate werecloser to 9-1/2 percent than to the 9-1/8 percent rate of the last fewdays. So, if we raise expectations [by] having 4 to 8 percent basedon the second quarter, we are going to get even more of a reaction inthe market.MR. PARTEE. But I said I'd base it on June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Basing it on June seems awfully fussy tome.MR. PARTEE. But it's basing it on where we are, which Iwould define as June.MR. GRAMLEY. You get a lot by way of money growth; that'sworth $10 billion in Ml, I think. The second-quarter average is $505billion and June is $515 billion.MR. GUFFEY. Rebasing suggests that we know more about whatM1 is going to do in the future than I think anybody around the tableis willing to admit.MR. CORRIGAN. I think one can make the argument the otherway around. Rebasing, depending upon how we articulate it, can beconstrued to say that we had this unusual period and we're recognizingthat it's unusual. We are cutting the umbilical cord from it andwe're going from there. That clearly leaves open the option anddemonstrates our willingness to do something like that again.MR. GUFFEY. It seems to me that the market would suggestthat M1 is going to become a greater focus of policy implementation.And I'm not prepared at this moment to start looking at Ml as a policyguide because I don't think we know what is going to happen in theperiod ahead any more than we knew what would happen or how we canexplain what happened in the last six months or nine months.-52-7/12-13/83MS. TEETERS. That argues, though, for just ignoring Ml--don't set a target for this year or don't set one for next year.MR. GUFFEY. I'd just like to clarify that point. I wouldnot want to ignore Ml totally and not set any targets at all because Ithink M1 has served us very well, both politically and economically inthe past and it will need to do so in the future. I wouldn't want tomove totally away from it. I'd like to preserve it.MS. TEETERS. But if we eliminate the ranges temporarilyuntil we have a relationship back, I think that signals the marketsthat we're not [focusing on Ml] even more strongly--MR. GUFFEY. But then when we move back to it, it will be thesole target as far as the markets are concerned. If we eliminate itand then reinstitute it when we think it has some validity again, thenthe markets are going to pick it up as being the sole target formonetary policy. And in my view it shouldn't have been totally theguide in the past and shouldn't be in the future. Again, I thinkyou're according it something that I would not be prepared to do.MR. CORRIGAN. If Ml is growing at 12 percent, I don't careif we have a target or not, the market is going to look at it andwe're going to get interest rate effects. We can't wish that away.It's just not going to go away.MR. GUFFEY. The other approach, though, provides someflexibility to us in the period ahead when the uncertainty is still ata very high level.MR. BLACK. A lot of the reasons for that uncertainty havedisappeared, Roger. It may well behave more predictably now than ithas in the recent past. I hope so and I know you hope so. Of course,none of us knows.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are the Administration's and CBO'sprojections for nominal GNP next year?MR. KICHLINE. I don't know about [CBO]; the Administration'snominal GNP is 9.7 percent for 1984.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. CBO is out of date. There isn'tmuch--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sticks in my craw a bit--we're back at9-3/4 percent. That's about where we will be. If we say 4 to 8percent, we're saying velocity is going to increase by the normalcyclical amount even if we're in the high end of the range.MR. ROBERTS. If we hit it right in the middle and have anormal cyclical velocity, we're right on.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On 8 or technically 7--MR. ROBERTS. Yes, it's just as important not to pull it backtoo much as it is to have the right amount.-53-7/12-13/83MR. PARTEE. That argues for 5 to 9 percent, analytically--noquestion about it.MR. WALLICH. Well, it gets to be very close to saying thatMl has become like M2 and M3. One reason I can see for saying that isthat M1 now accumulates interest as a result of interest being paid[on NOW accounts] and so it has an upward bias that it didn't used tohave. Whether that is very important, I don't know. But I thinkthere is a difference between Ml and M2 and we ought to show that inthe range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The argument that I hear against 5 to 9percent, apart from something cosmetic, is: Suppose velocity is highand we want to tighten up and we're well within the 9 percent? Iguess the answer to that has to be that if that's true, M2 and M3 andcredit must be running high.MR. GRAMLEY. Not necessarily.MR. PARTEE. I don't see that.SPEAKER(?). I don't think so.MR. GRAMLEY. The argument for a big increase in velocity andslow growth in Ml is that we had this big cyclical drop in velocity,which relates to higher interest rate sensitivity in demand for NOWaccounts and changes in compensating balance practices as interestrates go up. And I think the implicit argument here, which we oughtto lay on the table, is that interest rates are going up a good bitmore than the staff has forecast and that slows down Ml growth a lot,so we need to keep a low range for that reason. I worry about thatabout as much as I worry about the problem that Chuck posed earlier,which is that the economy may hit the rocks and Ml growth may slowdown for that reason. I think both of those are protecting againstbeing run over by a herd of stampeding elephants in Washington at highnoon. The main problem we're going to have, I think, is that we havea fairly strong economy that's going to pull a lot of money growthout. And the question is what we want to do about that. Do we wantto ignore it or not? I would be prepared to put very little weight ongrowth of Ml, but I don't think we ought to tell the publicinadvertently that we're giving up on the fight against inflation.So, I think Jerry's suggestion of basing on June makes good sensebecause I don't think we ought to constrain ourselves too much. Thenwe can use 4 to 8 percent and it sounds better. Cosmetically, itsounds better. And I think we can finesse this business of velocityin 1984; that's no problem. No one really knows what is going tohappen to velocity anyway so we just make some arguments for [thepossibility that] it may go up or it may not and we'll be all right.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can make some arguments that it may goup; we can't make any that it may not because then we have to--MR. GRAMLEY. No, if we say it may not go up, we're saying ineffect that we're not going to put much weight on Ml until we seenormal patterns of M1/GNP relationships restored. And if, in fact,when we get to 1984, it takes 10 percent growth in Ml to have a decenteconomy, we're prepared to do that.-54-7/12-13/83MR. CORRIGAN. I don't see that as a problem. If we're facedwith the situation later this year or next year where velocity isn'tgrowing, I think it's a fairly easy matter to make that kind ofadjustment both in policy and what we say about policy. But I don'tthink the reverse follows. If we have a target that's 5 to 9 percentand money supply is growing at 9 percent and the economy is growinglike gangbusters, how do you go up [on the Hill] and explain thatwe're tightening when we're within our target range? I think it's areal problem.MS. TEETERS. We change targets.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We can do 4 to 9 percent based on thesecond quarter, which also is a practical way of showing the marketthat we're de-emphasizing M1 to some degree. They don't reallybelieve as much as I think some of you people around here believe thatwe have de-emphasized Ml. I keep mentioning this point. Sure, it hasbeen reinforced by the strength of the real economy; I understandthat. But there's a revision to the old thinking more and more.MR. MARTIN. Jerry, I think we go up to the Congress and tellthem that we're tightening because the economy is growing above therate anticipated and we're beginning to see the first signs ofinflation. I don't think we go up and make an argument based on theMs at all. We make an economic argument.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But how can we say we see the firstsigns of inflation? What do we point to?MR. MARTIN. Well, if the economy is growing very, very[rapidly]. That was the assumption Jerry made.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think he has a basis forsaying that.MR. CORRIGAN. There's somewhat of an historical tendency tobe unwilling to do that in this Committee.MR. MARTIN. That was his assumption.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If the exchange rate--MR. MARTIN. I'm not talking about today. I'm talking abouthis scenario, Tony.MR. CORRIGAN. The problem is that there's a reluctance to dothat even in the confines of this Committee, much less to go up andtell Congress that that is what we are doing. I don't give a darnabout M1 in and of itself either. My concern is simply that weformulate policy in a way that it provides us with flexibility to dowhat has to be done, if indeed it has to be done.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Gosh, I would hate to rebase on June but--MS. TEETERS. Well, take Tony's [suggestion] and make it 4 to9 percent and base it on the second quarter.-55-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd almost prefer to make it 8 to 12percent for the year.MR. GUFFEY. Well, 7 to 11 percent puts some restraint on M1over the last half of the year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7 to 11 percent is exactly the same as [8]to 12 percent based on the second quarter.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I made some calculations when Iwas fiddling with this. Growth of 12 percent for the year would giveyou about 8 or 8-1/2 percent from June to December. That's about a 10percent rate from Q2 to Q4.MR. BOEHNE. Does that show July above or below the target?MR. AXILROD. I would assume it's above, but I'd have tocheck. Oh, I'm sure it's above.MR. PARTEE. Of course, if it's slow in the second quarter--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What has it been so far?MR. AXILROD. For the year-to-date it's around 13 percent.As of June, from a fourth-quarter base it was running 13.8 percent.So, it's 5.8 percentage points above the June level.MR. ROBERTS. June was 10 percent.MR. AXILROD. I meant above the June target level. And thegrowth rate for Ml from the fourth quarter to the second quarter isabout 13-1/4 percent. Either way it's very strong. Our projectionfor the third quarter, for what it's worth--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's 13.8 percent now, we're almost at14 percent so if we have 11 percent for the year, it has to come downto 8 percent for the rest of the year. That's simple arithmetic.MR. BOEHNE. You are the number one salesman on this, Mr.Chairman. What do you feel most comfortable with trying to sell?MR. BLACK. One interesting thing that makes it a littleeasier is that under any of these short-term alternatives, the thirdquarter looks fairly high in an absolute sense. Any of these short-term alternatives that we're looking at would imply a third-quarterrate that really doesn't look like much drop from the second-quarterrate. It's just pure arithmetic. If I can find the darn table--MR. PARTEE. Lyle's helping you.MR. BLACK. Here it is. It's on page 14 [of the Bluebook],Mr. Chairman. Under the short-term alternatives for Ml, "A" gives you10.8 percent for the third quarter; "B" gives you 10 percent; and "C"gives you 9.2 percent. That may be obfuscation to a certain degree,but it is probably a more meaningful number than the rates from Juneto September in a sense. I don't know whether it's a wise thing to do-56-7/12-13/83or not, but I don't think anybody could deny that that's probably amore meaningful figure than the behavior over a particular month inthe period. Any of those involves some deceleration but not what mostpeople would think of as a terribly fast deceleration. I don't knowwhat the fourth quarter looks like at this point.MR. ROBERTS. That would be 2 percent.MR. BLACK. That's going to be a lot less. You run into afew more problems. You assume that's within your target and then youstart talking about the month-to-month--MR. AXILROD. Well, you have very low fourth-quarter numbers[if you] believe that. Growth is going to have decelerate into the 4or 5 percent area.MR. BLACK. You have faith on that, Steve. I know they wouldbe low, but I don't have those [numbers] in front of me.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that kind of increase in the thirdquarter, we'd have to have, say, 5 percent for the fourth quarter.MR. BLACK. It is pretty low.MR. AXILROD. Yes. That's what comes out of the averagingprocess. If Ml growth is decelerating at the end of the third quarterand continuing to decelerate in the fourth quarter, you get very lownumbers. But I would be very cautious about [assuming] that willhappen.MR. GUFFEY. That's a quarterly average?MR. AXILROD. Yes, low numbers month-to-month and a lowquarterly average in the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And July looks as if it's going to behigh.MR. AXILROD. We will get the more recent numbers shortly.At the moment it looks that way.MR. GRAMLEY. That makes a very strong case, if we are goingto rebase at all, for rebasing on June.MR. AXILROD. Last year, Mr. Chairman, we thought July wasgoing to be high and it came in weak. Remember, that was the surpriselast year. And August and September came in high.MR. CORRIGAN. Another thing on this rebasing: If we don'trebase, we are going to have a target this year of 8 to 12 percent or7 to 11 percent or something like that and then what do we do nextyear? We're left having to hang out a target for next year that onthe surface is going to look like it's 4 or 5 percentage points belowour target for this year.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe if we talk long enough, youwill come back to my suggestion.-57-7/12-13/83MR. CORRIGAN. What, an easy money policy?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The fact that we are doing somemodest tightening, [which is] probably what we're going to be doing, Idon't think we ought to show that. And there's enough justificationin the M2 and M3 figures to justify a modest tightening.MR. WALLICH. We are pretty far into the expansion and it's avery strong expansion. Interest rates have gone up very moderately.Historically [speaking], I don't think it's a very tough policy thatwe've had.MR. GRAMLEY. Hopefully, we're only about 1/8th of the way.MR. RICE. Compared to what--what we've done in the past?MR. GRAMLEY. Maybe 1/16th.MR. CORRIGAN. If we are not careful, it may not be aneighth.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We don't have a typical recovery. Wehave a very strange world situation as you know, Henry. And yet Idon't see that that whole world situation enters into our bottom linepolicymaking here.MR. WALLICH. Whether that is a very major thing[unintelligible]. I wrenched myself away from that on the groundsthat we're contributing a good deal more to the world expansion byhaving this bigger growth rate.MR. MARTIN. But the interest sensitive sectors of thedomestic recovery have not had time to react to or [feel] the impactof the slightly higher rate. A month from now, six weeks from now, wewill see the interest sensitive areas, especially housing, begin tolevel off or decline.MR. BLACK. That's another reason why Ml may well slow down.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would suggest that we go to theshort-term ranges. The more one looks at the problems in the nextquarter, it bears upon the reality of any number we put down for therest of this year. So, let us move to the short-term ranges. We cando that by dispensing with the Managers' reports at this point, toavoid any interruption in the continuity. What do we have now for theshort-run ranges?MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the table on page 13 of theBluebook summarizes the short-term ranges. Alternative A retains thefederal funds rate range of 6 to 10 percent, which was in the lastdirective of the Committee, but assumes in effect retaining the degreeof restraint on bank reserve positions that the Committee mostrecently has allowed. And those money market conditions, we believe,are consistent with a slowing in Ml growth to a 7-1/2 percent rangeover the June-to-September period, as you see, and a slowing of M2 andM3 growth---58-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That produces what quarterly average?It's 10 percent or something that like?MR. AXILROD. Yes, that produces a 10.8 percent quarterlyaverage, given a high July. And I might add that I do now have veryrecent data and they would not suggest that July is very differentfrom 10 percent. They tend to confirm the first couple of weeks inJuly that we had estimated last week. Alternative B and alternative Ccontemplate a tightening of bank reserve positions--in the case ofalternative B, perhaps up to the 9-1/2 percent area for the funds rateand perhaps up to the $850 million to $1 billion range for member bankborrowing. And alternative C contemplates even more tightening. Webelieve alternative B is generally consistent with Ml growth,expressing it at an annual rate, in the 7 to 11 percent range and ismore consistent than alternative A with the broader aggregates--atleast M2--being closer to the midpoint of their ranges. We believealternative A to be more consistent with the broader aggregates beingtoward the upper end of their ranges--particularly M3, but M2 would bein the upper half of its range. And for M1 we would be morecomfortable, I think, with an 8 to 12 percent range for the year. Thegreater tightness of alternative C we believe would be more temporaryeven than that under alternative B because we would contemplate a morerapid downward reaction of the demands for goods and services. Andthat would tend to be reversed toward the end of the year and intoearly next year more than with alternative B and, of course, thatwould contemplate a greater slowing of M2 and M3.Mr. Chairman, in view of the uncertainties, I might say thatas a policy course it would not seem illogical to me to contemplatehigher growth rates of the aggregates, such as those in alternative A,even if the Committee wanted also to contemplate some littletightening of the money market. If the Committee did not wish tocontemplate any tightening, it certainly seems as if the higher growthrates of alternative A, or maybe even higher rates, would be necessaryso far as we can see at this point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure I understand what youjust said. You say when you really look at it, you're not surealternative A is inconsistent with some modest tightening of the moneymarket?MR. AXILROD. If the Committee wanted to contemplate no morethan a modest tightening, then I think it would be more certain to getthat result to be consistent with the [growth rates it adopts for the]aggregates if it raises them. If the Committee were willing to havemuch more than a modest tightening--quite a tightening--then, ofcourse, a lower aggregate [figure] would work more to assure that thatwould develop naturally.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you talking about roughly a $600million borrowing assumption?MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm not sure that that would get you alot of tightening.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we need $800 million to getthe funds rate to 9-1/2 percent.-59-7/12-13/83MR. AXILROD. Probably, although this week borrowing isrunning around $400 million. Of course, in earlier weeks it had runmuch, much higher very steadily.MR. MARTIN. When you associate "A" with some tightening, areyou referring to a validation by us of the movement in the marketsthat has already occurred or are you talking about higher rates fromtoday's level or yesterday's level?MR. AXILROD. I was associating alternative B with sometightening, Governor Martin--perhaps I misspoke--and alternative Awith about the present degree of reserve restraint, which would be avalidation [of the modest recent tightening].MR. MARTIN. Let me shift to "B" then: Are you talking aboutvalidation or further increases?MR. AXILROD. No, I was assuming further tightening wouldmean a funds rate moving up at least to 9-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're talking about the funds rate.That might be consistent with the rest of the market being where itis, if [market participants] thought that was the end of [thetightening]. But they may not think it's the end of it.MR. MARTIN. I wouldn't think it's the end of it.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask Steve, inresponse to Tony's question: If we select alternative A, what kind ofborrowing level in your judgment would give us a funds rate someplacebetween 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent?MR. AXILROD. That is somewhat tighter than we contemplatedin alternative A and I would say between $600 and $850 million.MR. GUFFEY. Between $600 and $700 million would you say?MR. AXILROD. Borrowing has fluctuated so much that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't interpret the borrowing levelwithout some allowance for excess reserves. We've had borrowing muchhigher but we have had a lot of excess reserves. I think the changein free reserves or net borrowed reserves is roughly what wecontemplated, but we have been getting a lot of borrowing in thebeginning of the week and the market gets easy.SPEAKER(?). Because banks have so many excess reserves.MR. GRAMLEY. Would it be better, instead of an initialborrowing assumption, to talk about an initial net borrowed reservenumber?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In some sense it is probably better totalk in those terms or in some combination of the two. I think of theborrowing number as shorthand for something that's associated with$350 million or so of excess reserves, which used to be normal. Forseveral months, at least, it has been well above that. I think thedistribution of reserves results in some easing influence even though-60-7/12-13/83the borrowing is high. So, implicitly I look at the net borrowedreserves.MR. PARTEE. Alternative A on Ml would be consistent withwhat for the last two quarters [of 1983]?MR. AXILROD. We thought that would be more consistent--againthis is judgmental--with the alternative that isn't here; we had morelike an 8 to 12 percent range for the year. Alternative B, which isthe basis of the staff forecast, we thought was more consistent with a7 to 11 percent range.MS. TEETERS. And "B" implies a rise in rates to 9-3/4percent?MR. AXILROD. The way we had written "B," it assumed a fundsrate probably up in the 9-1/2 percent area or somewhat higher. Again,it depends on what borrowing level the Committee adopts. The onePresident Guffey suggested would be somewhat lower. What we have inhere is 9-1/2 to 10 percent; where it would fall in that range dependsa bit on how it's toned up.MS. TEETERS. Net free reserves, excluding the one week inthe past six when it was positive, would average about $225 million.MR. PARTEE. Net borrowed?MS. TEETERS. Yes, net borrowed reserves were about $225million. And I agree with the Chairman that that's what we shouldfocus on--whether we want to increase the net borrowed [assumption] orkeep it the same--because the week-to-week changes in the excess andborrowings are really all we have.MR. MEEK. I think that $225 million includes about $150million of seasonal borrowing.MS. TEETERS. I thought that was out of there. It's theextended that you pushed over.MR. MEEK. Seasonal borrowing is in.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if we're going to work with theinitial assumption of net borrowed reserves, then we have to make anestimate as to what the excess reserves are going to be, and I don'tthink--MS. TEETERS. They are not unrelated, Tony.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I know that.MS. TEETERS. When the borrowing goes sky high so do theexcess reserves.MR. AXILROD. No, that would eliminate the need to make thatassumption in advance. If you gave us a net borrowed assumption, wewould have a required reserve figure; under lagged reserve accountingthat would disappear later and then we would know the nonborrowedreserve number by subtraction. Whatever excess is involved and-61-7/12-13/83however net borrowed chooses to distribute itself between excess andborrowings, we'll work out. We will have a lot of borrowing and a lotof excess, or a little borrowing and a little excess, for the same--MR. WALLICH. Well, you remember the old mechanism: If youkeep net borrowed at a given level that the banks don't findconsistent with prevailing interest rates, the money supply will getaway from you as you try to maintain that net borrowed level. It's avery tricky, slippery target.MR. GRAMLEY. No trickier than [the relationship of] initialborrowing to the federal funds rate.MR. PARTEE. Yes. I think we've been doing exactly the samething here in the last 6 to 9 months.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, what bothers me more than anythingelse is that when we stopped tracking Ml we lost a lot of thatautomatic correcting mechanism we had before. I don't think thefigures we choose here are as important as that we agree that we aregoing to change the borrowing level and federal funds rate--and maybein rather prompt steps--if the actual growth deviates from what weexpect. That's the point I'd like to see us zero in on if we could,because all we can do now on the present procedures are ad hocadjustments. That makes me a little uncomfortable.MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I should have commented that theproposed directive alternative on the short run does include abracketed proposal that the Committee may want to consider asconsistent with this discussion. If it were included, it would implya degree of automaticity in reaction that has not been attained forsome time; if not included, we could not have the automaticity thathad been in place before last October. That's another point theCommittee may wish to consider.SPEAKER(?). Where are you?MR. GRAMLEY. Pages 21 to 22. That would go with thebracketed comment on page 21.MR. AXILROD. I had not thought that those necessarilyfollowed, Governor Gramley. This would be in case the Committeewished to give a little more weight to Ml and a little moreautomaticity, whether or not the bracketed part under the long run--.Oh, I'm sorry! You mean the second paragraph on page 21. That'sright; it would go more logically with the last paragraph.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we ought to have some modestdegree of tightening here, but it's a matter of degree.MR. ROBERTS. Alternative B accommodates the present rate ofgrowth in M1 during the third quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Present rate of growth? I'm not quitesure what you mean by the present rate. It would accommodate---62-7/12-13/83MR. ROBERTS. The 10 percent rate we've been seeing in Ml inthe third quarter would be reflected under alternative B. It'srunning about 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it was running above that. Oh,you mean from June. Okay.MR. ROBERTS. [July] is estimated, I thought he said, atabout the same as [June].MR. AXILROD. That's right. But if you adopt the 6 percentand July is correct, that alternative would necessarily imply a sharpdrop in August and September to about 4 percent. That would give youa high quarterly average but August and September would have to comedown quite a lot to get there.MR. MARTIN. And you're talking about [growth in] totalreserves under "B" at 2-1/4 percent June-to-September?MR. AXILROD. Yes.MR. MARTIN. It's also substantial.MR. AXILROD. It was because of that sharp drop implied inAugust and September that I suggested with a bit of caution thepossibility of higher growth rates [even] if you had some modesttightening.MR. MARTIN. What would "B" imply with regard to the primerate--very considerable pressure upward?MR. AXILROD. I would think a rise.MS. TEETERS. There'd be even more pressure on the mortgagerate. Last week it was at 13.3 percent, when we had a--and I quote--"modest increase" in pressure. Apply the same modest increase inpressure and it would get over 14 percent.MR. AXILROD. But "B" is going to a funds rate of 9-1/2 to 10percent. If the Committee were only going to a 9-1/2 percent fundsrate, things would become a little more iffy; it becomes a sort ofstruggle between the banks.MS. TEETERS. But, Steve, didn't you say even alternative Aimplies some increase in restraint?MR. AXILROD. Well, we were writing alternative A as if itimplied bank reserve positions that would keep the money market aboutwhere it is. It's probable that short-term rates and long-term rateshave anticipated a further tightening, so there is some realpossibility of a little drop in rates under alternative A if it worksout that the money market just doesn't tighten up from its recentdegree of restraint.MR. RICE. Alternative A does include the present degree ofrestraint--that is, it includes the tightening that has already takenplace?-63-7/12-13/83MR. AXILROD. That's what we were intending. The market isanticipating further tightening, as far as we could construe up toyesterday. But, that's what we were intending.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's fair to say that themarket, particularly after the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, probablywill not retreat and will tend to assume that this is not the lastupward adjustment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the problem. When we get into aphase of change they keep anticipating more and more until somethinghappens to change that, such as a decline in the money supply, aweakness in the economy, or something.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They are reacting now to those wideswings in weekly Ml variations as they were before we had formallydeemphasized Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You put more on M1 than I think isjustified.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking about the swings [in Ml]we're now seeing in the Friday publications.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what I had in mind was borrowing ofroughly $600 to $800 million, but I assumed excess reserves of $300 to$400 million, say. It implies higher borrowings as it evens out ifexcess reserves are very high. Whether that's consistent with "A" or"B," I don't know; I guess it's someplace in between.MR. MEEK. Let me mention one other factor that's in thatborrowing number. We have a lot of nonmember banks that now haveaccess to the discount window; they're borrowing about $100 million.The seasonal borrowing is $150 million and there has always been anormal frictional borrowing amount of about $100 million. So, you'retalking about a $350 million base in some sense.MR. BLACK. Also, borrowing has been so low that there's lessreluctance [by banks] to come in, so it's probably going to be high.MR. MEEK. I think $600 million is probably about where weare now, but not in--MR. PARTEE. $600 million on borrowing?MR. MEEK. I think $600 million on borrowing is somewherearound 9 percent or a little higher--perhaps 9-1/8 percent.MR. BOEHNE. So, what we need is $800 million to get to 9-1/2percent? Is that what you are saying?MR. MEEK. Well, I would give a little range there, I think.MS. TEETERS. Why do you feel we need to tighten now over andabove what we've already done?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The economy is moving pretty fast; we havesome inflationary danger sitting out there in the future; and the-64-7/12-13/83aggregates are running high. So, I'd go for a modest tightening untilI see a change in this.MS. TEETERS. What's wrong with the economy recovering?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nothing, if it does it in a sustained way--a noninflationary way.MR. RICE. The forecast doesn't show very much inflationarydanger.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The staff forecast doesn't show muchinflationary danger.MR. RICE. No, the consensus forecast; I didn't hear anystrong arguments against the staff forecast on that score.MR. WALLICH. If we don't act somewhat now, I think we'rerepeating what we've done many times before. That is, we let it runtoo long and we then confront either inflation or excessive interestrate increases. Both put an end to the expansion.MR. PARTEE. We've just had a concerted move in the market,which is the point that Pres made. Now, maybe we haven't fullyconfirmed that move. But I would be happy to see the private ratestructure stay where it is for a while because I think it will havesome effect on the very credit sensitive industries and we ought towait and see what that is before we let this get away from us on thetightening side. But I think that's probably consistent with a littletightening.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I would [unintelligible]except for this expectation. We've had rates move up, and I'm notsure the market is convinced that we've moved at all. Now, when wetell them that we have--probably tomorrow--we will get anotherreaction.MR. RICE. I don't understand how that tightening isconsistent with steady [reserve] positions.MR. MORRIS. There's no doubt that we've moved in the market.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. What do you think? I justread the newspaper. Some say we've moved a tiny bit and some say wehaven't.MR. MEEK. Well, I think the analysts have one [view] and thetraders another. I think the traders have voted with their feet andhave anticipated not only 9-1/8 percent but something on the order of9-1/2 percent. The analysts are still sorting out free reserves,borrowings, and excess reserves, and lag a bit behind.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we tighten to 9-1/2 percent, thechances of the market not continuing to anticipate that there might bemore tightening later on are very small. I don't think we couldtighten without getting some movement in the whole spectrum of short-term rates, even though technically the 9-1/2 percent [funds rate]would be consistent with the short-term rates we've seen here.-65-7/12-13/83MR. MORRIS. It would force a change in the prime rate.MR. PARTEE. Well, the prime rate probably ought to go up anotch.MS. TEETERS. You're going to force a change in the discountrate, too.MR. CORRIGAN. No, I don't think that follows.MR. MORRIS. I think we could very easily see the prime ratego to 9-1/2 percent.MR. PARTEE. Yes, and it probably ought to. Everything elsehas moved and the prime has not.MR. ROBERTS. Everything has moved 5/8 to 3/4 point exceptthe prime.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The logic of that argument, Chuck,that we [ought] to wait a while before we put more pressure on thewhole spectrum of short-term interest rates is that we really can'tafford to push up the fed funds rate even though it would be in atechnically better relationship.MR. PARTEE. That could be. An awful lot will be determinedby [events in] the next few days--the testimony and so forth.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I am assuming that the tone of thattestimony, to the extent that it's not as completely neutral as it canbe, is that it would give more [emphasis] to the question of alertnessto the strength of the economy, strength of the aggregates, etc., thanit would to any implication that would correct anticipation on theother side. In other words, I don't see any reason to assume that thetestimony would tend to take the upward movement and expectations out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is only one way to do that. If wein fact move a little, then we say we moved a little and leave theimplication that at this point we don't see any reason to move anymore.MS. TEETERS. We've already moved.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, we have moved.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you prepared to go that far?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that depends upon what we do here, Iguess. I don't see how we can give that impression without moving abit here. If we move a little here, we can leave the impression thatwe may have a little tightening but there's nothing else in the offingother than what we're in the process of doing immediately. Thatprobably won't calm them down. I don't think [the market] is going tobe calmed down until something happens like the money supply goingdown or the economy showing a bad month or something.MR. ROBERTS. And we had the first month of a turnaround inbusiness loan demand in June.-66-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fact is that in a strong economy andanything like their present mood there's no reason why we shouldindicate a decline in interest rates, whatever we do.MR. MARTIN. But that's one month of business borrowing andthe kind of businesses that provide much of the new employment arepaying 2 to 3 points over prime. If we get the prime rate up another50 or 75 [basis] points and add 2 to 3 [percentage points] on top ofthat, we'll see how much borrowing we get!MR. ROBERTS. Well, some people are still paying prime, butit's less of a significant rate in the C&I market. In New York,three-fourths of the new loans are not at prime; in Chicago, half ofthem are not at prime.MR. PARTEE. They're below prime.MR. MARTIN. Yes, but small businesses are paying 200 to 300basis points over prime, as we all know. In construction with 100basis point increase on FHA/VA [loans], they're back to paying 6points again. The conventional loan points are much more, maybe 10.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There has been a bit of a shift backto prime as the Eurodollar and the Libor rate got lower and the banksfound some of their interest is--MR. PARTEE. Well, I think Pres is right that very few peoplein the construction industry pay prime. They'll be paying prime plus2 probably.MR. MARTIN. And then points on the mortgage.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I'd like to get to, which is a littledifficult to do in the current atmosphere, is the point where we'renot really tightening more than we can tighten--where the expectationsin the market change and they say that whatever change in interestrates will be might have [occurred] and that the next move might bedown again. We're not there; we are a long ways from there in thepresent atmosphere because of all the external events and the moneysupply. How do we get there without making things so tight?Obviously, we don't want to--MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it's going to take a while to get there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we can do it right at themoment, but I--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think you can do it in yourtestimony either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, no.MR. GRAMLEY. We're not going to get there until there hasbeen enough evidence in the financial data and the nonfinancial datato indicate to the public that no further tightening is needed.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is right.-67-7/12-13/83MR. PARTEE. A smaller quarter in GNP.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Basically I agree with what you're saying.What we're doing here is trying to maneuver things so that indeedthose things happen in two or three months.MR. GRAMLEY. That's why I would agree that some slightfurther nudging up is needed. I do think it's important to recognizethat we have accomplished a good bit. We have long-term rates up 3/4percentage point, the stock market has stopped booming, and theexchange rate hasn't dropped a ton like we thought it was going to doin the past year, so we got restraint from that side too. So, we'vemade some progress. I think we probably need a little more.MR. BLACK. And Ml.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you consider the exchange rateprogress?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, progress in achieving a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to quantify your view?We'll start backwards: start with that view and then translate itinto the right numbers and then go back to the long term. How do youquantify your view?MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I would go for a borrowing figure ofsomewhere around $800 million probably, or $850 million. I'd like tosee the federal funds rate hit around 9-1/2 percent. I wouldn't wantit to go up high into the 9-1/2 to 10 percent range. I would gobasically with the specs of "B." That's where I'd be. I want to dothis cautiously. I would not wish to go in the direction that thebracketed language in the directive suggests, with a lot ofautomaticity in response. I think automaticity in response ought tobe avoided like the plague because we just don't know what these moneynumbers mean. Until those numbers begin to make more sense, I thinkwe ought to use a judgmental approach rather than an automaticresponse.MR. PARTEE. Well, those specs aren't bad. I'd be close [tothat]. I'm not sure I agree with the last point, although I certainlylean away from automaticity. But I feel that we would need to rebaseMl in order to show the market that we're not going to be trying toget it down in the range.MR. GRAMLEY. I agree with that too; for the long-run range Iwould use 4 to 8 percent based on June.MR. WALLICH. I could go with alternative B shaded a littleon the low side--not as far as $1 billion of borrowed reserves or 10percent on the funds rate. I'd use lower limits--$850 million and 9-3/4 percent.MS. TEETERS. Are you going to show the 7 to 11 percent range[for fed funds]? That is going to come out as a very strong signal:that we're raising rates by a whole percentage point and the range byquite a bit.-68-7/12-13/83MR. WALLICH. Well, we're supposedly now in the 6 to 10percent range and funds are at 9-1/4 percent.MS. TEETERS. Well, I just find it very difficult to acceptany tightening. I didn't approve a tightening last time and I justdon't think we need any more at this point. We haven't had time, ashas been pointed out, to get the effect on the mortgage market and theautomobile industry of what we have done already. And the economy,which has had only two quarters of recovery, doesn't strike me as onethat needs a lot of restraint. And it's also one which is fairlytypical. We typically get a quarter like this. We should get somerecovery before we start tightening again; we should let it get backto something close to normal. I'd go for alternative A and keep thefree reserves minus the special factors like the seasonal in a rangeof maybe $200 to $250 million dollars net borrowed.MR. RICE. I would support that. I think we've already had agood deal of tightening. I know some people think it's minuscule; Ithink it's significant at this point in the recovery. I would not atthis time want to damp the recovery because I'm not yet sure it is allthat strong. It may well be as strong as many of you think it is, butI would like to be surer than I am now and I would want to wait a bitbefore I tighten any further. I'd want to wait at least another monthor two.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'm closer to Emmett andNancy's view, but I think it would be perfectly reasonable tocompromise at something in the neighborhood of an initial borrowingassumption of, say, $700 million. I don't see that expectations aregoing to change, and that [borrowing] would we give us some modestfurther lift in rates and I think would be consistent, as Stevepointed out--at least I think he expressed this view--with the targetsof alternative A. I don't think the funds range is significant; theway we're running monetary policy these days, we're not going to toucheither extreme anyway. So, I don't think it's important whether weleave it at 6 to 10 percent or not. I think we might as well leaveit.MR. GUFFEY. I would join that view for a borrowing level of$700 million or thereabouts. That suggests to me that we validatewhat has happened in the past; a funds rate roughly in the 9-1/8 to9-1/4 percent range with a potential high of 9-1/2 percent might fallout of the $700 million borrowing level. I would oppose going muchhigher than the $700 million at this point.MR. KEEHN. I'd be more inclined toward alternative B. I'dfeel more comfortable with a fed funds rate of 9-1/2 percent or maybea touch higher. And if a $750 to $800 million borrowing level wouldaccomplish that, I think that's where I'd be comfortable.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You and I ought to change Districts!The theory of this regional system is that we reflect the view of ourDistricts. We do not.MR. ROBERTS. I think Si's view is about where I would be.Alternative B is closer to what I would like to see: a funds rate of9-1/2 to 10 percent and the borrowing somewhere around $800 million ifexcess reserves are going to be around $400 million.-69-7/12-13/83MR. MORRIS. I would support the status quo policy ofalternative A.MR. BOYKIN. I would support "B," pretty much for the reasonsthat have already been set forth. I won't bother to repeat them.MR. FORRESTAL. We would support alternative B, Mr.Chairman.We would look for something perhaps at the lower end of-that range forthe reasons you've already expressed--namely, that we're looking at amuch more robust recovery than we had anticipated and monetary growthis very strong. The major question facing the Committee, it seems tome, is how long we can allow the monetary aggregates to continue togrow without raising inflationary expectations. So, it's a questionof how much restraint needs to be put into the system. Our view wouldbe that a little more tightening is required at this time, and thealternative B specifications would fit that. I would say we wouldlook for borrowing at around the $800 million level, with the fundsrate somewhere between 9-1/2 and 10 percent.MR. BOEHNE. My preference is alternative A, for the reasonsstated. However, I would find acceptable an "A minus," which would be$700 million on borrowing and 9-1/4 percent on the funds rate.MR. MARTIN. I would support the Chairman's $600 to $800million range, anticipating that $700 million would be the midpoint ofthat. I would like to see fed funds at no higher than 9-1/2 percent.In other words, I'd support some verification on the interest rateside of what has already occurred, for the reasons I have mentionedtoo many times at this meeting. And I would move for the deletion ofthe automaticity embodied in the language in the two paragraphs thathave been called to our attention.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else has something to say? Are wesupposed to be having coffee? If nobody else has anything to say, whydon't we have coffee quickly?[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me try to summarize this as nearly asI see it. I am impressed, first of all, by the fact that ourforecasts, I assure you, will receive much more prominence [thanusual] in testimony and congressional discussion. I got a requestfrom Mr. St Germain that the first page of the Humphrey-Hawkinstestimony be nothing but a table of economic forecasts so they canconcentrate on that. I don't know whether I'll do that or not, but--MR. PARTEE. Our forecasts?MS. TEETERS. Identified?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Committee forecast. So, it's going tobe sitting right out there on the front page. I calculated that thecentral tendency averages roughly 9-3/4 percent. They go up as highas 11-1/4 percent and the lowest is 8.9 to 9 percent, which rounds offto 9 percent.MS. TEETERS. You're talking 4th quarter over 4th quarter?-70-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking 4th quarter over 4th quarterfor 1984. Now, wait a minute. No, there is someone who is as low as7 percent. Yes, the low is 7 percent. But still, I think this wouldbe 9-1/2 to 9-3/4 percent, just to cite that as background. But itbothers me in rationalizing--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How is that lower one split betweenreal GNP and prices?MS. TEETERS. About even.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how to answer thatbecause the way I have it arrayed it goes from high to low on each ofthese, so it doesn't add up. They are all higher than the staff. Orrather, the tendency is to be higher than the staff on the GNPdeflator. There's no question about that; that's where the differencefrom the staff forecast is. The staff forecast is 8.3 percent [onGNP] and on the deflator it's 4.1 percent. The central tendency onthe deflator is going to be 5 percent or something like that on theCommittee side. Now, it can be changed. But it will be sitting thereand much more than before we're going to be asked: Is this desirable?Is this what we really want? Is it consistent with our policy? Andso forth and so on. Let me just cite that as background.For the short run, after listening to you and considering thedesirability from my particular point of view of a little flexibility,I would still say something like $600 to $800 million, assuming that[excess reserves] are around $300 to $400 million, which means netborrowed reserves of $300 to $400 million. In fact, borrowings wouldbe higher than that if excess reserves show this recurrent tendency tobe much higher. But I detect a lot of sensitivity, which I can wellunderstand, to the federal funds rate moving above 9-1/2 percent, andI think that flexibility would be partly associated with a tendencyfor the federal funds rate to move and stay much above 9-1/2 percent.As for the aggregates, in the sense of being a little moreconservative in terms of what actually has been happening in Ml--.Well, it looks like we're going to have a high Ml in July, judging bythe way it's starting out. Of course, it doesn't make any differencefor the June-to-September figure but for the quarterly average we'restarting high. I'd be somewhat inclined to take the specifications ofalternative B for M2 and M3 and use 7 percent or something like thatfor the Ml specification. So much for the short run. We have todiscuss precisely what to say in the directive and I would make somechanges in what has been proposed.For the longer term, there's no perfect way. I must say thatI don't feel comfortable with rebasing on June. It looks like toomuch fine-tuning. I can see everybody saying: Gee, they just takethe highest number they got recently and they are fooling around. Iwould put in either 7 to 11 percent or 8 to 12 percent for this year,and I take it there's agreement--well, we'll get to it--for 5 to 9percent or 4 to 8 percent for next year. But if it's 4 to 8 percent,I really have a problem in terms of our forecast. It seems to me theimplication of that is a lower GNP forecast. And I would feel muchmore comfortable if we decide on 4 to 8 percent, if people would saythat in the light of all our policy decisions these things werereviewed and we got a somewhat lower GNP forecast for next year andmaybe a lower inflation forecast. It can be on the inflation side-71-7/12-13/83rather than the real side. But I feel a little uncomfortable aboutrationalizing 4 to 8 percent with a forecast of almost a 10 percentnominal GNP increase next year. I don't feel uncomfortable inrationalizing it with the staff's GNP forecast; the staff's GNPforecast is more than 1 percent lower than the Committee's GNPforecast.I guess there's agreement not to change the M2 and M3 rangesfor the rest of this year and to reduce them by half percentage pointfor next year. Credit could either be reduced by 1/2 or 1 percentagepoint. Looking at the numbers now for credit: On the average, thoughnot in every expansion, [nonfinancial] debt has increased a littlefaster than GNP in the second year of recoveries. I think it's truein all but one case since 1954. The first year it increases moreslowly. Now, it has been increasing more rapidly this year; so Idon't know what that tells us for next year. So, that probably iswhere I would be.Now, we have to divide it up in terms of arriving at aconclusion. Let's take the short term first. To repeat: Some degreeof flexibility in [borrowing of] $600 to $800 million, interpretedpartly as net borrowed of $300 to $400 million, but with somesensitivity to the federal funds rate getting above 9-1/2 percent.MR. MORRIS. So this is more generous than alternative B?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A little more generous, yes. It's prettymuch between--MR. MORRIS. Alternative B is 9-1/2 to 10 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it's between "A" and "B," I think,and in broad terms is confirming where the market is now, except thatI agree the market just might anticipate more [tightening]. I don'tknow how to deal with that. The market will anticipate it at somepoint whether we do anything now or not, unless we try to hold it downby--MS. TEETERS. A lot depends on the testimony.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think in the testimony I would nottry to give the impression that we just embarked on this; thetestimony would say we've tightened already. I'll probably say thattomorrow because I don't feel I can avoid it. I will try to say aslittle as possible about the future until next week.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you feel that you can say we'vetightened a bit and that for the time being we want to wait and seethe results of that tightening and other factors on the growth of theeconomy?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd like to be able to say that, but ifright in the midst of when I'm testifying we are tightening a littlemore I don't know that I can really say we are going to wait and see.But I'd like to give that impression to the degree that I could. Ithink I can say we don't see anything here that says we need anydrastic action. The emphasis would be on a relatively modest move.-72-7/12-13/83We don't see anything right now to require anything more drastic thana slight action. I'm not sure I can say this is over now.MR. MORRIS. We're already up to 9-1/4 percent on the fundsrate, so you're only talking about 1/4 point and that I think could beencompassed within the statement of no significant further move.MS. TEETERS. We only intended it to go to 9 percent lasttime.MR. PARTEE. They're going to be watching.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As much as possible I would give theimpression, without denying that some tightening may be going on, thata really drastic move is not what the doctor calls for.MR. GRAMLEY. You just have to convince them that we've movedenough to choke off inflation and not enough to hurt the economy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. Just in the interest ofclarity, when I say "sensitive" to a federal funds rate of about 9-1/2percent, that doesn't mean that the federal funds rate couldn't beabove 9-1/2 percent on particular days or for several days. What I domean to say is that if it got up there, then we wouldn't be movingaggressively toward the higher borrowing numbers but the reverse.MR. RICE. We would be trying to bring it back down to 9-1/2percent?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to make the target and thenset--MR. RICE. Well, if it happens to drift up to 9-3/4 percent,it could stay there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could stay there, but it would onlystay there if the borrowing number tended to be on the low side ofthis range that we're talking about.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think it's a tad of tightening, but justa tad.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't represent it as anything otherthan that.MS. TEETERS. Yes, but suppose it goes up to 9-3/4 percent.Then you'll come back next time and argue that we're just validatingwhat the market has already done.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At that point either we would want tovalidate it or not or go further, depending upon what evidence we haveat that time. I would be delighted to get in a position where becauseof something we saw in the aggregates and the economy or whatever, wecould say "Let's ease up a little bit." I'd be delighted to be inthat position, but I don't think we're there.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not sure that I understand theimportance of the targets for M2 and M3 and that for Ml. I'm not sure-73-7/12-13/83I understand their importance if we're having that narrow a view as towhere we expect the fed funds rate to be. Do you want to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this gets to the question of what wesay in the directive. I don't feel particularly strongly about thisbut I think it might be useful to have something along the lines ofwhat [the Bluebook] is proposing in the brackets, but I'd modify it.Let me say one other thing: In the long-run targets--but it wouldhave a pale reflection in this operational paragraph--I could see somemerit in trying to handle this Ml issue by presenting our targets,when we present them statistically, in a little table. I'd put downM2 and M3 as a target and put down Ml and total credit--I don't knowwhat term to use--as a monitoring range or an associated range, so wehave a two-tiered kind of target.MR. GRAMLEY. Would that be demoting Ml further from what itwas?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would not interpret it as demoting itfurther but making it clear that it has been demoted. It doesn't getthe same weight as the other two.MR. BLACK. Are you talking about the short run still?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about the long run when I saythat, but [it is reflected] in the short run. I had a piece of paperwhere I scribbled something for the operational paragraph: "TheCommittee seeks in the short run to increase slightly further theexisting degree of reserve restraint. The action is expected to beassociated with growth of M2 and M3 at annual rates of about 8-1/2 and8 percent respectively from June to September." And then, though I amnot sure I thought this through, I'd pick up that bracketed sentence[in the Bluebook] but modify it to take out the "in part." I'd say"Depending on evidence about the strength of economic recovery andother factors bearing on the business and inflation outlook, lesserrestraint would be acceptable in the context of a significantshortfall, while somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable shouldthe aggregates expand more rapidly. The Committee anticipates that adeceleration in Ml growth to an annual rate of around 7 percent willbe consistent with its third-quarter objectives for the broaderaggregates."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could you expand that sentence andput in something about total credit in the same sentence?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could, except that we don't have afigure.MR. AXILROD. Evidence comes in later. In terms of thestatistical evidence available, it's shakier and comes in later [thannumbers] for M2 and M3.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But it would be helpful, I think, tocarry through the concept of the two tiers with the associated ranges,if there's some way of doing that even without putting numbers on it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not very meaningful if we don't getthe figures in.-74-7/12-13/83MR. PARTEE. We have a third-quarter projection as I recall:I read it someplace.MR. AXILROD. We couldn't put that in.MR. PARTEE. It's rather low because the government borrowedso much in the second quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could put in a figure but I don't thinkit would have much, or any, operational significance. It might havesome operational significance by the time we get to September.MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's very difficult to have any numberthere until the very end.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say that the Committeeanticipates that deceleration in Ml growth to an annual rate of blankwould be consistent with its third-quarter objectives for the broaderaggregates and that total domestic credit would remain within itsrange for the year or something like that. It could be a littlebroader--"will remain within the established range for the year."MR. PARTEE. That is true, isn't it?MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's hard to get out of that range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder whether it's worth putting thatin up above, too, just to emphasize that in these respects, anyway,we're within the targets. "The action is expected to be associatedwith growth of M2 and M3 at annual rates of about 8-1/2 and 8 percentrespectively from June to [September], consistent with the targetsestablished for the year." I didn't say anything about the range forthe federal funds rate. I don't have any strong feeling about thatone way or the other. If we leave it at 6 to 10 percent, we aretelling the market a month from now--I don't know how meaningful thatis--that we didn't want or were worried about the federal funds rategoing above 10 percent.MS. TEETERS. It has been in there for quite some time; if wetake it out, it's going to cause comment.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll get comment a month from now but Idon't know whether it will make any difference. It's a littleartificial at the low end, particularly now, but--MR. MORRIS. But if we really would be concerned to see therate go above 9-1/2 percent, it seems strange to me to raise the upperlimit to 11 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One can argue it either way; it seemsstrange not to change it because we're nowhere near the middle. Andit would seem strange to raise it if we want to reflect that concern.So, I come out neutral.MR. MORRIS. A skewed median.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think I'm neutral on the subject.-75-7/12-13/83MR. GUFFEY. We're still on the short-run directive?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we're on the short-run ranges.MR. GUFFEY. I have a question about putting in the bracketedsentence. I don't know that it adds anything and I would opt toremove it.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it gives us a little moreflexibility, Roger.MR. GUFFEY. I don't know that it does, Tony. We can operatepolicy and this is a record that is essentially meaningless when it'sreleased.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Basically what it's saying, though,is that our judgments about movements in the real economy will temperthat earlier sentence. And I think that's consistent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it says more accurately thatjudgments about the real economy and inflation and so forth willtemper our judgments about the aggregates.MR. MARTIN. I think it's well to say that; I'd suggestleaving it in.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it's also a warning that if theaggregates really went in one direction or another we would pay someattention to that, but how much attention we would pay would dependupon what we thought was going on in the economy and exchange ratesand other things.MR. GUFFEY. I guess my point is that, at the time thisrecord is released, that's a meaningless expression.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You think we're being too heretical?"Depending in part on evidence"--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I took out the "in part" deliberately.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. --"about the strength of economicrecovery both domestically and in the world." Something like thatwould show that we are aware of what is happening in the worldeconomy.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we get the right words,"Depending on evidence about the strength of the domestic economicrecovery and other factors bearing on the business and inflationoutlook, including...."MR. GRAMLEY. We're talking about the operating directive.It's getting somewhat absurd.MR. PARTEE. Yes, this is the instruction to the Manager.-76-7/12-13/83MR. GRAMLEY. It's getting somewhat absurd. The whole ideaof providing a little broadening is fine, but you are throwing in themonitoring of the credit aggregate and you are throwing in theinternational situation. This is--MR. MORRIS. Yes, that ought to come in earlier in theintroductory paragraphs, not in this paragraph.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The short-term directive--MR. GRAMLEY. We can list these things in the Chairman's ear.I agree with flexibility, too. [Unintelligible] between now and thenext meeting.MR. PARTEE. It's not so much the world economic recovery asit is international debt. It's really the international financialconditions.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's also the industrializedcountries.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably the right answer is not tocomplicate it. I may have complicated it too much, but let's not goany further. We can put somewhere else in the record that among theseother factors we're looking at are international financial markets,the credit situation, etc. Well, I think the primary question, somodified, is: Do we leave that sentence in or not? Let's deal withthat question.MR. PARTEE. Would you read the sentence again the way younow have it?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way I now have it is: "Depending onevidence about the strength of economic recovery and other factorsbearing on the business and inflation outlook" and the rest of thesentence is as it is.MR. WALLICH. Well, that is an instruction to the Managerwhereas it is an expression of the intention of the Committee subjectto our evaluation--MR. PARTEE. We will instruct the Manager as to the economicconditions and--MR. WALLICH. That's right. I think we should deburden--MR. PARTEE. I have a feeling the Chairman will have a viewon these matters.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's fair. In or out?SEVERAL. In.MR. WALLICH. I would say out.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me have a show of hands. Howmany say in?-77-7/12-13/83MR. PARTEE. Are you talking about everybody?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just members of the Committee. That's1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8, without me. Tentatively, we leave that in. Now,what about the numbers? I put in here 8-1/2, 8, and 7 percent and putin at the end of the sentence on the broader aggregates that they areconsistent with the targets established for the year. That's justadvertising. We say in the other sentence, which would follow thissentence we just discussed, that the Committee anticipates thatdeceleration of Ml growth to that area will be consistent with itsthird-quarter objectives for the broader aggregates and that totaldomestic credit expansion would remain within the range establishedfor the year. Let's just look at that part, both the wording and thenumbers of 8-1/2, 8, and 7 percent.MS. TEETERS. That assumes borrowing and [unintelligible]?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll get to that in a minute. But that'swhat I'm going to assume so we can vote on it explicitly. Is that allright? We'll get to the funds range but we're not there yet. We'revoting on the 8-1/2, 8, and 7 percent with the language that Isuggested. All right.SPEAKER(?). I think I'll go with that.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we get to the funds range. We have achoice of 6 to 10 percent or 7 to 11 percent; I'm happy with eitherone.MR. GUFFEY. 6 to 10.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many want 6 to 10 percent?MR. GRAMLEY. What has it been?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 10.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, then, leave it there.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who is for leaving it at 6 to 10 percent?1,2,3,4,5. Who is for making it 7 to 11? 1,2,3. How many are left?Some people aren't voting again.SPEAKER(?). I don't care. As long as you're planning onsomewhere between 9-1/4 and 9-1/2 percent, I'm for either.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wouldn't like to see a lot ofdisagreement just about that number, but I guess we have more for 6 to10 percent in an indifferent situation than we have for 7 to 11percent. All of this is associated with $600 to $800 million onborrowing, interpreted as $300 to $400 million of nonborrowed reservesand sensitivity to the federal funds rate being above 9-1/2 percent--meaning that we would lean toward the lower side of this degree ofpressure either in net borrowed reserves or borrowings or both.That's all I have to say. If nobody has any other particularimprovement on that formulation, I'll just assume that's it.MR. GUFFEY. I'd just like to ask: When you are talkingabout $600 to $800 million and $300 to $400 million, I assume you are-78-7/12-13/83looking at $700 million [on borrowing] with about $350 million on netborrowed. Is that at least the way we start in theory?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's--MR. PARTEE. It's certainly within the range.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, I guess we ought to vote on thisunless somebody has some question. Is it all clear?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters NoGovernor Wallich NoSPEAKER(?). A bell shaped distribution!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we turn to the longer-term ranges.Let's dispose of this total credit figure to get it out of the way.Do you want to go down a half point or one point next year? How manyvote for going down one point? [Six.] How many want to go down ahalf? Five. That certainly settled that one!MR. PARTEE. How about one point on the top and a half pointon the bottom?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, before we get to what is acceptableand what is not, let's assume for the moment that it's down one point,subject to change. Everybody is in favor of down a half point for theother aggregates, M2 and M3. Now we're on Ml again, our famous Ml. Ifeel just as I expressed it. I'm willing to go to 4 to 8 percent, butit makes me very uncomfortable with the GNP projections as high asthey are. And I would like to have a feeling that if we arrive at 4to 8 percent people might think that that's a little restrictive--enough to justify some shading of their GNP projections.MR. PARTEE. Do I take it that you mean that you don't thinkwe ought to attempt to restrain GNP at 10 percent? That's anacceptable growth in the economy?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My gut feeling is that if we say 4 to 8percent, we are assuming that GNP ought to be restrained from 10 or 11percent. I think that's what I am saying.MR. PARTEE. Whereas 5 to 9 percent is pretty neutral.MR. ROBERTS. You could have, could you not, a 10 percentnominal GNP, 4th quarter over 4th quarter? I think that could stillbe consistent.-79-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it could be. I can't put it thatsharply. I can't say that with 8 percent it is impossible to have an11 percent [nominal] GNP, but I think that's coming back to prettymuch saying that velocity patterns haven't changed at all.MR. GRAMLEY. What is the staff--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a word we're saying this is our centralfeeling about the GNP and the central feeling is that velocitypatterns probably haven't changed at all. That's what makes meuncomfortable.MR. ROBERTS. If we had 6 percent growth in money, which isright in the middle of our range, and got a 10 percent middle rangenominal GNP, assuming 3-1/2 percent velocity--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what you have to assume--a 3-1/2velocity, which would not be outrageous but is higher than the averagesomebody gave me for the second year.MR. ROBERTS. Higher than the 2.7 we heard.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what bothers me about it, just interms of explaining it. It seems to me that we'd have to say that forall this talking we've been doing about velocity changing, ourforecast and our policy is based upon the notion that velocity hasn'tchanged. That's what bothers me.MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me this is not an issue that's worthgetting hung up on in testimony. Around a 10 percent nominal GNP hasa nice ring to it; it's fairly close to what seems to be theconventional wisdom, right or wrong. For that reason, I wouldn't wantto risk a major disagreement or being beat up on because of it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure what you're saying.MR. BOEHNE. I'm for 5 to 9 percent is what I'm saying.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then maybe you ought to find outwhether today's discussion could cause some of those who came in withhigher projections to feel justified in somewhat lower ones or not.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would solve the problem, if it did.I guess that's what I'm asking, particularly in the light--MR. BOEHNE. Well, it solves the problem of numericalconsistency, but I don't think it solves the broader problem of theFed somehow finding 10 percent growth unacceptable and wanting torestrain it. That strikes me as an uncomfortable position to be in.MR. PARTEE. Well, I think it's a very big growth. I mustsay I had 9 percent and I guess I'd be inclined to raise it, hearingwhat I've heard around the table.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We had even lower--80-7/12-13/83MR. PARTEE. We're not talking about any restraint at all.MR. MORRIS. We have second-year velocity expansion as highas 4.3.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have a list here of what everybodyprojected on everything and I'm looking for Governor Partee's name andit's not here.MR. KICHLINE. If you're looking at annual averages, I thinkhe abstained.MR. PARTEE. I didn't give annual averages.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'm sorry. Have I been looking at thewrong numbers all along? I didn't mean to look at these annualaverages.MR. PARTEE. There still is quite a range, according to thischart that was passed out yesterday, for the year from the fourthquarter. The low I see is 7 percent and the high is 10-1/2 percent.No, there's 11-1/4 percent from somebody.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The high is 11-1/4; the low is 8.3. Butthere are 8 people at 10 percent or higher. Did we present this asCommittee members or everybody last year?MR. KICHLINE. Everyone last year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Half the people who vote are at 10 percentor above.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, I'd say 5 to 9 percent. Unlessthere is going to be a major review and change from a substantivepoint of view I'm happy with the 5 to 9 percent.MR. MARTIN. I think the 5 to 9 percent is easier to explain.You're the person who has to be the expositor here and I think weshould go along with your--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When I sit here, it seems to me easier toexplain without much question. On the other hand, it's shockingpsychologically perhaps.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, that's the part that bothers me. Westart out with an Ml target for this year of 4 to 8 percent and thenwe are going to allow an overrun and raise it for next year. And whatis going to happen is that people are going to say the Fed [is not]fighting inflation. I think you are making a lot more of thisvelocity point than is necessary from the standpoint of consistencywith GNP projections. If you're talking about the midpoint and theaverage, fine. But there's no reason at all why if we have a targetof 4 to 8 percent, we can't let the 8 percent happen. If 8 percenthappens, 10-1/4 or 10-1/2 percent is easily a reachable measure fornominal GNP.MR. BOEHNE. But M1 is going to be in this associated rangebelow, and we're going to show in the M2 and M3 ranges a drop of 1/2-81-7/12-13/83point, and the companion associated range for total credit is going togo down 1 point. It seems to me that we have three of the four down,which indicates concern about inflation in terms of the long-rungoals. And the fact that Ml has to go up and down and all aroundsimply conveys the uncertainty that is characteristic of thataggregate.MR. ROBERTS. Well, that isn't exactly right. We've had anexcessive rate of growth here for a long period of time; it'scontinuing at a little more moderate pace. Normally in a businessexpansion we would moderate that; it's time that we signal that to themarket very clearly. And I would be in favor of the 4 to 8 percent.MR. WALLICH. Historically, Ml has been about 3 percentagepoints slower than the other two. Now that velocity has changed, itmay be 2 percent slower, so that 8 and 10 percent are stillreconcilable.MR. PARTEE. Well, that's arithmetic.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the margin 8 and 10 percent arereconcilable. It is pretty hard to reconcile 4 and 10 percent.MR. PARTEE. I think what you want is 5 to 9 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if you take Paul's reluctance tobase it on June, then you tell the markets that you are going to do 4to 8 percent based on the second quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am thinking now of using theannual figures--using either 7 to 11 percent, which is equivalent to 4to 8 percent, or even 8 to 12 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, you're thinking of usingannual--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, it would be presented as: Look, Ml isoff this year; we are going to attempt to slow it down. That's truewith even the 8 to 12 percent range; 7 to 11 percent is a slightlydifferent coloration. Next year we expect it to be lower by asignificant amount. What I would say is just what we said before:that it does assume some slowdown in velocity from past trends, butnot all that much at one end of the range. At the lower end of therange we've allowed for a full, or more than a full, cyclical reboundin velocity.MS. TEETERS. We are dealing with a very different aggregate.And this whole discussion is [based] on the assumption that it isstill the way it was for 20 years. It's a new aggregate. It's goingto behave very differently. And we ought to give ourselves plenty ofroom to let it operate and find out what it does.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to make too much of thedifference between 5 and 9 percent and 4 and 8 percent. But it alsocomes to: What are our chances of getting within it? It's awfullynice to be within these numbers instead of making excuses for beingoutside. The down [side] is explaining why they've gotten that highin the first place.-82-7/12-13/83MR. GRAMLEY. If we go to 5 to 9 percent, isn't there areasonable argument for rebasing on the second quarter for the secondhalf of this year also?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't mind rebasing on the secondquarter, but I don't like rebasing on June.MR. GRAMLEY. If we go to 5 to 9 percent, I think we could dothat. Maybe the staff could give us estimates of what 9 percent wouldbe. What would a range of 5 to 9 percent give us if we hit the upperend of that range?MR. AXILROD. By the fourth quarter?MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.MR. AXILROD. You have to give me some time to make thatcalculation.MR. GRAMLEY. The only question is what the year-over-yeargrowth is. I think it'll be close to 12 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's going to be one percent higher thanwhere we are now. That will be an easy calculation.MR. PARTEE. Is June [adding] about 1 percent in the secondquarter?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 1/2 of a percent.MR. GRAMLEY. 1/2 of a percent, yes.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 1/2 percent higher than whatever.MR. AXILROD. Yes, it should be around 11-1/2 percent. If itgrows 9 percent Q2 to Q4, just extrapolating from what I have here,that ought to be about 11-1/2 percent for the year. Is that whatyou're asking? If it grows 8 percent, it looks like it's about 11percent for the year. So, if it grows 9 percent, it ought to bearound 11-1/2 percent for the year.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The argument against rebasing asopposed to giving an annual number is that it might look as if we'regiving Ml more importance than we want to convey. But I think that'sa bit offset by putting in Ml and total credit as associated ranges.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would not argue against rebasing on thesecond quarter; it just looks a little flimsy to me to rebase on June.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, that's what I'm saying. Inother words, I'm addressing why we were moving away from the rebasingapproach earlier. In general it was because it might give theimpression that we were attaching more importance to Ml than we wantedto convey. But maybe we're offsetting that now by putting in Ml andtotal credit as associated ranges. So, therefore, I think we canrebase on the second quarter.-83-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm perfectly willing to rebase onthe second quarter, if it sounds better to say 5 to 9 percentbeginning in the second quarter.MR. PARTEE. Really, it's for this period out ahead--the next18 months. We don't have much distinction between the second half of1983 and the year 1984.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And we shouldn't have a distinctionbecause that would imply a knowledge on our part about velocity, whichwe don't have.MR. PARTEE. Yes, and I'd say we don't have a distinction inthe GNP forecast either. So, I think it makes sense to talk about theperiod ahead.MR. BLACK. If we rebase and take 5 to 9 percent for '83, itlooks to me as if we ought to go a little below that for '84.MR. PARTEE. We're talking about a block of time and we arenot distinguishing one part of it from another.MR. BLACK. But if we really look at our ranges for '83 and arebased 5 to 9 percent for M1 from the second quarter looksappropriate, then I'm just saying the targets for next year--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we go for 5 to 9 percent particularly,we have to say in the statements that 9 percent is not appropriate ifwe get a normal velocity recovery. We just say that very strongly.That's why we have a range, and we could well be low in the range ifvelocity is normal. But we have some great doubts about whethervelocity will be normal. We're going to have a downward movement inM1 next year without a doubt, but it's going to be 11 percent thisyear or something like 10 or 11 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. That's a lot of progress, Bob.MR. BLACK. Well, looking at the year as a whole. But fromthe last half, if we come within a 5 to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From the last half there wouldn't be.MR. BALLES. The latter half will be about 6 or 6.5 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but on our principal targets, M2and M3, we would be showing a reduction.MR. BLACK. The difference is that that's not my principaltarget, Tony.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it is the Committee's.MR. BLACK. Yes.MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I'll come back and support thewords of caution that Lyle threw out here, wisely in my opinion, a fewminutes ago. We are not debating the course of policy; we're debatingbroad ranges that have a public announcement effect and certain-84-7/12-13/83perceptions. To go up to 5 to 9 percent in combination with whatwe've already done--or let happen--in M1 this year because of somevery unusual circumstances, I think has some real risks of adding toperceptions that the Fed is giving up on the battle against inflation.I would be very leery of that. I'd rather live with someinconsistencies that we can straighten out or worry about later on.This is, after all, just a tentative, provisional indication of our1984 plans subject to the usual more thorough review around yearend orearly next year.MR. PARTEE. Of course, we're not really using the Ml numberas a range with a midpoint. We're talking about a true range of 5 to9 percent and we're expressing hope, I would presume, that it could bemore toward 5 percent, but that depends on the rate of increase invelocity.MR. MARTIN. This isn't a statement in isolation; this is astatement made at a time that interest rates have firmed and arecontinuing to firm a little.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We could underline the uncertainty ofthe velocity projection by making it 4 to 9 percent.MR. MORRIS. We could underline it even better by eliminatingM1 guidelines.MR. GRAMLEY. We could put it in the list below the creditaggregate: M2, M3, credit aggregate, and Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't--MR. MARTIN. Or a footnote.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, we forgot it!MR. BLACK. Or put the footnote on another page where nobodycould find it!MR. PARTEE. Or we could have another paragraph--associatedwith the particular increase in bank credit and Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is all a question of nuance.If we have 4 to 8 percent, then I think a statement has to say prettyclearly that we're counting on regular velocity movements and if theydon't happen, we're going to have to increase the target. Now, if weemphasize that less--MR. PARTEE. I certainly don't want to do that.MR. GUFFEY. I would prefer doing that and coupling it withgoing to 7 to 11 percent for this year and thus not building anycertainty on the Ml target.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We can have a new category forvelocity-sensitive associated ranges!CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you've heard all my doubts on eitherside. Who wants the 4 to 8 percent next year?-85-7/12-13/83MR. GRAMLEY. I'd prefer 4 to 8 but I could live with 5 to 9.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One, two, three, four, five. Who wants 5to 9 percent? One, two, three, four, five.MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'd rather switch than fight.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who wants 7 to 11 percent this year asopposed to either 5 to 9 or 4 to 8 percent for the remainder of theyear?SPEAKER(?). I don't think we can have 4 to 8 percent for theremainder of this year and then say next year is going to be 5 to 9percent.MR. PARTEE. That has to be 5 to 9 percent.MR. GRAMLEY. It could be 5 to 9 percent and then 4 to 8percent, but not the reverse.MR. PARTEE. Either [unintelligible] or we're going torebase.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I agree with that.MS. TEETERS. And the question is whether we want to rebaseor not.MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, one or the other. Just let me put itthat way. Do you want to rebase or not? Seven. Well, that isn't avery healthy [margin] but I guess we rebase. Having rebased, what isthe preference between 5 to 9 and 4 to 8 percent?MS. TEETERS. 5 to 9.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You already asked that, didn't you?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I asked for next year; now I'm asking forthis year.SEVERAL. It's the same.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everybody is going to have the same.MR. CORRIGAN. We could have 5 to 9 percent this year and 4to 8 percent.MR. KEEHN. Yes, 5 to 9 and 4 to 8--SPEAKER(?). How many people have that?MS. TEETERS. Listen, you lost that argument.MR. CORRIGAN. Heck, I want 4 to 7 percent next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could have 5 to 9 and 4 to 8.-86-7/12-13/83MR. GRAMLEY. That would be my preference.MR. KEEHN. That would be my preference.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's see how strong the support isfor that: 5 to 9 percent for the rest of this year and 4 to 8 percentfor next year.MR. GUFFEY. Assuming rebasing?MR. BALLES. This would be from June or the second quarter?SEVERAL. Second quarter.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A second-quarter rebasing. That isn'ttremendous [support]. Who wants 4 to 8 and 4 to 8?MR. WALLICH. I'm willing to rebase on June.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a bigger increase than what youindicated, Henry. That's a triumph of cosmetics over substance.MR. BLACK. That is right.MR. MARTIN. Hope over experience.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That leaves us with 5 to 9 percent for theremainder of this year and 5 to 9 percent for next year.MR. PARTEE. Well, the whole period could be spoken of as 5to 9 percent. I wouldn't make that much of a distinction between thesecond half and next year.MR. BLACK. You have to rewrite this.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not quite sure what you aresaying. Are you saying when people look at it in these cone termsthat the cone begins in the second quarter and goes through 18 monthsand we get a big cone then 19 months later?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, you're not suggesting that?MR. PARTEE. I hadn't even thought of a cone. No, I wasthinking that I did not want to distinguish. The reason I didn't votewith Lyle on reducing it to 4 to 8 percent is that it seems to me tobe fine-tuning because we can't make any distinction between the rateof progress on the economy now for the second half of this year andfor next year. And our forecast is very close to assuming that. So,it seems to me we ought to talk about a 5 to 9 percent rate ofincrease as being consistent, depending on what is going to develop invelocity, for this period ahead. I see your point because theHumphrey-Hawkins Act asks us what our targets are for [the next year,which is] 1984.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it makes much difference,and I don't think we have to face this at this stage. We set it thisway and say 5 to 9 percent for the end of this year. The assumption-87-7/12-13/83would be that the second 5 to 9 percent started out where we were atthe end of this year.MR. WALLICH. It can't go above 9 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It can't go above 9 percent in eithercase; it can only go below. Well, I recognize the psychologicaldifficulty of this. It's a question of a kind of realism and of theinitial psychological [effect]. I have to think of how that could beworded.MR. AXILROD. You have indicated no change in the range fornext year. You could say "extending 5 to 9 percent over the balanceof this year and indicated no change for the range for next year."MR. PARTEE. And "tentatively for next year as well."MR. AXILROD. Yes, indicating that its base is wherever itends up.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. When you do the Humphrey-Hawkinstestimony, do you actually release the directive language on the long-range targets or do you simply use your own wording?MS. TEETERS. It has been worked into the text in the past.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It shouldn't; the wording appears--MR. PARTEE. It is not set.MS. TEETERS. It's not set in; that's correct.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not set in as a directive.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I assume on the wording that theassociated range type of language would be placed around the sentenceon Ml.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "At this meeting the Committee reaffirmedthe longer-run ranges established earlier for growth in M2 and M3 andtotal domestic nonfinancial debt." I don't know that we want to say"with growth in the broader monetary aggregates expected to be in theupper part of their ranges."MR. AXILROD. No, not with the short-run policy; it's notconsistent. That was just in case a different short-run policy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That M1 sentence has to be changed quite abit. We have to write an Ml sentence; that's where we are.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. An Ml and a total credit sentence.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we take out the total domesticnonfinancial debt from the first part and just say "reaffirmed thelonger-run ranges established earlier for growth in M2 and M3."-88-7/12-13/83MR. GRAMLEY. We could leave the total nonfinancial debt in1983 in that sentence, take out the next bracket and the followingbracket, and then change it to the second half of this year.MR. CORRIGAN. Would it be too much of a break from precedentto have it structured so that we have in effect two votes--one on M2and M3 and then a separate vote on the associated range for Ml andtotal credit?MR. PARTEE. Well, it certainly would set a precedent.MR. MORRIS. It would be too much.MR. PARTEE. We already have the difficulty of inconsistency.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it gives more importance tothe associated ranges if we have a separate vote on them.MR. CORRIGAN. Maybe.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe it should be what you were saying,Lyle. "At this meeting the Committee reaffirmed the long-term rangesestablished earlier for growth in M2 and M3 for 1983." And then goimmediately to "The Committee also agreed to tentative growth rangesfor the period from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarterof 1984 of" whatever they are. What are they?MS. TEETERS. 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 and 6 to 9percent for M3.MR. PARTEE. I thought we were cutting them a half point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is cutting them a half point. "TheCommittee considered that these ranges"--that's referring to M2 andM3--"would be consistent with growth...."VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it should be the reverse. Inother words, say that the associated ranges of X and Y are consistentwith the principal targets. It's not that the principal targets weredesigned to be consistent with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. "At this meeting the Committeereaffirmed the longer-run ranges established earlier for growth in M2and M3 for 1983. The Committee also agreed on tentative growth rangesfor the period from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarterof 1984 of 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 and 6 to 9 percent for M3.The Committee considered that growth of M1 in a range of 5 to 9percent"--if that's the number--"in the second half of 1983 and during1984, taking a base of the second quarter of 1983, would be consistentwith these ranges. The associated range for total domestic credit wasreaffirmed at 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent for 1983 and tentatively set at7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent for 1984." Now, I used a full percentagepoint reduction there, if we use the 5 to 9 percent. If we use the 4to 8 percent, I think we'd use the higher total credit number. Wecould say 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent.-89-7/12-13/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What would you do then about the nextparagraph?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the operating paragraph; nothing onthat.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In the second sentence we ought tosay "the behavior of Ml and total credit."CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that will do. "The behaviorof Ml and total credit will be monitored, with the degree of weightplaced on Ml over time dependent on evidence of velocitycharacteristics that are resuming more predictable patterns."MS. TEETERS. Take out the bracketed sentence?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leave out the bracketed sentence. Andthen we don't need the next sentence either, I don't think.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, wouldn't you want to say thedegree of weight on both in leaving out the next sentence?MR. PARTEE. The degree of weight on both placed on thevelocity characteristics of Ml?VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, the degree of weight on M1 and onthe [debt].CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know.SPEAKER(?). It's clear now; you can't--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're right; I'm sorry.MS. TEETERS. You can't.MR. PARTEE. We haven't got velocity on total credit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that wording acceptable, leaving openfor the moment the numbers on both credit and M1?MS. TEETERS. Did you take out Tony's change?MR. PARTEE. It's a just an expression of what we did withoutany real analysis. We will have to rely on the statement for thatanalysis. But it's so complicated that I think that's the way to go.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what would appear on the table isthe M2 and M3 targets and the associated ranges, or whatever othereuphemism is used, that we have for Ml and total credit.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's a more clean-cut wayof doing it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hearing no comment, it leaves us stillwith this 5 to 9 or 4 to 8 [decision]. I can live with either one; Idon't want to make too much of it. I would say if we have 5 to 9percent, we ought to go down 1 percentage point on the credit range;-90-7/12-13/83if we have 4 to 8 percent, I'd go down 1/2 point on credit. I don'tknow; as a matter of fact we could have 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. Wehave halves in all the others.MR. GUFFEY. For '83 and '84?MS. TEETERS. No, it's too restrictive for '83.MR. PARTEE. Well, it seems awfully fine.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. GRAMLEY. We've done it before [unintelligible] M1.MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] compensating with regard to--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The fact that we already usedmultiple--MR. GRAMLEY. Our range for 1981 was 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we weren't protesting then that wedidn't know anything about velocity.MR. GRAMLEY. We should have. We knew as little then as wedo now.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess the more obvious compromise is 5to 9 percent this year and 4 to 8 percent next year. The only thingthat bothers me is the height of those nominal GNP [forecasts].MS. TEETERS. What's wrong with just leaving it 5 to 9percent for the whole period?MR. GRAMLEY. I think we're much better off to have itsomewhat lower; I would worry very much about just the announcementeffects of numbers like 5 to 9 percent continuing through 1984.MR. BALLES. Amen.MR. GRAMLEY. It's not that it's going to affect policy atall; I don't think it will. But I think the announcement effectscould be unfortunate. It's not the market effects but theannouncements effect that I'm worried about.MR. BALLES. I'll support that.MS. TEETERS. I think we'd get unfortunate announcementeffects just by showing that we're going to tighten up again.MR. ROBERTS. We're telling the market that we accept thisbulge that has taken place--that we are not going to do anything abouttrying to get rid of it. That ought to be a positive influence.MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that would influence theirthinking.-91-7/12-13/83VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'll switch my vote and accept5 to 9 percent for the remainder of the year and 4 to 8 percent forthe next year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would do that, but I think we have tosay in the statement that if the next six months show no return to[normal patterns of] velocity, 4 to 8 percent is probably too low.MR. ROBERTS. It's subject to a resumption of normalvelocity.MR. GUFFEY. There's a potential rebasing every year.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Let's vote on that particularvariant, understanding that I will cast some doubt if pressed on thisconsistency. I'll say we are assuming that it will return to normalvelocity patterns. If that doesn't happen--if we don't see furtherevidence of that in the next six months--we're going to put thattarget higher when we come back in February. After all that, are weready to vote? Now, where do we put the credit range then?MS. TEETERS. Down 1/2 point. That leaves--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's down a 1/2 point on the credit. Ifyou are going to vote for it--SPEAKER(?). Make it 2 to 11!MR. PARTEE. I thought we took--MR. BALLES. I thought we already had decided down a point oncredit.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess we did have a majoritythere.SPEAKER(?). No one feels all that strongly about it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's take it again. Assuming wehave 5 to 9 percent and then 4 to 8 percent, who is for down 1 pointon the credit aggregate? Who is for down 1/2 point? I guess we havea trade here for the 4 to 8 percent. So, we are at 5 to 9 percent. Ihave to change the wording slightly here from what I wrote, reflectingthat. Understand that that's done. We are down only 1/2 point oncredit.MR. WALLICH. From 1983 to 1984?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, for credit. Now all the numbers arereduced by 1/2 point.VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Excepting Ml.MS. TEETERS. Except Ml, which is down by--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M1 will be 5 to 9 percent; the borrowing---92-7/12-13/83MR. GRAMLEY. The 5 to 9 is just for a half year, Nancy.That's annualized.MS. TEETERS. Come on! It goes down a whole point.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ready, aim--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It would be ironic if the marketsinterpret the 1 point reduction in M1 as against a 1/2 point reductionin the other three as in some way giving more importance to M1 again.SPEAKER(?). Let's take a vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Guffey YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Martin YesPresident Morris No, on the grounds that Idon't think we ought to have guidelines for Ml and M2Governor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesPresident Roberts YesGovernor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now I think we have reports from theManagers.MR. GRAMLEY. Somehow they seem rather anticlimactic.MS. HORN. We'll be fascinated by everything they have tosay!SPEAKER(?). Make it short.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is abbreviated.MR. MEEK. Yes, very abbreviated. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is still borrowing?MR. BALLES. No, they've stopped the borrowing now; they haverepaid the whole thing. That final week before the consummation ofthe mergers it got up to a daily high of $960 million and a weeklyaverage of $800 million. We gave them a week after the consummationof mergers to repay the whole thing and they have done it.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did lend to them?MR. BALLES. Yes, really raised the funds inthe market to do it. We didn't want to have a disruptive situation,so we talked about cranking it down to about $300 million a day. Andthey paid off late last week and got it down to zero.-93-7/12-13/83CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions? Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mexico, as I understand it, would prepayat least part of these but they can't do it because their agreementwith the commercial banks doesn't permit them to repay the official[borrowing] in advance. So, we are exploring some kind of depositarrangement or something.MS. TEETERS. I move we accept both reports and ratify thetransactions.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. I'd say the Brazilianthing has been very disturbing; it's promising if they act. They'rein the clinch this week--today, tomorrow. The latest report seemssomewhat promising. It's a terrible problem.MS. TEETERS. What is the political situation in Brazil? Isit like Chile? You know, Chile blew up last night. Is Brazil inthat sort of situation?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Chile blew up last night?MR. PARTEE. Well, it didn't blow up.MS. TEETERS. There was a big riot in Chile last night.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there have been some riots inBrazil, too. But it's complicated. The President has heart problemsand is coming to the United States. They are in the throes of tryingto pick a successor for the President--pointing a finger in the rightdirection. Apart from the economic problems and difficulties, whichare very evident, time is running out in terms of patience by thebanks and the BIS and others. And it's either going to come togetherthis week or we're going to be in the soup.MR. ROBERTS. There was a reference to our guarantee of theBIS credit. Is that a full or a partial guarantee?CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a mistake in the papers. It is theUnited States but it's Treasury, not us. It's shared among thevarious central banks and--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have about 47 or 48 percent.MR. ROBERTS. "We" meaning the U.S. Treasury?SPEAKER(?). The Treasury.SPEAKER(?). About $200 million.MR. CROSS. The Treasury has $500 million out of $1250million.MS. TEETERS. Isn't the Brazilian guarantee the one thatinvolves-94-7/12-13/83 -95-SPEAKER(?). No.CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, that wasVICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And that didn't go through.SPEAKER(?). They never drew on--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, this doesn't have any of the realsecurity. The Brazilian problem is very troublesome; it's troublesomewhatever happens. If they act, they're going to have problems at homeand they already have them. The Mexican situation, on the other hand,looks pretty good. From an external standpoint they still are notgrowing. With that, I guess we can conclude.END OF MEETING