
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 0

In my view, most of the data that we’ve seen tend to support that notion.
If we take the reference to accommodative policy out, I think we do need to consider what is appropriate for section 4, the forward-looking language.
And, in particular, the phraseology “some further measured policy firming is likely to be needed” strikes me as getting just the right balance, as I think you were saying as well.
The word “measured” I think has come to mean 25 basis points, and I believe it’s important to hold on to that notion if we take out “accommodative.” Secondly, on the issue of how much more we have to do, I tend to think it may be one or two more moves, similar to the expectation built into the Greenbook and the market, which strikes me as appropriate in supporting the concept of “some further.” So, even though it’s a mouthful, I like the “some further measured policy firming.” On the “may” versus “is likely,” I think it’s important to hold on to “is likely” because that’s actually our best judgment
—that further tightening is likely.
If we get into January and we are much less certain, then we can dial it back to “may.” But I think “is likely” is a more accurate signal and I would support that wording.
And finally, though people don’t focus on it too much, we have the escape valve that you just talked about, the last sentence.
We’ve gone through lots of iterations of this statement back and forth.
One of our colleagues feels as though he’s been in a great tragedy or a comedy of errors.
[Laughter] December 13, 200582 of 100But I think we’ve ended up in a reasonably good place, and I’d like to stick with the language of alternative B as written, as you proposed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Bies.
MS.
BIES.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, let me say that I support the 25 basis point increase today.
And I give my sympathy to Brian, who has heard our many different viewpoints in the last week.
I think he has done a good job of trying to get all our ideas out here in a reasonable balance.
My initial feeling was that I really didn’t want to keep the word “measured” in the statement;
I wanted to drop it as part of this change.
But for the reasons everybody has suggested, I can accept the wording in alternative B as it is now.
Mr. Chairman, you talked about some of the risks to the long-term side of the market.
<START>I think that is a serious concern because so much of the pricing these days seems not to involve looking at the longer-term risks, and it’s so critical to what is currently driving investment and risk-taking.<END>
And for that reason, I guess I’d like to leave the words as they are now.
<START>But the big change that I would like to see is a move away from forward-looking language as we get to the point where there is more uncertainty about future policy.<END>
It was easy for the last thirteen meetings to say, “We’re on a trend;
the funds rate is way too low and we have to get it back up.” So it was easy for us to signal ahead.
But as we signaled ahead, the market looked at what we were saying we were going to do as opposed to what the data were saying we would do.
We, in effect, have taken the risk away from the market, especially at the long end, because market participants think we’re going to signal ahead of time and they will have time to get out of their long positions.
In my view, we should go back to structuring section 4 to say basically where we think the risk is.
Then I’d take the second part of that sentence and put it down in section 5, because it’s still a tautology to me.
It still says we want to attain the right balance.
Well, there’s no way any of us December 13, 200583 of 100around this table is going to say that we’re not going to follow the mission of the Fed.
So if we’re going to put in a tautology, I’d put it in part 5.
And in part 4 I’d just indicate our assessment of the risks
<START>—that we think the risks are balanced or that the risk to growth or for inflation is greater.<END>
That would give the markets the message that they need to go back to looking at the data to figure out what we’re going to do, rather than our laying out for them what our next policy moves are going to be.
As we get to the cusp, that risk perspective is really important.
We saw when we turned from the bottom and rates were heading back up again that it disrupted the markets.
<START>But we need the markets to be ready to absorb that kind of risk because, as we sit around this table, we do not know exactly how we’re going to engineer getting out of this pattern of moving 25 basis points at each meeting.<END>
And I think the way to do it is to focus on where we see the risks and to stop giving any kind of signal on what our likely moves are going forward.
I would like to see that happen at the next meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Olson.
MR.
OLSON.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I support the ¼ point increase.
We have passed over fairly quickly, except for a couple of instances, the impact of removing the “accommodative” language, which I think is very significant.
And I am reminded, based on past experience, that when we make multiple changes in our statement, there is a greater likelihood that the market will respond in ways that we hadn’t intended.
On the decision of whether to include or exclude the word “measured” from the language, initially I was ambivalent.
But after hearing the discussion, I wanted to make sure that if we removed it, we also had language that took off the table the possibility of a 50 basis point move.
So I was intrigued by Brian’s suggestion of
—I don’t know what to call it
—a gentle jettisoning of the term, and I think on balance I am in favor of keeping it.
So I am supporting both the ¼ point move and alternative B as written.
December 13, 200584 of 100CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Santomero.
MR.
SANTOMERO.
Mr. Chairman, I support the proposal to raise the fed funds rate 25 basis points.
<START>As to the language itself, I supported the first change we had to alternative B. Since that time, we’ve played around, if you will, with some of the wording, and I worry a little about wordsmanship by 19 people over time.<END>
I’m not sure how stable that is.
So, rather than being one of the 19, I’m very happy with the language as it stands.
On the issue of “measured,” I came into this Committee meeting somewhat reluctant to retain that word in the statement.
I was taken by your explanation of the likely market reaction and, on further thought, I support retaining that word as well.
So I’m quite happy with where we are.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kohn.
MR.
KOHN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your proposition to tighten policy by 25 basis points today.
And I agree with you that we’ll have to move probably in January, with a good deal of uncertainty about where we’ll go after that.
If I could design the market reaction to our announcement
—which I know from long experience I can’t
—I would leave rates about unchanged when we’re finished, with some probability of tightening past January, but not 100 percent.
Like you, I think we’re at a point where the momentum in demand and the level of resource utilization are such that if we’re going to make a mistake, we ought to err a bit on the side of going too far rather than stopping too soon.
Exactly what the role of asset prices is in that is a much more difficult issue.
I certainly see asset prices playing through to the macroeconomic situation, as you said
—in particular, housing prices and the way they have stimulated not only residential construction but consumption more generally.
And as I said in my remarks, I think we need to see some sign that that market is cooling off.
So, in that regard, I agree that asset prices are critical to the outlook.
Whether I would worry December 13, 200585 of 100about imbalances and put a little more emphasis on them, aside from the macro outlook, I think is a much more difficult question.
In terms of the language, despite my expansive reading of the word “accommodative” at the last meeting, I support its deletion from the announcement and the wording of alternative B. I don’t think we have to go to a restrictive policy in this firming cycle, which I would define as a policy designed to cause the economy to run below potential in order to reduce inflation.
I think I’ve just been reinforced in that judgment by the recent data on costs and prices.
But we don’t need to get into linguistic hair-splitting to make our point about what we intend to do.
I support taking attention off of a precise definition of “neutral,” which remains a shifting and elusive quarry.
And that was inherent in the use of the word “accommodative.” In terms of the wording of the statement itself, I like alternative B as it is currently worded.
I agree with you that moving from “is likely” to “may” would signal that we are about to stop, or that we think the odds are at best 50/50 that we’ll move again, and we would have a heck of a rally in financial markets.
And as I said, I’d prefer to leave markets unchanged at the end of this.
So I would go with “is likely” at this point, given my expectations, and save moving to “may” for the January meeting, if we think the odds are 50/50 for March.
As for the word “measured,” I would prefer to keep it in the statement.
To me, it means that we think we’ll be moving in 25 basis point increments, and I do believe that’s our intention.
I’d be concerned that omitting it would be interpreted as an indication that the Committee would be looking at the possibility of moving in 50 basis point increments, and I don’t think that’s what we intend to do.
In the phrase “measured pace,” I thought it was the word “pace” that tended to carry the concept of a series of moves, rather than the word “measured,” which, to me, meant 25.
<START>So I’m in favor of dropping “pace” and keeping “measured.” Thank you, Mr. Chairman.<END>
December 13, 200586 of 100CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Pianalto.
MS.
PIANALTO.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support your recommendation of a 25 basis point increase in our fed funds rate target.
I can also accept the language in alternative B. Like others, though, I came to the meeting preferring to remove the word “measured.” But I didn’t see removing the term “measured” in the way Brian did
—that it meant markets might think we would go up at a faster pace of 50 basis points.
I thought that its removal would give us more flexibility to stop at a certain point.
It’s interesting, in listening to this conversation today, that we all have different interpretations of what it would mean.
So I am just going to go with your guidance.
Nevertheless, given what I know today, I’m leaning to the view that we’re going to have to stop at some point soon versus having concern that we’re going to have to do more.
But again, given what I’ve heard today and given your recommendation, I support the language as written in alternative B. CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Yellen.
MS.
YELLEN.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support a 25 basis point increase today and I also support the language in alternative B. It seems to me that the framework in “B” maintains its existing form and also offers forward-looking guidance.
I think we’ve had a very constructive process, much to my surprise, in the way 19 people have taken turns at drafting a statement that has evolved really quite nicely.
The statement has the potential to evolve further next month and in March;
we’ve already discussed ways in which it can evolve
<START>—by eliminating “some,” changing “is likely” to “may,” or possibly excluding “measured.” For today, I guess I’m comfortable keeping “measured.” I think there are arguments on both sides of it.<END>
I think it is important to signal that we have no intention of doing something more aggressive than a 25 basis point move.
On the downside, as President Pianalto said, when you combine “measured” with “is likely” and simultaneously remove “accommodation,” markets may December 13, 200587 of 100conclude that we have in mind at least two more steps, maybe more.
And potentially removing “accommodative” may signal that we intend to go beyond neutral into a restrictive stance.
But it’s really hard to interpret how the markets are going to react to this.
And frankly, I think this statement comes as close as we can get to doing what I would like to see today, which is to essentially validate the expectations that are currently in the markets and in the Greenbook.
Those expectations are that we are highly likely or almost certain to move another 25 basis points next time and that what we will do in March and beyond is an open question.
I think this is not a statement that is likely to bring long-term rates down, although we will see shortly.
On the issue of asset prices, I would simply second the comments that Governor Kohn made about them.
It’s a topic for greater discussion in the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Guynn.
MR.
GUYNN.
Mr. Chairman, I too support the recommendation for a 25 basis point increase.
<START>I’m sure that the process we went through on revising the language in the statement was frustrating to the staff but I actually found it both interesting and constructive.<END>
When we’re making changes as significant as we are today, I think there should be some way for all of us to contribute to the ideas and to see each other’s ideas.
<START>So again, as frustrating as I’m sure it was, I found it constructive.<END>
There’s a lot to like about alternative B, and I support it as well.
I’ll limit my comments just to the words in play.
Actually, my comments on the draft statement language last week indicated a support for leaving “policy accommodation” in.
My thinking was
—and I still believe this
—that we really haven’t moved through whatever the neutral point is to pure tightening.
I have a little bit of concern that markets will interpret it that way and assume that we’ve gotten behind and, therefore, are ratcheting things up.
<START>But I like Brian’s comment that there comes a time to honorably discharge December 13, 200588 of 100words and phrases from service.<END>
And since it’s so hard to measure, and even more difficult to talk about, I think it is time to get that out of the statement.
I actually think there’s no cost to leaving in “measured” in row 4.
Although I think the probability is very small of its removal being misinterpreted as an opportunity for us to move faster, to me it’s much better to leave it in.
<START>I have a strong preference for leaving the next line as it is, with “is likely” instead of “may.” I think that’s where we are, and I’d much prefer that the wording stay that way.<END>
I assume we’re going to have other substantial changes to the statement in coming months.
<START>I just hope we can find a way either before the meeting or during the meeting to have a chance to share our views and see each other’s ideas, as messy as it is.<END>
I think we come out in a better place when we do that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER.
Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation to move 25 basis points and I support the language in alternative B. I think it’s a nice, balanced formulation, and I do believe it’s the best way to leave expectations roughly neutral.
I think we view the probability as very high that we’re going to need to move in January and that March is maybe an even bet.
That seems about right.
<START>This probably introduces a little bit more uncertainty into the signal about monetary policy than has been the case before, but I think that’s desirable.<END>
It’s a fairly flexible formulation and allows us to adapt reasonably easily going forward.
<START>I agree that “may” would carry too much risk of taking out a good deal of the tightening that is now built into the market, and, therefore, I don’t think it would be desirable.<END>
<START>The problem with “measured,” of course, is that in our discussion there is so much dispersion on how we interpret the implication of “measured” today that it’s a little hard to justify retaining it.<END>
Nevertheless, I’m comfortable retaining it because it has two virtues that are not necessarily December 13, 200589 of 100inconsistent.
One is that it does keep a bit of a cap on expectations about how much and how fast we need to move, and I think that’s probably desirable now.
The second implication it carries is the sense that we may be facing two more moves rather than just one.
Again, I think that’s desirable now, too;
so, on balance, it makes sense to me to keep it.
Also, I just want to echo what many of you have said in that I agree that this was a pretty good process.
Committees sometimes have a bad name.
We were a group of seventeen people this time and I thought the process was quite good.
I think the language got better through the evolution of this statement, and that makes me more hopeful.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We are going to be voting only on the directive and the assessment of risks;
therefore, we needed a second view of the Committee on the statement itself.
<START>It turns out that the critical word there that has been in dispute, and which Brian was unable to resolve, was the word “measured.” And it had the advantage of not changing the rest of the statement either way<END>
—whether it was in or it was out.
In the event, a significant majority seems to be in favor of leaving “measured” in.
<START>Hence, we will vote on the directive and the assessment of risks, and if that gets an affirmative vote, we will presume that the language for the statement shown under alternative B is acceptable as well.<END>
So, why don’t you read “B” and the assessment of risks.
MS.
DANKER.
I’ll be reading the directive wording from the Bluebook and the assessment of risks from alternative B in exhibit 2 from Brian’s presentation.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
<START>To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 4¼ percent.” And the wording for the assessment of risks:<END>
<START>“The Committee judges that some further measured policy firming is likely to be needed to keep the risks to the December 13, 200590 of 100attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance.<END>
In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to foster these objectives.” CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Call the roll.
MS.
DANKER.
Chairman Greenspan Yes Vice Chairman Geithner Yes Governor Bies Yes Governor Ferguson Yes President Fisher Yes Governor Kohn Yes President Moskow Yes Governor Olson Yes President Santomero Yes President Stern Yes CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay.
Let’s move to recess.
I’d like to ask the Federal Reserve Board members to come to my office to respond to requests for changes in the discount rate.
[Recess] CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The Board voted to approve the requests of all twelve Reserve Banks to increase the discount rate to 5¼ percent.
The last item on the agenda is to confirm that our next meeting, and my last, is January 31st.
See you all for lunch.
END OF MEETING
INSTANCE OF DISAGREEMENT: 19
