Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 10-11, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 10, 1987, at 3:00 p.m. and continuingon Wednesday, February 11, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. GuffeyMr. HellerMr. JohnsonMr. MelzerMr. Morris 1/Ms. SegerMr. Keehn, Alternate for Mrs. HornMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Stern, and Timlen, 2/ AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Kohn,Lindsey, Prell and Siegman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account1/ Entered the meeting after action to approve the minutes from theDecember meeting.2/ Attended Tuesday afternoon session only.2/10-11/87Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director forMonetary and Financial Policy, Board of GovernorsMr. Simpson, Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Kusko 1/ and Mr. Moran, 1/ Economists, Divison ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office ofStaff Director for Monetary and Financial Policy,Board of GovernorsMr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMessrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Scheld, Rosenblum,Ms. Tschinkel, and Mr. Scadding, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Chicago, Dallas,Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of BostonMr. Keleher, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of AtlantaMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a list of the individuals present at a meeting.


Passage number 2.
 Meulendyke, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof February 10-11, 1987February 10,1987--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The minutes for the December meeting havebeen moved and seconded and are approved] without objection. Now wewill get our report on foreign currency operations out of the way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the minutes for the December meeting have been approved without objection and that they will now move on to a report on foreign currency operations. There is no contention or disagreement indicated in this passage.


Passage number 3.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.] Thank you, Mr.Chairman. Also, we need approval of intervention of $50 million thatwe did on one day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is thanking the chairman and requesting approval for a specific intervention of $50 million.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We ought to approve that and then go tothe questions and answers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is simply stating that something should be approved before moving onto questions and answers. There is no hint of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 5.
MR. ANGELL. I move we approve it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Angell, is making a motion to approve something, suggesting agreement or support.


Passage number 6.
MR. MELZER. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Melzer is speaking, but there is no conflicting opinion or debate present.


Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Now, let's turn to thediscussion. You recited all this and a lot of it sounded like ancienthistory. History repeats itself about every 3 days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is agreement or consent among the participants. The following sentences are expressing an observation about history repeating itself frequently, but there is no contradiction or disagreement presented.


Passage number 8.
MR. BOEHNE. What have you noticed about the inflow ofinvestment funds from abroad through all of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking for information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 9.
MR. CROSS. The Japanese tell us that their total long-termcapital outflows are continuing at the same level as last year. Wedon't know, but there seems to be more diversification; to a greaterextent there is Japanese investment in Australia and Canada and insterling also. There is also more diversification in the types ofinstruments, we think. But we don't have very good information.Another problem is that there is a tendency by Japanese investors toengage in hedging operations. Even if they continue the long-termcapital outflows, they may at the same time be hedging on the exchangerate side and that has effects on the exchange market. There seemedto be a considerable amount of hedging during the period when thedollar/yen rate changed from the 158-159 level where it had stood fora while. As it broke through that level, a number of Japaneseinvestors seemed to engage in some hedging. To summarize, theJapanese capital outflows seem to be more diversified, but there mightbe other things that are taking place which are offsetting some of theexchange market effects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage discusses the possibility of Japanese investors engaging in hedging operations and the potential effects on the exchange market. This suggests that there may be disagreement or contention surrounding the impact of hedging on capital outflows and exchange rates.


Passage number 10.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If I could add to that: There was a lot offocus in our bond market on what the weak dollar might mean to foreigninterest, especially Japanese interest, in the current Treasuryrefunding. That turned out finally, after some backup in rates as theauction approached, to be pretty good interest.A footnote to that, though, is thatwith these firms becoming more internationalized not every thing theytake is necessarily for resale back in Japan; but, certainly, thegreat bulk of it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 11.
2/10-11/87MR. FORRESTAL. Do you see any shift by the Japanese from thebond market to the stock market. Is there any evidence of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for evidence of a potential shift by the Japanese from the bond market to the stock market.


Passage number 12.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Certainly, we hear those same comments ondiversification that Sam referred to: either into the stock market orfrom Treasury issues into other securities such as Ginny Mae's orcorporate issues--even some of the higher-yield corporate issues.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply mentioning some comments about diversification options in investments.


Passage number 13.
MR. BOEHNE. Sam, did your reference to diversification meandiversification within the U.S. or diversification among countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question that seeks clarification on the specific type of diversification being referred to.


Passage number 14.
MR. CROSS. Both kinds are going on. There isdiversification among countries in the sense that more Japaneseinvestment is going into Canada, Australia and into sterling--we don'thave very good information [unintelligible]--than before. Secondly,there is diversification in the sense that Peter mentioned: thatinstead of the very heavy concentration on Treasury bonds, there is agreater tendency to buy corporate bonds, equities, real estate, orother forms of investment. So, we see both types.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing two different types of diversification happening in Japanese investment without expressing any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 15.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No other questions. There probably shouldbe, because if we ever reach this great international understanding--with or without a meeting--I presume there might be a lot moreintervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply pointing out that there might be a need for more intervention in case of a great international understanding.


Passage number 16.
MR. CROSS. Well, I think so. There has been a great deal ofdiscussion of that possibility [here] and perhaps elsewhere, with thedeal presumably being more intervention on our side and more moves byGermany and Japan and others to stimulate their economies. There'ssome question about what the Germans could do at the present time,given the fact that they just got through their election and are stillin the process of trying to put together a government. The market hastaken some encouragement from the fact that the party that had agreater belief in stimulating the economy seems to have done well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of intervention and stimulation of economies, as well as the current situation with Germany's election and government formation. They mention that the market has taken encouragement from the success of the party that supports stimulating the economy, but this is not a point of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 17.
But what that will lead to, if anything, is the point that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Meanwhile, the economy is doing less well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any contention or disagreement. It is stating a potential outcome without expressing any conflicting views or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 18.
MR. CROSS. That is another point; the German economy isclearly doing less well than it appeared to be a month ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is stating that the German economy is not performing as well as it seemed to be a month ago, which implies disagreement or contention with the previous perception.


Passage number 19.
MR. BOEHNE. This talk about the Germans and Japanesestimulating their economies in exchange for our intervention hassurfaced off and on for months. Is there any reason to believe thatwe are any closer to some kind of understanding now than we have beenin the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that the talk about the Germans and Japanese stimulating their economies in exchange for intervention has been present for months, and the question is whether there is any new development or progress towards understanding now.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Closer, yes. Close enough, I don't know.Partly, I think, as a result of the election there is more pressure inGermany politically to do something. Plus, the economy quite visiblyis not doing so well. seems very resistant tochanging what the economy is doing in any short period of time; he isnot exactly a fine tuner. Nonetheless, he is bound to put somewhatmore pressure on that side. And I think the Japanese are more worriedthan they were. These countries get really worried about theirexchange rates but they sure don't move very fast to take what seem tobe the necessary steps. Actually, neither of them is going to doanything very dramatic. What you hear talked about in both cases is2/10-11/87probably a tax reform program--fixing it up so there is some revenueloss over the next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is pressure politically and economically in Germany for change, but also states that the economy is resistant to change. Additionally, the speaker mentions that the Japanese are more worried, but they do not take necessary steps quickly. Overall, there is a sense of disagreement or conflicting views on what actions will be taken by these countries.


Passage number 21.
MR. CROSS. If it is just a nod in the direction ofstimulation, then the chances of any meaningful success fromintervention, I think, would be a good bit less than if it weresomething more stimulative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the opinion of Mr. Cross regarding the level of stimulation and its potential impact on intervention success.


Passage number 22.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon what you think of theexchange rate anyway--whether there's a reasonable, potentialequilibrium or not. But obviously, it has implications for theconduct of monetary policy not just here but abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining that the implications of the exchange rate have implications for monetary policy both domestically and internationally. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 23.
MR. HELLER. It seems that the Germans are emphasizing[domestic demand] a lot as well as the GNP numbers that we focus onand that look pretty discouraging. Domestic demand is expanding at 4to 4-1/2 percent and the difference is going to imports. I thinkthat's where our perspective and their perspective are reallydifferent. They say as long as we have a 4 to 4-1/2 percent domesticdemand expansion, we don't mind the low production figure at home aslong as the rest goes into imports. That way we make our contributionto international adjustment.SPEAKER(.). [Unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller suggests that the Germans prioritize domestic demand and view low domestic production figures as acceptable as long as imports increase. However, the speaker's response is unintelligible, so it is not clear if they agree or disagree with Mr. Heller's perspective.


Passage number 24.
MR. HELLER. With the mirror, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply confirms that the mirror was involved in the situation.


Passage number 25.
MR. JOHNSON. They are also starting to admit that theirdomestic demands may not be as strong as they had thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 26.
MR. HELLER. Their GNP number is a lot lower. The 1-1/2percent they are talking about now is a lot lower than the 2 percentthey were talking about a couple of weeks ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply pointing out that the current estimate of 1-1/2 percent is lower than the previous estimate of 2 percent. There is no explicit disagreement or argument present in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three percent domestic demand is not muchin terms of what we would like to see. They'd have to get to fivepercent or something like that; four is better than three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "Three percent domestic demand is not much in terms of what we would like to see" implies that the current level of domestic demand is insufficient. The statement "They'd have to get to five percent or something like that; four is better than three" suggests that the ideal level of domestic demand should be higher (five percent or four percent) than the current three percent. This difference in perspectives indicates disagreement or contention.


Passage number 28.
MR. HELLER. With a shrinking population they'll say that istough to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any obvious contention or disagreement. It is a statement about the challenges of achieving something with a shrinking population.


Passage number 29.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have all those great terms of tradein their favor. That helps them to consume more, but they are not bigconsumers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about the terms of trade being favorable, and then states that despite this advantage, they are not big consumers. There is no disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 30.
MS. SEGER. Export some credit cards to them and help themout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 31.
MR. HELLER. Credit cards.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or information related to credit cards that could create contention or disagreement.


Passage number 32.
MS. SEGER. To be better consumers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "To be better consumers" does not suggest any opposing views or conflicting perspectives. It simply introduces the topic of becoming better consumers.


Passage number 33.
MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: This passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 34.
 Yes, but there are no credit companies in--MS. SEGER. I am saying we could export some of ours to themso they could use them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 35.
2/10-11/87MR. HELLER. Oh I see. Well, as part of the Bank of Americasale to BAI, they got a big credit card operation over inDeutscheland.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any more questions. If not, wewill turn to the domestic report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 37.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply shows Mr. Sternlight expressing gratitude towards the Chairman.


Passage number 38.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking if there are any questions. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 39.
MR. MELZER. Peter, with regard to these expectationaleffects that you were just referring to, I agree with you that whatyou described there is a major shift in psychology. Can that have apermanent effect on the level of the funds rate for a given borrowingtarget.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Melzer, agrees with Peter's statement about a major shift in psychology and asks a clarifying question.


Passage number 40.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it can have a lasting effect. Iwould hate to say that anything is permanent, given the changeabilityof things. I wouldn't be totally astounded if the funds rate driftedback to something under 6 percent. Maybe that would come about asseasonal borrowings picked up more. But, at least barring some newfactor right now, as I said, I tend to think more of a funds rate inthe 6 percent area in association with $300 million of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply expressing his thoughts and opinions about the potential lasting effect and future trends of the funds rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 41.
MR. HELLER. If you had expanding credit demands--it is clearhow that can happen as it did in that year-end period--under ouroperating procedures you just can't adjust your projections ofrequired reserves quickly enough to adapt. On an on-going basis andin a more orderly fashion, can that phenomenon create greaterpressures in the funds market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller suggests that expanding credit demands can create greater pressures in the funds market, while someone else may argue that it does not.


Passage number 42.
MR. STERNLIGHT. In more normal times the revisions don'toccur with such speed. So, one can fold in the new revisions in anorderly way and they wouldn't have the impact that they had in thatDecember period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about the speed of revisions and their impact during a specific time period.


Passage number 43.
MR. HELLER. So, in theory, you ought to be able to keep upwith it if it is more or less orderly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Heller discussing the ability to keep up with something if it is orderly.


Passage number 44.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a simple response to a question, indicating agreement. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 45.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is a question as to whetheryou always want to keep up with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that there is a question or uncertainty about whether one always wants to keep up with something.


Passage number 46.
MR. HELLER(.). Oh, I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing understanding and agreement with the statement or situation.


Passage number 47.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just from my own perspective--andthis is obviously one person's view and one person's alone--I franklyregarded that whole year-end thing as pretty darn wild. And there isa question that arises in my mind--not that I have an alternativeidea. To find ourselves in a position where we have to throw $20billion dollars into the market for individual banks, between openmarket operations and the discount window, seems to me to raise aquestion as to how far we should go in sanctioning the kind ofbehavior that we were seeing in that time frame.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage is expressing the author's personal perspective and a question that arises in their mind. There is no clear contention or disagreement stated in the passage.


Passage number 48.
2/10-11/87MS. SEGER. Where would the funds rate have gone if wehadn't--101 percent or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 49.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "I guess" is expressing uncertainty or hesitation rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 50.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 51.
 I think it leaves--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In no circumstances would it be theend of the world if the funds rate did go to whatever level. I don'tknow; I am just saying that from my perspective the whole thing waspretty wild.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a personal statement expressing the speaker's perspective on the situation.


Passage number 52.
MR. BOEHNE. Peter, I hear in the business community, amongfinancial types, a little more talk about inflation accelerating andat least some questions about how firm we might be. I noticed, Ibelieve it was in that Drexell Burnham survey, that there seemed to besome uptick in inflationary expectations. Is that noticeable at allin the bond market or in the conversations that you have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of observation and a question seeking confirmation or further information.


Passage number 53.
MR. STERNLIGHT. There has been a little of that. A lot ofit came in the wake of the oil price [moves] by OPEC and the othercountries lining up with OPEC in the last couple of months. Then thedollar weakening also fed those views that there was more to beconcerned about prospectively on inflation. I wouldn't say it was avery major factor but it was there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply describes different factors that contributed to views on inflation.


Passage number 54.
MR. PARRY. Peter, my impression is that the priceperformance of the long-term tax exempt market has been a lot betterthan the taxable market in this period. Is that due to supply or thefact that, with the new tax law, investors really don't have as manyopportunities to shelter income as they did before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, is simply stating his impression and asking for clarification or confirmation from Peter.


Passage number 55.
MR. STERNLIGHT. My impression is that it would be both ofthose factors. There was some abatement of the supply of tax exemptsand, as you stated, there are fewer alternatives for shelteringincome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is stating his impression that both the abatement of the supply of tax exempts and the fewer alternatives for sheltering income contribute to the situation. This statement is not in opposition to any other claim or viewpoint.


Passage number 56.
MR. BLACK. Peter, I guess that you would say the degree ofpressure on reserve positions is essentially unchanged, despite thehigher federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Black without any opposing views or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 57.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it depends upon your standard ofmeasurement. Measured by the borrowing target that we are aiming at,it has been unchanged. But I have to admit that a somewhat higherlevel has emerged, even screening out the super high levels around theyear-end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Although there is mention of a higher level emerging, there is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 58.
MR. PARRY. The fact that the Bluebook alternative B has a 6percent funds rate I guess means that you agree, Don.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 59.
MR. KOHN. Yes, for the $300 million in borrowing, I agreewith Peter's analysis. I think there is, as Peter says, some riskthat it might stick a little above 6 percent; but we are so uncertainabout it that 6 percent seems like a good center of gravity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with Peter's analysis but acknowledges that there is some uncertainty about the interest rate.


Passage number 60.
MR. JOHNSON. What is in our directive. We don't specify aborrowings number in our directive. We have an understanding of about$300 million or whatever we decide. But if we say constant reserve2/10-11/87pressure, what is that going to mean to us. Maybe we ought toinstitutionalize the borrowing number or the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about clarifying and determining the meaning of certain terms and directives.


Passage number 61.
 Are we goingto--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have institutionalized theborrowing number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing an opinion or belief.


Passage number 62.
MR. JOHNSON. Borrowing number, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they are borrowing a number, which does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 63.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's some allowance for excess reserveswhen they are very abnormal, I suppose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement acknowledges the possibility of allowing excess reserves when they are abnormal, indicating a level of flexibility or leniency. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 64.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's what I had assumed. An answer toyour question would be that we haven't changed reserve pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is simply stating his assumption and providing an answer to a question.


Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at it another way and measureit by the increase in the money supply it has been rather enormous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents an alternative perspective on measuring something, without introducing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 66.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To say nothing of the increase inreserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "To say nothing of the increase in reserves" is not contentious or disagreeable. It is simply adding an additional point to the discussion without contradicting or arguing against anything previously stated.


Passage number 67.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The funds rate has been where it has beenbecause of a $27 billion increase in the money supply in three weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the funds rate being influenced by a $27 billion increase in the money supply over three weeks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 68.
MS. SEGER. Doesn't it take pressure on reserves to move thefed funds rate as it has moved. I realize that there were unusualcircumstances; nevertheless, there must have been some temporaryreserve pressure to have pumped it up so. I think you said the ratewas 38 percent at one time; that doesn't sound like it was excessivelyeasy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger is expressing her disagreement with the idea that the fed funds rate was not excessively easy. She argues that there must have been some temporary reserve pressure to have pumped the rate up to 38 percent.


Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There were $2 billion of excess reservesthat week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states a fact about the amount of excess reserves during a particular week. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 70.
MS. SEGER. Yes, but maybe they needed $2.1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 71.
MR. HELLER. Zero in the evening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a specific time, "Zero in the evening," without any conflicting opinions or opposing arguments.


Passage number 72.
MR. MELZER. And there is probably one guy out there whobought them at 38 percent and sold them at zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a simple observation about a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 73.
MR. BLACK. He's not with that company any more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that Mr. Black is no longer with the company without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It puts us in a real dilemma. How much dowe think this demand for economic activity [unintelligible]. If wewere under our old operating procedure, aiming for the money supply,the federal funds rate would have been 60 percent or 75 percent for afew days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 75.
MR. ANGELL. Peter said he was playing it by his gut. Iunderstand that, but my reaction is that you didn't do too badly,Peter. Given all the forces, it seems to me that you followdirections very well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention in the passage. Mr. Angell is providing positive feedback and stating that Peter did well.


Passage number 76.
MR. BLACK. I didn't mean to imply otherwise by my question.I felt that was the way you were going to answer, but I just wanted tomake sure that you still view it the same way. Because of the highspread between the discount rate and the federal funds rate, there2/10-11/87might be a little more demand for those borrowings, so there might bea little more pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is clarifying their understanding of the other person's viewpoint and asking for confirmation.


Passage number 77.
MR. JOHNSON. It would be interesting to know eventually whypeople aren't borrowing with the higher spread. I would like to knowthat answer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, is simply expressing curiosity and a desire to know the reason behind people not borrowing with a higher spread.


Passage number 78.
 I am not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much can you identify this simpledistribution of reserves that you have been talking about. We knowthe seasonal [unintelligible]. Do you see appreciably less borrowingby banks under $1 billion or--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification.


Passage number 79.
MR. KOHN. We have looked at those data, Mr. Chairman. Thedivision that we have looked at is banks over and under $1 billion.You can see, actually, some [difference] all year--and I think thishas been connoted by the fact that the seasonal borrowing has beenless, to some extent--and then a widening of the gap over November andDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The statement simply presents data and observations without indicating any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 80.
 It is not a lot, but you can see--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose you look at banks under $10billion or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact or suggestion, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 81.
MR. KOHN. We haven't done that. All we have done was overand under $1 billion. We can try other breaks, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have only done calculations involving over and under $1 billion and suggesting trying other breaks.


Passage number 82.
MS. SEGER. What is happening to the administration ofdiscount windows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement about the administration of discount windows.


Passage number 83.
MR. KOHN. As far as I know, nothing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's belief or knowledge.


Passage number 84.
MS. SEGER. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that Ms. Seger sees something, without any conflicting opinions or arguments involved.


Passage number 85.
MR. KOHN. They are instructed not to do anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only states a statement made by someone, Mr. Kohn, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 86.
MS. SEGER. No new personnel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that there are no new personnel. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 87.
MR. JOHNSON. One little clerk who's doing it all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the role of a single clerk who is responsible for doing everything.


Passage number 88.
MR. MORRIS. I think we started, maybe a year or two ago, toget tougher with the big banks. We instructed them that they couldcome in on Wednesday, on a settlement day, if they really had a case.And that was it. My impression is that, at least in our District, wehad more borrowing from the big banks before that--before we startedthis Wednesday-only routine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their impression about the borrowing from the big banks before and after implementing the "Wednesday-only routine."


Passage number 89.
MS. SEGER. I am glad you said that because I told Don that Ihear stories from bankers, too. And he tells me faithfully that wehaven't changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with what the other person said.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
MR. MORRIS. [We haven't] as far as the smaller banks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the use of the word "haven't," which suggests a contradiction or negation of a previous statement or expectation. The speaker is stating that something has not been done or achieved, indicating a disagreement or contention with the expectation that it should have been done.


Passage number 91.
MR. BOYKIN. In his District, big banks don't borrow becausethey do not want it known that they may have come to the window forother reasons. So, the big institutions don't come in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Boykin about big banks in his district.


Passage number 92.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The big banks seldom, if ever,borrowed other than on a Wednesday anyway, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about the borrowing habits of big banks.


Passage number 93.
2/10-11/87MR. MORRIS. I don't know what the numbers would show, but Ihave a feeling that the big bank borrowing is less now than it was acouple of years ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that the speaker, Mr. Morris, lacks knowledge of the current numbers but believes that the big bank borrowing might be lower now compared to a few years ago. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 94.
MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information about Mr. Kohn to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 95.
 I have looked at data over the last several years,and it doesn't--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Borrowing is less than it was a couple ofyears ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author simply states that borrowing is less than it was a couple of years ago based on the data they have examined.


Passage number 96.
MR. MORRIS. That's true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris simply acknowledges the truth of something without expressing any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 97.
MR. KOHN. You would have to normalize on the interest ratespread, and it hasn't shown any [tendency to run lower] for banks over$1 billion, which is the break we've been using. It hasn't shownanything, particularly in the last couple of years; it may be a littlelower but not much. Now, it is true that when we went tocontemporaneous reserve requirements (CRR) we said--as we always havesaid and as President Corrigan just noted--that most of the big bankborrowings are supposed to happen on Wednesday. That is when theyhave gone out and sought funds. And now it happens every otherWednesday. So, that may be what you are referring to. But in termsof their frequency of borrowing, or the amount they are allowed toborrow relative to deposits, and that sort of thing, there was anattempt made in the switch to CRR and the two-week reserve period notto change the standards. There was an attempt made to keep thestandards roughly comparable. Perhaps it wasn't successful, but thatwas an explicit goal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining the factors that were considered and the goals that were set during the switch to contemporaneous reserve requirements (CRR). They mention that there was an attempt to keep the standards roughly comparable, but they acknowledge that it may not have been successful.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 98.
MR. JOHNSON. I don't see how that would explain the changeat the end of the year and the continuation now. I think there issomething over and above that CRR that is making them hesitant,because the funds rate was behaving fairly consistently before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing disagreement or skepticism about the explanation provided. He states that he doesn't believe the given explanation fully accounts for the change and continuation of the situation.


Passage number 99.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One thing that is probably at workis that they have more surprises now than they used to have. Just inrecent weeks the speed at which the turnover is taking place iscontinuing to grow. I am sure that they have more surprises that havenothing whatever to do with the discount window. They just don't knowwhere they are going to end the day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that there are more surprises occurring and that they are unsure of the outcome.


Passage number 100.
MR. MORRIS. This would make them more reluctant to use thewindow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating an opinion or observation without any opposing views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
MR. BLACK. A couple of our banks reported that they couldn'tfind the federal funds. The market had dried up, as far as they wereconcerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement indicates that the market for federal funds had dried up according to a couple of banks.


Passage number 102.
MR. ANGELL. It increases the demand for excess reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement made by Mr. Angell does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that excess reserves are in demand.


Passage number 103.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It would also be consistent withtheir being more reluctant to come to the window. They want to savethat for when they really need it. I think that is part of theexplanation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a suggestion and an explanation.


Passage number 104.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Moreover, I wouldn't exaggerate thesignificance of this moving around one quarter of a percent orsomething like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement simply expresses the speaker's opinion about not overemphasizing the importance of a small percentage change. There is no clear disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 105.
2/10-11/87MR. JOHNSON. It probably has been very timely, given whathas happened to the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to vote to ratify thesetransactions. [Without objection.] Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The statement simply mentions a plan to vote on ratifying transactions, and there is no objection expressed.


Passage number 107.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] We have had a lotof focus on the international side, so we are going to do somethingdifferent than we have done over the last decade; we are going toinvite Mr. Truman to speak next.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 108.
MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.] Mr. Prell will nowcontinue our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 109.
MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.] Mr. Kichline will nowconclude our presentation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that Mr. Kichline will conclude the presentation.


Passage number 110.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] That concludes ourpresentation, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that their presentation has concluded.


Passage number 111.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If anybody still remains wide awake, arethere any questions. Or was the presentation so complete that noquestions--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there are any remaining questions after the presentation.


Passage number 112.
MR. BOEHNE. I have at least one question. First of all, Ithink you fellows did an outstanding job. This is not an easy taskand I think you outdid yourselves. Having said that, let me ask myquestion. The key to this forecast is what happens to theinternational sector--to the turnaround in the trade deficit. I guessif we have been disappointed, we've been disappointed because theturnaround hasn't come faster. So often things happen more slowlythan we think in economics; but then when they do begin to happen,they sometimes surprise us in that they happen so quickly. This is myquestion: Even though what we are dealing with in the trade deficit isoutside historical experience, is there anything in our own history orthe history of other countries to suggest that once the turnaroundcomes--even though it may have come more slowly than expected--that itmay occur faster than we think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 113.
MR. TRUMAN. Some time ago we looked at one part of thatquestion--whether anyone ever had a turnaround of this magnitude. Wefound a number of examples of countries that had turnarounds in aspace of 3 to 5 years of 3 percent or more of GNP. So that is notunheard of. The question is whether we would have for the forecastperiod as much of a turnaround as we have projected here. In fact, apassing allusion to that is 1978, which was shown on the first chart.In 1978 and 1979, as a share of GNP, there were slightly largerswings. Basically, from the first quarter of 1978 to the firstquarter of 1979 there was an improvement of something like 1-1/3percent of the GNP. And we have essentially 1 percent over severalquarters. In that sense, we have less of an improvement stretched outover a slightly longer period. However, I think it is fair to saythat we had a more conducive external environment in those periods.Both abroad and in the developing countries, particularly, [growth]was much more rapid in the late 1970s than we are seeing at themoment. That certainly is one reason why we had to scale back ourprojections somewhat. The other factor I would mention is that inputting projections like this together we look at what various2/10-11/87historical equations tell us, and maybe because we are a little gun-shy, we have chosen not to go with what the straight econometricequations tell us in terms of how much of an improvement we would haveover this period. That's for a number of reasons, some of which Ithink everybody knows, including the fact that we are coming back fromsuch a strong position. The third point I would make relates towhether this is disappointing. I guess in some sense it isdisappointing. But as I look back at the forecast that we gave a yearago, the forecast for the U.S. current account for last year, givenall the conditions, was reasonably close to what we came out with.Maybe people hoped there would be more of a turnaround, but I don'tthink the staff forecast as a whole was substantially outside anynormal range of error in terms of 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of facts and analysis.


Passage number 114.
MR. JOHNSON. Ted, what are some of the models actuallyprojecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 115.
 I agree with you, I wouldn't--MR. TRUMAN. We would have another $20 billion in real netexports over this period if we went with historical equations for thevolume of nonagricultural exports. As anybody who has done thisknows, all equations have errors and it is partly a function of whatyou do with the errors that happened in the most recent period. Therehas been some error in the most recent period, and in putting theforecast together we have chosen, implicitly, to increase rather thanto reduce its size. That's partly because, given the relatively soggyenvironment in the rest of the world, we feel that there are limits onthe rates at which U.S. exporters can penetrate some of those markets.Looking back at it--and with the big qualification that the fourth-quarter numbers are still partly estimated--I think it is clear thatthere was a substantial improvement in our nonagricultural exports in1986. That's something that was borne out in the Reserve Bank surveysand also by the statistics.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their agreement with someone else's viewpoint and providing additional information and explanation.


Passage number 116.
MR. JOHNSON. I think that the biggest issue is that a lot ofpeople you talk to expect most of the gains to come on importsubstitution, but we don't really show much there at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents Mr. Johnson's opinion about the biggest issue, which is that people expect most of the gains to come from import substitution, but there is not much evidence to support that.


Passage number 117.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, we have it coming on import substitutionin the sense that we have a still growing economy. In fact, in somesense you want to look at the production side, not the demand side.Production is growing at 2-1/2 percent, and normally that would beassociated with an increase in imports of 2-1/2 percent or more overthe course of the next two years. We essentially have none of that.So the substitution effect comes, in some sense, against a two-year 6percent import growth that otherwise would be there. That is quite alarge number, but we are not looking for an actual decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the current situation and the expected import growth in a matter-of-fact manner.


Passage number 118.
MR. FORRESTAL. How much did the volume of non-oil imports goup last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 119.
MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine as the passage is unintelligible


Passage number 120.
]MR. FORRESTAL. So, non-ag exports have been a little slower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states "Mr. Parry" without any additional context, so it does not present any conflicting or opposing ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 122.
MR. PARRY. I have a question for Mike Prell on personalincome and savings, chart 14. I think it may have some implications-10-2/10-11/87for the PCE forecast. The saving rate clearly has been coming down inrecent years. Your forecast would have that saving rate trendingdown--not looking at the quarterly pattern, but on average--in 1987and 1988. Of course, if that did not occur there would be someimplications, potentially, for the growth of consumption. Withdisposable income rising more slowly, I can understand why it might bea difficult environment in which to build savings, but at the sametime I have difficulty seeing the rates coming down to those levels.I don't know if you can ever find saving rates down at those levels.Continuing that trend would be of considerable interest andsignificance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty and doubts about the forecasted saving rates coming down to certain levels.


Passage number 123.
MR. PRELL. Well, the periods in which you find sustained lowsaving rates are not periods that you would necessarily want to usefor purposes of analysis at this time--the Depression, for example, orthe early postwar period. I think you put your finger on one of thefactors in our thinking: that as real wages are eroded, there will notbe an immediate adjustment of spending patterns. We have durablegoods purchases growing at a very low rate. Our consumption growth ishistorically very low and we are assuming that this wealth increasethat we have seen at least is not erased. So, on the basis of thosewealth and income levels, we ought to be able to sustain a relativelylow saving rate. But certainly, we are in somewhat unchartedterritory and it's a potential risk in the forecast. We decided notto look back at [unintelligible] and say that's a potential risk.They are two sides of the same coin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different periods of time and factors that may affect savings rates, but there is no disagreement between the speaker and any other individual mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are assuming a little increase in thesaving rate in 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 125.
MR. PRELL. If you look at the annual totals it's gyratingaround.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the annual totals.


Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It only mentions Chairman Volcker without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 127.
 It's a difference between the annualaverage and--MR. KICHLINE. The saving rate in the fourth quarter of lastyear was 2-3/4 percent. If you are visually looking at this chart, itdepends on the point you look at. One other thing that conditions ourthinking is that, historically, the income side tends to get revisedup in the national income accounts in July. They tend to find incomewith these revisions. We have looked at these data, and history wouldtell us that the 2-3/4 percent number for the fourth quarter is likelyto be over three percent, and perhaps appreciably over three percent;but we will know that a couple years from now. So, conditioning ourthinking is the fact that these numbers tend to understate the savingrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing additional information and context to explain a potential discrepancy in the saving rate data.


Passage number 128.
MR. PRELL. This is where we were a year ago; it wasessentially the same sort of situation. It has happened repeatedlythat they find income and the saving rate does go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about a situation that happened in the past.


Passage number 129.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 130.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I was stimulated to ask two questions,Mr. Chairman. First, given the relatively favorable numbers at theend of the year, I think there is some expectation that the GNP forthe fourth quarter might be revised upward. And some people are-11-2/10-11/87suggesting that it might even be revised substantially. If that wereto happen would that change your outlook for the year as a whole. Inother words, do you think you might revise your forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification or confirmation from the chairman.


Passage number 131.
MR. KICHLINE. We had in mind when we put the forecasttogether that the fourth quarter would be revised up somewhat. Thequestion would arise if the revision were much larger than we hadanticipated. The major source of the change is our expectation thatnet exports will look a lot better, perhaps $8 to $10 billion better,than in the accounts now. But some more recent information coming outon business fixed investment and some other areas suggests that maybeby the time they put all of the numbers together the upward revisionwill be something smaller than that. So, our sense is that we mightget a 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent number instead of 1-3/4 percent.Implicitly, we had that expectation in mind when putting together thisforecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different possibilities and potential revisions to their forecast.


Passage number 132.
MR. FORRESTAL. You have that built in. My second questionis for Ted Truman. I guess I am not quite clear why you think you aregoing to get depreciation of specific Korean and other Far Easterncurrencies against the dollar. I ask that given their propensity tokeep their currencies at a low level relative to the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 133.
 I guessthey haven't exactly pegged it but--MR. TRUMAN. Well, most of the action in this area comes fromKorea and Taiwan. They have already begun depreciating slightly forthe last three or four months. And basically, that's what we havebuilt into this forecast. They depreciate by 5 to 6 percent in realterms while some of the Latin American countries, essentially Braziland Mexico, [unintelligible] percent over the two-year period,[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about the depreciation of currencies in Korea, Taiwan, Brazil, and Mexico.


Passage number 134.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage because there is no information provided to suggest any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 135.
MR. BLACK. Jim, or Mike, I forget which one of you mentioned[in the presentation] that if you had had the employment report youprobably would have upped your forecast a little. If you add to thatthe National Association of Purchasing Manager's Report, would thatcause you to change your figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It is simply a question asking if additional information would alter the forecast.


Passage number 136.
MR. KICHLINE. No, we had that information in hand. The onlymajor piece that came out that we did not include in our thinking wasthe employment report. We have 2-1/4 percent now, and I think if wehad had that report, we would probably have a number in the 2-3/4 to 3percent range for the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Kichline, is stating that they had all the necessary information except for the employment report. He is not expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Heller without providing any information or context that would suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 138.
MR. HELLER. Mr. Truman, you have the interesting chart 5there, with real interest rate differentials and the U.S. dollar plusyour forecast for the real interest rate differentials.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply describing the presence of a chart and stating the content of that chart and a forecast.


Passage number 139.
MR. TRUMAN. Forecast of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Instead, it seems to be a statement or topic of discussion.


Passage number 140.
MR. HELLER. Pardon me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: , but I think you may have misunderstood my point. I was actually advocating for stricter regulations, not less.


Passage number 141.
MR. TRUMAN. The red line is the forecast of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is providing information about the dollar forecast, there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 142.
-12-2/10-11/87MR. HELLER. I'm sorry; I totally misread the chart. I wasgoing to ask if you forecasted real interest rate differentials whatthe underlying actual rates implied by that chart were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The confusion caused by misreading the chart does not indicate any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 143.
MR. TRUMAN. The interest rate differentials.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a statement made by Mr. Truman without any indication of disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about interest rate differentials.


Passage number 144.
MR. HELLER. Well, the actual interest rates that you werelooking at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is making a statement about interest rates without any opposing views or conflicting opinions presented.


Passage number 145.
MR. TRUMAN. We have long-term interest rates in the UnitedStates that are trending up slightly over the forecast period innominal terms and real coming down slightly now. And that is aboutoffset by the differential in inflation over the period. Essentially,you have the same midpoint, which is about 3/4 of a percent there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states the trend of long-term interest rates in the United States without any contradictory information.


Passage number 146.
MR. HELLER. So it's a flat line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "So it's a flat line" is a statement of fact without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 147.
MR. TRUMAN. Basically, it will be flat. That's one of thereasons why I didn't put it in the chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Truman is simply stating a fact about the chart.


Passage number 148.
MR. JOHNSON. So why do you get the further depreciation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Johnson.


Passage number 149.
MR. TRUMAN. Economists argue about whether negative realinterest rates cause depreciation. If you have a lagged structuralmodel, I think you would argue that they probably do. At some point,however, it implies that you are going to have appreciation. In thiscontext, I think it would be a negative factor, on balance. The majorpoint is that, while we think there will be at least continuingdownward pressure on the dollar, the current account will not movefast enough as some combination of market participants and market[unintelligible] think is necessary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining different opinions held by economists about the relationship between negative real interest rates and currency depreciation, but he does not express his own disagreement with any of these viewpoints.


Passage number 150.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Truman, on chart 6, that wholesale pricechart, if that were net of oil, am I correct that probably you wouldhave seen more of a depreciation in the United States than you wouldin the foreign countries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement followed by a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 151.
MR. TRUMAN. We have more [unintelligible]. As a matter offact, we have it going the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, is simply stating a fact about a certain situation without indicating any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 152.
MR. PARRY. But oil is denominated in dollars, so thedepreciation of their currencies must have had a very large impact onthose indices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry is stating a fact about the impact of currency depreciation on the indices.


Passage number 153.
MR. TRUMAN. In some sense you can see it in the next chartwhere you have the Economist Index of all commodities. You haveessentially [unintelligible] over the last couple of years; priceshave been flat in dollar terms. So likewise, in the oil case, you hada combination of a declining dollar price and it's magnified by theexchange rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating information about the Economist Index of all commodities and the fluctuation of prices in the oil case.


Passage number 154.
MR. PARRY. So net of oil, our inflation improvement probablywas better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Parry, providing information about inflation improvement. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 155.
MR. TRUMAN. No, I would say net of oil, probably ourinflation improvement is not as good. Because if all of the othercommodity prices were fixed in dollars, and the dollar was declining-13-2/10-11/87against deutschemarks, yen, and so forth, and you take oil out, youhave [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests that without considering the price of oil, the improvement in inflation may not be as good. However, the exact reason for this disagreement is not clear due to the unintelligible portion of the text.


Passage number 156.
MR. PARRY. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement where Mr. Parry expresses that he understands or acknowledges something. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 157.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or accompanying sentences.


Passage number 158.
MR. KEEHN. My question is somewhat related to an earlierquestion regarding Japanese investors in long-term Treasuryobligations, and you probably have no chart or number for it. Youhave given the interest differential. Normally that's what we are[unintelligible]. But given the tremendous decline in the dollar[unintelligible], broadly how are those long-term investments lookingover any period of time. I guess the question is: Is there a way thatthey have been protecting themselves against a [depreciating dollar].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 159.
MR. TRUMAN. There are three things to say. One is that thestatistics do not show much in the way of net Japanese purchases ofTreasury securities over the past year. The statistics may be wrong,but they do not show it. Secondly, as I commented and as I think wasimplicit in what Sam was saying earlier, even if they buy them youdon't know what else they are doing and to what extent they areselling them. As to the question of whether there is going to beenough foreign investment in the United States over the next twoyears, I think it's a question of the price at which that investmenttakes place. Investment is going to be made in the United States.They don't have much choice. The question is what combination ofinterest rates or exchange rates brings that forth. If the Japanesewant to invest abroad but insist on protecting themselves, thenbasically they are saying [unintelligible]. They have to place yen-denominated investments abroad and someone is going to have to takethe other side of that currency position. If there are not enoughpeople to take that at the current exchange rates, the rates are goingto go lower. That's how I think of the model.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Truman explaining his thoughts on Japanese purchases of Treasury securities and foreign investment in the United States.


Passage number 160.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is another way of looking atthat. Chart 10, I think, is kind of interesting. Roughly speaking,if you take the three years 1983, 1984, and 1985, the cumulativecurrent account deficits for those three years are something like $280billion; but the cumulative current account deficits for 1986, 1987,and 1988 are something like $410 billion. So we are looking at asituation where in the three years that we are in now, we have tofinance 50 percent more than we financed in the three earlier years--but in a context in which interest rate differentials and exchangerate relationships are very, very different than they were in thethree-year period when we were only financing $280 billion as opposedto the $410 billion or whatever it's going to be. It could get a lottougher. The conclusion one draws is that it could very well betougher--especially in the kind of interest rate/exchange rateenvironment we have right now--to finance what lies ahead than tofinance what came before us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the passage discusses different time periods and the increasing current account deficits, there is no clear contention or disagreement presented. The passage is simply presenting information and discussing potential difficulties in financing future deficits.


Passage number 161.
MR. HELLER. In my mind there are always two possibleoutcomes. The one is like the scenario that you are outlining--thatthe dollar will really plunge; the other possible outcome is that yousay okay, the balance is not turning and, therefore, there will bemore exports and that will give confidence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage states that there are two possible outcomes. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement between individuals or ideas. It simply presents two different possibilities.


Passage number 162.
-14-2/10-11/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's already built into thosenumbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given string of numbers is a mathematical expression and does not contain any statement or argument that would indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 163.
MR. HELLER. So then you are stuck with the first one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact or a conclusion based on the previous statements, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 164.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You are not stuck with it. I thinkit just says that the potential risks of that adverse scenario areprobably greater prospectively than they were retrospectively.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a belief or opinion about the potential risks being greater in the future compared to the past.


Passage number 165.
MR. PARRY. I think something of an offset to that, Jerry, isthat because of the depreciation of the dollar the foreign investoris, in effect, buying at a cheaper price.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about the depreciation of the dollar and its effect on foreign investors. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 166.
MR. TRUMAN. That's the other point that came up in myconversation with Governor Johnson. In some sense, the closer you areto the bottom the more attractive it is to buy. In fact, theexpectation of appreciation makes it look cheap now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a point made in a conversation, highlighting that the lower prices of certain items may make them more attractive to purchase.


Passage number 167.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Still, in those markets people will buy.Do we have any more questions or comments. If not, I think we can goon to people discussing anything they want to lay out about thegeneral view of the outlook and the potential risks therein. [In theforecasts you submitted prior to this meeting] everybody is positivein a certain range, but there is considerable difference for somepeople. Mr. Parry isn't one of them; he agrees with the staff so hiscomments can be brief.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that some people have different views or forecasts, but Mr. Parry agrees with the staff.


Passage number 168.
MR. BLACK. I hope the converse of that doesn't necessarilyapply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Black simply expresses his hope about a hypothetical situation, without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 169.
MR. PARRY. I didn't hear you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry simply states that he didn't hear the other person.


Passage number 170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comment briefly on the outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The sentence simply asks for a brief comment on the outlook without indicating any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 171.
MR. PARRY. I would start out by saying that our forecast isnot very different from that of the Board staff. But I do want tocomment a bit on the risks that I see to the forecast because I thinkthey could have implications for policy. It would appear to me thatthe risks as far as inflation is concerned are on the up side. Wehave assumed that the recent decline in the value of the dollar islargely permanent and that the dollar will end 1987 at a lower levelthan we had in our previous forecast. The pass-through of priceincreases resulting from the dollar's decline has been slow to date,but I believe profit margins of many foreign suppliers of goods to theUnited States are really quite narrow at the present time and,therefore, future pass-throughs could be considerably greater.Secondly, it seems that the momentum of oil prices at the present timeis in the direction of rising oil prices, or at least not declining.Thus, our assumptions about oil prices could turn out to be too lowand inflationary pressures more intense. The dollar and also the oilprice issue are largely factors that one would presume would betemporary as far as inflation is concerned. But a third risk forinflation would be more prolonged, I think, in its impact. The staffprojection of the unemployment rate at year end is around 6-1/2percent. By some estimates that rate gets close to full employmentand thus any positive shock to demand could produce more serious pricepressures than are included in the forecast.-15-2/10-11/87On the real side, I am basically comfortable with the staff'sestimate of just under 3 percent, although there is a risk to theprojection, probably, on both sides of the forecast. I would like tonote two risks on the downside. The first one I really was hinting atwhen I asked the question about the saving rate. It seems to me thatit is conceivable for the saving rate not to deteriorate from theselevels. If that were the case, it's possible that consumption wouldgrow at a somewhat slower pace than is incorporated in the forecast.Obviously, another major uncertainty on the real side is net exports.We have talked about that considerably, but to me a conservativestance would be to assume that the failure of the dollar to declinerelative to currencies of numerous important trading partners willlead to an improvement in net exports that is somewhat less than theBoard staff's number.On the regional front, we continue to see growth a bit fasterthan the rest of the nation. Last year we saw employment up 3.5percent compared to 2.3 percent nationwide. We also saw a huge jump--67 percent--in California building permits in December, but that was aresponse to a large builders fee that went into effect January 1.It's interesting to note that the increase significantly added to thenational totals; it probably caused about 17 percent of the increasein the December leading indicators. So it was not an insignificantdevelopment. A couple of other points in the District: We had arather interesting experiment regarding the effects on consumerbehavior of the removal of the sales tax deduction. Oregon does nothave a sales tax, and consequently, one of the things that we observedwas that there was no surge in car sales in Oregon in contrast to theyear-end surge in other states with sales taxes. We also heard from amember of our small business and agricultural advisory council thatapparently one major Japanese car maker is beginning to ship strippeddown models to the U.S. I think that is interesting because it maymean that the volume of Japanese car imports may not decline as muchas had been expected and that, conceivably, price competition in theindustry may turn out to be more intense. Finally,pointed out to us thathe was having much greater success in selling to the Canadians becausethey were now substituting our exports for French exports. We havebeen focusing on the failure of the Canadian dollar and the currenciesof [unintelligible] countries to appreciate and thus to enable us tocut down on our imports. One thing that is sort of interesting isthat the failure of their currencies to appreciate relative to ours isprobably raising some export opportunities that perhaps we have notbeen focusing on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, discusses the risks to the forecast and expresses disagreement with the assumptions made by the Board staff. He believes that the risks for inflation are on the upside, particularly due to the decline in the value of the dollar and the momentum of rising oil prices. He also mentions the risk of more serious price pressures if the unemployment rate gets close to full employment. Additionally, he expresses some uncertainty and disagrees with the staff's projections on the real side, specifically regarding the savings rate and net exports.


Passage number 172.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It also has diminished some imports whenyou [unintelligible] to France. The problem is your preciseindication of the risks. Let that be a model to others when theyapproach this thing.Just in terms of inflation, I meant to ask a question of you,[Mr. Kichline]. We have all of these GNP deflator projections; howmuch do you have to add to that, roughly, to get a consumer priceindex projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It consists of a statement about imports and a question about inflation projections.


Passage number 173.
MR. KICHLINE. For 1987, fourth quarter to fourth quarter, wehave forecast a CPI increase of 3.8 percent; it was 1.3 percent on a-16-2/10-11/87fourth-quarter basis in 1986. So that's 0.9 percentage points abovethe deflator in 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting factual information about forecasted CPI increase for a specific period compared to the previous year. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 175.
MR. BOEHNE. I will be very brief. One of the noticeabledifferences in the forecast of people around the table has to do withinflation. There seems to be a trend: the more you are in Washingtonthe lower you think inflation will be; and the more you are out in thecountry the higher you think it will be. I have been surprised intravels around my District by questions about inflation. I would haveexpected questions to be more on the dollar or whether the economy isgoing to go into a recession or what have you. I have found in recentweeks that the greatest concern is that inflation is going to get outof the box. And if you push, and ask if [the basis for the question]is wages, or imports, or that you are raising your own prices, youfind that it doesn't seem to be analytically based. It seems to bemore of a gut feeling that somehow we are just going to let inflationout of the box again. I think it's just a general worry at the gutlevel that causes that. But it is there. And I think that has someimplications for how monetary policy is stated in addition to what itactually is. In general, I agree with the staff forecast; I'm perhapsa touch higher on inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges a noticeable difference in inflation forecasts among people in Washington and those in the country but does not express disagreement with any specific forecast. The speaker also indicates their agreement with the staff forecast.


Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 177.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, before I talk about theforecast in general, I thought I would tell you about some interestingnumbers I came up with. Ninety percent of the New England high techmanufacturer exports are flown out of Boston Airport because of thelow weight to value ratio, so I thought I would ask the port authorityto give me some figures on air freight exports and imports. I thoughtit might be an indicator of how this high tech industry is doingbecause I have been getting a lot of optimistic feedback and I wantedto see if it was confirmed by the numbers. The numbers are in poundsso you don't have any exchange rate problem. What they show is thatour air freight exports bottomed out in the first quarter last yearand have been rising pretty substantially. In the three months endedin November of 1986 they were running 29 percent higher than the samemonths of 1985. Air freight imports, which are still larger thanexports, were running 7 percent higher than a year ago. Now that'spounds and that can be misleading because I know that we shipped a lotof tuna. Lobster don't weigh much, but we ship a lot of tuna toJapan. We don't eat fresh tuna and we ship the whole fish in aspecially prepared box because they like fresh tuna. It could well bethat a good part of this increase reflects a 40 percent decline in thecost of fresh tuna to the Japanese. But I think it does tend toconfirm the idea that the high tech industry is doing a lot morebusiness overseas than it has been. So, I will keep watching thosenumbers and see what intelligence I can get from them.I am inclined to think that if the forecast is wrong on realgrowth it's going to be wrong on the low side. I had a long argumentwith my staff about what number to give you. They wanted me to giveyou 2 percent real growth. I thought that was a bit on the low side.I hated to offend them because their forecast has been better thanmine in recent years, so we compromised at 2-1/2 percent after theysaw the January employment numbers. I am impressed with the very-17-2/10-11/87widespread strength in the leading indicators in November, December,and January. Three months back-to-back strength of this sort leads meto think that at least the first half may be considerably strongerthan we are projecting. So I come out on the optimistic side of therisks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker presents information about air freight exports and imports and expresses their own optimistic view of the high tech industry's performance. There is no indication of conflicting opinions or opposing arguments.


Passage number 178.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage given to analyze.


Passage number 179.
MR. MELZER. On the real side, our forecast is just a touchhigher than the Board staff's. I would be inclined to agree withFrank Morris; I feel good about the current statistics that we areseeing, although I am not inclined to read too much into that. Icertainly don't pick up anecdotally the idea that people areconsciously recognizing a significantly strengthening picture rightnow. The only thing I would say on the price side--just to pick up onwhat Ed Boehne said--is that in general in our discussions,particularly of late, we tend not to place too much weight on theeffects of M1 growth and so forth. But just to pick up on this year-end phenomenon, one way that you could conceptualize that is that whatwe have done is monetize or liquify a lot of unrealized capital gains.And that has been done largely through an expansion of bank creditthat hasn't run down significantly. That money is sitting there andsome of it certainly will go back into other investments; but some ofit could well be spent. I just think that at some point, when moneyhas run at such rapid rates, we are going to see some impact in pricesthat may not really be built into the forecast we are looking at. So,we're higher on the price side; we are at the high end of that range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their perspective on the current economic forecast and sharing their thoughts on certain factors that could impact prices.


Passage number 180.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the relationship is the same as thestaff's, your kind of price [forecast] would have to produce about a 5percent CPI. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing a hypothetical scenario and stating a result based on that scenario.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 181.
MR. FORRESTAL. If we have a difference with the staff, it'son the inflation side as well. We see pressure on prices probablyoccurring more towards the end of the year than at the beginning, andwe are attributing that basically to a greater impact from importprices than we had thought earlier. We have done some studies thatsuggest that the decline of the dollar is going to affect these importprices somewhat. Those studies are certainly not definitive by anymeans, but my hunch is that they are probably right. So we arelooking at the deflator to be at about 3-1/2 percent; we think it isreally somewhat unrealistic to see the deflator stuck at 3 percent,which is what the staff is forecasting for three quarters. On the GNPside, we are closer to the staff but a little lower; therefore, ourforecast is a little less sanguine than the Board staff's. Some ofthat activity that we saw in December could very well have been taxrelated. I hope it's more than that and that there is some momentumin the economy; but we will just have to wait and see on that. But wethink that GNP is probably going to grow around 2-1/2 percent.Consistent with that slower rate of growth, we have a slightly higherunemployment rate at year-end, although it's not significantlydifferent. So the real difference that we have is on the inflationside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, disagrees with the staff's forecast for inflation and GNP growth. He suggests that inflation will be higher than the staff's forecast, attributing it to the impact of import prices and the decline of the dollar. He also believes that GNP growth will be lower than the staff's forecast, mentioning that some of the recent activity could be tax-related and expressing uncertainty about the momentum in the economy.


Passage number 182.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is not enough context in the passage to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 183.
MR. STERN. As far as the real economy is concerned, myforecast is the same as the staff's but I tried to build into that-18-2/10-11/87some allowance for this fourth-quarter borrowing phenomenon--that is,I assumed the fourth quarter was going to take some strength out ofthe first half of 1987 for tax reasons and so forth. I must say thatI am not sure that was a wise adjustment. It seems to me, at least,that the risk--risk is probably not the right term--that the range [oferror] around the forecast is probably symmetric at this point. I amquite impressed with the momentum with which the economy ended theyear. I am not just referring to the December statistics. Looking atthe payroll data or the household employment data going back toSeptember or October, we see a string of consecutive sizable increasesin the statistics on a monthly basis that, as far as I am concerned,are about as reliable as any we have to look at. And there are someother developments one can add to that as well, relating to the year-end improvement in housing starts and the tone of the purchasingmanagers' survey and so forth. As far as inflation is concerned, I amat the high end of the range, based on the reasoning that we havebenefitted from some special factors in 1986 that are not going to bewith us in 1987 and that, in fact, will be reversed through higherimport prices of oil and other things. So, I suspect we are going tosee a somewhat more rapid rate of inflation.A couple of interesting things have happened in the Districtlately that I might just comment on. We run a quarterly agriculturalcredit conditions survey, and for the fourth quarter that survey hadthe most positive tone reported in a long, long time, both with regardto farm earnings and to the pace of farm debt repayments. One quarterobviously doesn't establish a new trend, but there seemed to be someinkling there that, at least in our District, we are seeing some realturnaround. I would also comment that the labor market in the Twincities, which has been quite tight for some time, has apparentlytightened further. We got reports from one of our directors that forjobs that would have to be characterized as requiring modest skills,but where the compensation is really pretty decent--total compensationof $20,000 to $25,000 a year--they just cannot find people to fillthem. There are no takers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is giving their own perspective and observations without contradicting or opposing any other viewpoints.


Passage number 184.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I am right that an inflation rate of 4percent in the GNP deflator means something close to 5 percent on theCPI--and that is the middle of the range--your number means the CPIcould be over 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not presenting any contention or disagreement. Instead, it is making a statement about the relationship between the inflation rates of the GNP deflator and the CPI.


Passage number 185.
MR. STERN. It could be, but that's only 0.4 percent a monthannually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is providing a statement or a fact without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 186.
 It doesn't strike me--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement seems to be expressing a personal opinion rather than engaging in a debate or disagreement.


Passage number 187.
 A turning point--MR. STERN. The CPI last year, excluding food and energy, wasaveraging about 0.3. It's that kind of deterioration.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the CPI (Consumer Price Index) without presenting any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 188.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't saying it couldn't happen. Ijust wanted to talk about it. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they weren't saying something couldn't happen and they just wanted to discuss the topic.


Passage number 189.
MR. KEEHN. Our numbers are very consistent with the staffforecast. We are a touch higher on real GNP, but perhaps from a lowerfourth-quarter base, and our deflator number is a little higher. Withregard to risk--and I think we have covered it in some detail--itseems to me that so much is dependent on the trade side that the risksreally have to be in that area. I must say, nonetheless, that I think-19-2/10-11/87we are probably going to come out about right on that. From talkingto people in the District, I do sense that probably one of the moresignificant changes that we have had in the last month or so is on thetrade side, more as it relates to imports than to exports. Certainly,the environment for exports is better and there are some industries--chemicals and paper products, for example--that are doing better. Buton the import side, I think an awful lot of the domestic people whohave been supplying the domestic markets that have been so very, veryhard hit are sensing better opportunities now--particularly for peoplesuch as the integrated manufacturers who had typically gone to foreignmarkets for their out-sourcing. I think they are beginning to lookmore at domestic markets for their sources and, therefore, that's animprovement also. It's nothing dramatic, but I do think we areperhaps at a turning point on this. Because of the importance of thetrade sector to our outlook for the year, in my mind that has to bethe big risk.On inflation, I think the risks are a little on the up side.People I talked to say that wage costs are continuing under very goodcontrol. Their contract settlements are excellent in terms of cost aswell as work rule changes, etc. And the market pricing is very tough;conditions continue to be very, very competitive so they are able tomaintain pressure on that. There is this bet that imported productswill begin to go up in price. I think we are going to see that showthrough and the CPI number is going to be a little higher than wemight have expected. And because of the sheer publicity--thevisibility that the CPI gets--it seems to me that it is going to beginto get one's eyes focused on this problem, perhaps more than has beenthe case in the last couple of years. So, I think inflation is theother risk area.I have just a couple of quick comments on the District. Iecho what Gary Stern was saying about the agricultural sector. I havebeen out a couple of times over the last two weeks, and I sensed thatwe might, I hope, be at the bottom of that particular problem, or inthe zone of stability, as I call it. That's a bit of a positive. Onthe negative side, we are continuing to see plant closings, somethingthat I keep a count on. Caterpillar has announced the closing ofthree additional plants in the Midwest in the last month or so. GMhas announced one more plant closing over and above that big stringthat they had a couple of months ago. They are now beginning to shutdown some of their [plants producing] parts used in assembly and,again, they are going to out-sourcing. So that's one on the negativeside. Generally, conditions in the District seem to be pretty muchunchanged from what has been the case over the last few months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and observations, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided a passage for me to analyze. Could you please provide the passage you would like me to assess for contention or disagreement?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 191.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we are more on the optimistic side,like some of our brethren are, I am comforted to see. We may havebeen overly influenced by the signs of a turnaround in manufacturingin recent months than by the flurry of good statistics that has justhit in the face of a great deal of liquidity in the economy. We putin 3-1/2 percent as the rate of growth in real GNP, and we have theunemployment rate coming down to 6.4 percent. So far as our analysisis concerned, we are pretty much in agreement with the staff on theforces that are at work in that we think there is going to be a markedimprovement in the net export picture and that it's going to be a-20-2/10-11/87major contributor to growth. We also agree with the conclusion thatgross domestic purchases are going to grow more slowly, but we differmainly in that we think that there are going to be more real personalconsumption expenditures. The staff has projected just 1-1/2 percentgrowth fourth quarter to fourth quarter. It is certainly true that wehave a lot of debt there, but we also have some factors that offsetthat negative in the growth of wealth. So our guess is that PCE isgoing to be somewhat higher than their forecast. Coincidentally, Isuppose, we had about the same kind of growth in real disposableincome last year as they are projecting for 1987 and we had a 4percent rise in real consumer expenditures. Against this moreoptimistic forecast, we have inflation near the high side, at 3.8percent. I am a little comforted to see that someone else is thereand even more comforted by one of the Board member's forecast of realGNP of 4 percent. For once I am not the high one on that. We thinkthat inflation is going to stem from this stronger projection of realgrowth; that ought to tend to reduce this remaining slack in labor andproduct markets, particularly in the second half of the year. Insofaras the risks are concerned, I would say that the risks are that thenumbers are going to come in somewhere between our forecast and theBoard staff's.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, expresses a more optimistic outlook on the economy compared to the Board staff's forecast. He disagrees with their projection of slower growth in gross domestic purchases and lower real personal consumption expenditures. He also disagrees with their inflation forecast, believing that stronger real growth will lead to higher inflation.


Passage number 192.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not much of a risk. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Not much of a risk" is providing a subjective evaluation of the level of risk, but it is not indicating any disagreement with another point of view or presenting a conflicting opinion.


Passage number 193.
MR. BLACK. It's an averaging of two misses, probably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement. Mr. Black is stating a fact about averaging two misses, without indicating any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 194.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My forecast is again almostidentical with the staff's forecast. It probably means that we areboth wrong. As a number of people said, the trade sector is obviouslycrucial. And frankly, I blow hot and cold on that. Sometimes I thinkwe have a good shot at doing better than the forecast and other timesI say "no way". I guess right now I am, to some extent, in the coldcamp as opposed to the hot camp. And that came about in part fromlistening to President Poehl and Governor Sumita over the weekend inBasle, both of whom were really distinctly more cautious abouteconomic prospects in Germany and Japan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage expresses the speaker's own thoughts and uncertainty about the trade sector, but does not involve any contention or disagreement with others.


Passage number 195.
 Clearly, in terms of thefavorable world economic situation--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How are the Japanese talking now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the Japanese are talking in a certain way without any indication of disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 196.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, they start with the governmentforecast which is 3 percent plus--say, 3-1/2 to 4 percent. Then theytalk a little about the Bank of Japan forecast and shave a half pointoff that. Then they start wriggling in terms of their own forecasts,so with the body english, I ended up with 2 percent or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It describes a process of forecasting and adjustment without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is where the Germans are. It's notvery exciting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about the location of the Germans and expresses their personal opinion that it is not very exciting.


Passage number 198.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And some worry, especially in theJapanese case, that they are really taking a terrible beating in theirmanufacturing sector now. So, as I said, I guess today I am a littleinfluenced by that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It mentions some worry or concern about the manufacturing sector in Japan but does not provide opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 199.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A terrible beating by Japanese standards.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply provides a statement about the severity of the beating by Japanese standards without introducing any argument or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. By their standards. On the importside, the question I keep asking myself is: If we have a shortfall2/10-11/87from this kind of consensus forecast on the export side, is there anygood possibility that we can make up the difference on the importside. That to me is a tough one. Indeed, it's a "Catch-22" becausewhen I look at the nature of the import situation here in the UnitedStates now, with the infrastructure that goes with it in so manyproduct lines, it just seems to me that to break out of that mold thatTed has in his forecast, we are probably going to have to have prettysharp price increases for imports. That's something we haven't seenyet; and if we start to see it, it's just going to add that much morepressure on the domestic inflation side. So, I am not sure we canmake up any shortfall on the export side. But if we do, I am afraidthat we are going to make it up at the cost of higher inflation. So,as I said, right now I am a bit on the cold side of the tradesituation, but that will change next week, I suspect.On the purely domestic side, like Mr. Stern and a couple ofothers, I've got to say I am impressed with not just the Januaryemployment numbers, but the collection of numbers over the past threeor four months which, net, have been stronger than I would haveexpected, especially in the circumstances of the tax change. Thosedevelopments will probably lead me to be marking up my forecast alittle. Putting it all together, I would say that the risks are aboutsymmetric at this point. I have a little of that nagging sense ofunease that Ed Boehne spoke about in terms of the inflation situation,although I can't pin it down either. If you go through unit laborcosts and productivity exercises, you still get numbers that lookrespectable, at least in terms of deflators. But there is at leastthat nagging feeling that this tremendous amount of liquidity that weput into the economy ought to do something at some point. And rightnow all it seems to be doing, in some sense, is feeding the financialsector. That in itself constitutes a risk because I continue to see arather sharp--and in some ways an ever sharper--dichotomy between thefinancial sector of the economy and the real sector of the economy.And I just don't see how that is sustainable. I think there are risksright there in terms of something going astray which, in turn, couldimpair confidence in the world in a detrimental way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement and concern about the possibility of making up the shortfall on the import side and the potential consequences of higher inflation. They also express unease about the inflation situation and the dichotomy between the financial sector and the real sector of the economy, questioning the sustainability of this situation.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any specific information or statements that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply mentions someone's name, Mr. Boykin.


Passage number 202.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, optimism or pessimism is arelative thing. Having been through a series of meetings over thelast several weeks--with our own board of directors, our advisorycouncils for small business and agricultural, our financialinstitutions' advisory council, and a few others--I thought I wasbeing rather optimistic in sending in [a forecast of] 2-1/2 percentreal GNP because that isn't what I was hearing anecdotally from ourpeople. However, based on what I have seen, it's probably under theothers; it's certainly a little under the staff forecast. My ownstaff, I think, would encourage me to shave that up slightly, based ontheir analysis and, certainly, the current information. One thingthat is tending to influence us in the Eleventh District is the factthat in the survey that we just did on the effects of the decline inthe value of the dollar, we probably have not received the benefit--orcertainly not the same benefit--that other Districts have beenreporting. There is optimism, although it's cautious optimism; it's asense that we just don't think we are going to slide down any furtherand we can see a few glimmers of hope. If anything, I have been a bitpessimistic in terms of the 1987 performance on the real economy and-22-2/10-11/87inflation, although we are not seeing a great amount of indicationthat inflation is getting to be a problem. To me, at least, it's timeto observe that very, very closely, because the possibilities are suchthat we could see a little pickup there. I don't know whether it willmaterialize or not; we will just have to wait and see. But it'ssomething that I would hope we'd be observing very closely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement of one person's perspective and opinions.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Angell, is going to tell us howgood the inflation outlook is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that Mr. Angell will provide information about the positive inflation outlook.


Passage number 204.
MR. ANGELL. No, I think it's pretty bad. I think myforecast for the CPI is 100 basis points higher than it was last yearafter I had been here 7 days. So I got worse on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Relatively worse.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

The phrase "relatively worse" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a comparison or contrast between two things, indicating that one is perceived as being worse in relation to the other. There is no explicit argument or disagreement present in this phrase.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 206.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, relatively worse, right. In a sense, Isuppose my forecast, at 1.9 percent real GNP, is optimistic in thatthe non-U.S. world output would seem to be hardly higher than 2percent and it would seem appropriate that we would be a little lessthan the rest of the world. So I guess I feel very comfortable thatif we can do it that wouldn't be bad at all. As I looked at theexport side, I noted from St. Louis' recent publication that U.S.export prices over the last six years have risen a total of 11percent, which would be less than 2 percent a year. Our staffforecast has an 11 percent increase in export prices over the next twoyears. In the world that I see, it is somewhat unlikely that thatkind of increase in export prices would occur. On the import side, Ialso noted in that same study that U.S. imports as a percentage of GNPhave been so constant; they just don't change very much. So I justdon't hold much hope for any reduction of imports by relative pricing.That is, the price elasticities seem to be such that we are not goingto make much gain there. Frankly, I don't see that we are going tomake quite as good a move on the trade side as even the staffforecast, and that's not very good.When I look at dangers, I suppose there are two kinds ofdangers. I tend to set aside the stagflation scenario; I don't seethat as very likely. On inflation, my estimate is only 1/2 of apercentage point different from the staff, and I don't see that to bevery large. But if we both missed, if there was higher growth andmore inflation, I guess that would provide us a very decided monetarypolicy option which would be, I presume, higher U.S. interest rates;and that would be good for the dollar. If we had higher growth, itwould be good for a lot of sectors of the domestic economy. So Iassume that if we missed in that direction we would have a responsethat would be appropriate both domestically and internationally. Theproblem I see would be if we get too slow and the world gets too slow.And if the U.S. gets too slow, then I wonder what the policy responsemight be because that might put downward pressure on U.S. interestrates. I'd hate to see that happen with equity prices maybe goingeven higher than they are today, which might be an unsustainable path.So that's the kind of worry that I have: that we might get too slow[economic growth] and get declining interest rates. This would putthe dollar in a precarious position, and we might not have good policyoptions. So, I guess I do worry some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author expresses skepticism about the staff forecast for trade improvement and expresses concern about the potential negative consequences of the US economy slowing down.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are paid for worrying. Mr. Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 208.
-23-2/10-11/87MR. HELLER. The pay shows that Governor Angell is notworrying very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage because there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints. It is simply stating that Governor Angell is not worrying much based on the pay.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Spoken like the private sector fellows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement that appears to be expressing approval or agreement with a statement or idea. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 210.
MR. HELLER. Overall, I very much agree with the staff. Mynumbers are almost indistinguishable from the staff forecast, but onthe trade picture I agree more with Jerry Corrigan. Having beenthrough Europe only a day or two before him, I think the hand-delivered Wall Street Journal article, courtesy of Manley Johnsontoday, says it all: "Fed Official Finds Little Sympathy in Germany onTrade Deficit." It will be difficult to get the very optimisticprogress on the export growth front. On the other hand, on the importsubstitution side I think there probably is a lot more room forprogress. So the net outcome may well be very much the same asforecast by the staff but the composition would be very different.On the inflation front, I think the key is not the directeffect of the depreciation of the dollar but the response of U.S.manufacturers to the increase in prices by their competitors. And ifthe U.S. automobile industry and their pricing behavior is anyindication, I think we are in for a hard time. I hope that noteverybody will follow that example but will instead hold prices and gofor the market share. If the auto example were followed it wouldclearly be very detrimental on the trade front, because we would notget the relative price effect and the trade picture would be very bad.One last brief comment: a lot was made out of the differencebetween the CPI and the GNP deflator. I think there is good reason toassume that next year that discrepancy will be bigger than it has beenin the past because the prices from imports will show up in the CPIwhile they are going to be subtracted out of the GNP numbers. Sothere is going to be a bigger discrepancy there. I think that isbasically a statistical quirk that we have to be aware of butshouldn't overemphasize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the staff and offering their own perspective and observations on the trade and inflation fronts.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 212.
MS. SEGER. Wayne Angell and I have been having a horse racein the last year to see who could be the most pessimistic. And,believe it or not, looking at actual numbers for 1986, neither of uswas low enough. Wayne, do you realize that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 213.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, and my inflation [forecast] was also toohigh last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Angell's inflation forecast was high last year.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 214.
MS. SEGER. Well, having said that, I am in his camp againwith a low number for real GNP growth--something on the order of 2percent, which is below the staff's. I have two main reasons fordeparting from the staff forecast. One is that I continue to beconcerned about the auto industry. On the one hand, I watch thepricing behavior, as Governor Heller indicated; but also, I reallythink that the fundamentals of the auto sales picture are weaker thanthe dealer delivery figures may suggest. There was a surge at the endof 1986, and I think much of that surge should be attributed to thetax changes that were going into effect January 1. We know that therewas a substantial decline in January. But, as someone pointed out tome, even that overstated the strength of true retail demand because-24-2/10-11/87many fleet sales were processed in January. And, of course, that'snot a function of showroom traffic, and so forth; that is a deal thatis struck between large purchasers and the corporations. So, thefundamental demand for automobiles is probably even weaker than itlooks. Auto manufacturers are watching February numbers very, verycarefully. One person told me that they were inthe process of revising down their production schedules as we spoke,which was this morning. Anyway, I don't think that they are going tocontinue to wait for a miracle to occur that will somehow or othereliminate these high inventories, particularly in certain lines andcertain makes, is the company with the worst inventorysituation. They have excessive--that's my word, not theirs--andextensive incentives out right now. If they don't get the resultsthey expect--and there is a great deal of concern that they won't--then they will have to make really substantial production cuts. Ihope that isn't the case, but I am concerned that we may not have[forecast] enough weakness coming from that particular sector.The other area of my concern involves the trade turnaround.I asked at the [Board staff] briefing on Monday where the additionalexports in this country were going to go and what the products wouldbe. I also asked what imports were going to be curbed or curtailed,and I haven't gotten very good answers to those questions. I justthink it's going to be much more difficult to accomplish this. Thedeterioration, I would remind people, went on for a number of years--five or something like that. And I think that there have beenadjustments made in the economy to these changes and that they are notgoing to be easily reversed. Although I would like to see a quick andsubstantial turn, my suspicious nature suggests that it won't takeplace. So, I put those two differences together, and that's why Ithink that we are going to have a slower rate of growth.On the inflation side, I am just a touch more optimistic,perhaps, that we will be able to keep inflation under control. Here Iguess my main difference comes from what I view as a real change inbusiness behavior--not in all business behavior but in the behavior ofa number of significant businesses--in that they are finallyaddressing the efficiency question. They are really trying to skinnydown. I just heard of one request by an organization that is workingwith its suppliers over a five-year time horizon and telling them thatin order to be assured of business in this period ahead, they willhave to agree to cut their prices, not increase them, by one percentper year over the next five years. That's pretty hard bargaining.And I think a lot of things like that are going on that have mainlyresulted from the intense import competition. I think it has been a[unintelligible] factor. I certainly can't put an exact number on it;I don't pretend to know. But I think that that kind of behavior isgoing to help us keep these inflation numbers looking better than theyotherwise would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with the staff forecast and provides reasons for departing from it. They express concern about the auto industry and the trade turnaround, stating that they believe these factors will contribute to slower growth.


Passage number 215.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 216.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: . Guffey disagreed with the proposal to increase taxes. 

No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Guffey disagreed with the proposal to increase taxes.


Passage number 217.
 Chairman, I didn't hold up my hand, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I got your name on a piece of paperand I will delete it if you don't want to say anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The chairman is simply acknowledging that someone did not raise their hand and offering them an opportunity to speak if they choose to do so.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 218.
-25-2/10-11/87MR. GUFFEY. Well, I think that since I am about the last[speaker], I will say something. Our forecast is very much like theBoard staff's on the growth side; we are a touch higher on theinflation side. If one were to make a forecast from the TenthDistrict perspective, none of those figures would be verysatisfactory; they would be much more pessimistic. On the forecastitself, the growth is largely dependent, as everybody has alreadynoted, upon the turnaround in the net export sector. If that occurs,then growth much as we experienced in 1986 seems to me to be quitereasonable. On the other hand, on the price side it seems to me thatour foreign competitors' import prices will have to rise since theirprofit margins have been squeezed over the last year and a half as thedollar has declined vis-a-vis their currencies. And that should startto show through together with an increase in imported oil prices. Ifthat were to occur, and as that is passed through, it would seem to methat inflation would be a bit higher than we experienced last year.Having said that, I think it is noteworthy, as Governor Hellermentioned, that the CPI--which will incorporate those higher importprices--quite likely will be in the 4 to 5 percent range. And it'sgoing to take some explanation, I guess by the Chairman, of thecontrast between the slow CPI numbers posted in 1986 with what likelywill happen in 1987 and why this may not be all that significant--whyit looks very high and should [not] give us all cause for concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, is expressing a differing opinion on the inflation side of the forecast compared to the Board staff's forecast. He believes that inflation will be higher due to the rise in import prices and increased oil prices. This contrasts with the Board staff's forecast which may be more optimistic.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 219.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with you. I am willing to explainsomething about the forecast--up to 3.9 percent. When it gets above 4percent, it may get a little difficult to explain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The person is agreeing with the other person's statement, but also expressing potential difficulty in explaining the forecast if it exceeds 4 percent.


Passage number 220.
MR. GUFFEY. That's the reason they pay you that big money,Mr. Chairman. In summary, our forecast is very close to the Boardstaff's forecast with the exception that we think prices may be atouch higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their forecast, which is largely aligned with the Boardstaff's forecast except for a minor difference in expected prices.


Passage number 221.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson, a benediction here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Governor Johnson and a benediction.


Passage number 222.
MR. JOHNSON. I will try to be brief; just about all of theissues have been covered. Like Jerry, I just got back from Basle and,after talking to the other G-10 governors, I am a little lessoptimistic, I think, than I was when I left.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson simply states that he is a little less optimistic after talking to the other G-10 governors.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 223.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just remember what you did to themthe last time you were there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

The statement implies that the listener has done something negative or harmful to someone in the past, which could potentially spark disagreement or contention depending on the context and the listener's response.


Passage number 224.
MR. JOHNSON. I'll admit to being the guilty party among theBoard members who estimated the higher real GNP growth rate. I havebeen looking at the numbers, and I have been fairly impressed withseveral months of fairly good data. There are some end-of-the-yearproblems there, but I think there is enough evidence to say thatthings are starting to pick up. The staff's forecast on the tradedeficit is looking pretty good. As I said, I was even more optimisticbefore I left to talk to the Germans and Japanese about it, so maybe Iwould cut that back a little now. But I do think things are lookingbetter. On the tax side, I will make one point: one reason why demandmay hold up a little better than some expect is that some people, Ithink, are overestimating what tax reform is going to do. There was abig surge to avoid the elimination of the sales tax deduction at theend of the year. I went back and checked the law and found that youreally don't lose the sales tax deduction unless it's a special sales-26-2/10-11/87tax item. Any generalized sales tax is still deductible--at leastthat is what it says in the books. If you calculate your sales taxfrom the state tax tables, you can still deduct it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is simply discussing his own analysis of the data and offering his perspective on the forecast.


Passage number 225.
MR. BOEHNE. I don't think that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 226.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I went back and from what I could seeit's still there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will have somebody look into this overnight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone will be assigned to investigate a matter overnight.


Passage number 228.
MR. BLACK. I sure hope you are right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "I sure hope you are right" indicates agreement and support.


Passage number 229.
MR. JOHNSON. It will be interesting to know because that'swhat the accounting firms say in the books they put out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 230.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we have to resolvethis right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any kind of contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's opinion of not needing to resolve something immediately.


Passage number 231.
MR. JOHNSON. No. I am just saying that it's interesting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson is simply expressing his opinion that something is interesting.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 232.
 Afew people may find that their deductions--MR. MORRIS. I have looked in two [publications] that saidexactly the opposite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "exactly the opposite" indicates a contradiction or opposing viewpoint to the deductions mentioned earlier.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they can ever fill out their W-4 forms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of a conditional situation without any opposing viewpoints or contradictions.


Passage number 234.
MR. MELZER. A good point along those lines, Manley, is thatthe withholding went down for a lot of people and a number ofretailers, particularly the ones that compete on price. I view thatas a real positive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Melzer, is expressing his positive view on the lowering of withholding for many people and retailers who compete on price.


Passage number 235.
MR. JOHNSON. A lot of the interest deductions are beingphased out, so it's not really a big hit all at once. That issueaside, I am reasonably optimistic about a turn in trade but it may notbe as strong as I originally had thought because I am a littlegloomier about the growth prospects abroad. It's going to beinteresting to see.On the inflation side, I am a little more pessimistic. Ihave marked up my estimate about a percentage point, I think, fromlast July but that's basically a function of the oil picture as muchas anything. The nominal inflation picture doesn't look that bad tome. There will be some pressure from import prices. But looking atthe wage situation and the shift toward manufacturing--so at leastthere is some productivity away from the service area--I think it'sgoing to be a little better. So, I am fairly consistent with thestaff on the inflation forecast but I do think we have to be extremelycautious in that area. I agree with everyone else here that thepsychology seems to be tilting the other way a bit. What's beenhappening in the financial markets with the dollar and some of thenervousness in the bond market should be watched very carefully.That's about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their individual opinions and thoughts on various economic factors.


Passage number 236.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That ends today's session.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The sentence simply states that the session has ended without indicating any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 237.
[Meeting recessed]-27-2/10-11/87February 11, 1987--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can proceed with Mr. Kohn this morningand discuss the long-run ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the meeting is recessed and will proceed with a discussion led by Mr. Kohn.


Passage number 238.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Thank you, Mr. Chairman." There is no indication of opposing views or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 239.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we probably ought to turn to M2and M3 first and see whether we can resolve those. But I have onequestion, just to isolate it, on M1. If I understand correctly,you're saying it's a matter of judgment but, for what it's worth,you're reluctant to say that growth would be less than 10 percent forM1; however, the model shows half of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a different opinion or hesitation about the growth rate in M1 compared to what has been stated previously.


Passage number 240.
MR. KOHN. The model shows rates on the order of 5 to7-1/2 percent for M1 for 1987.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement presented is a straightforward statement of the model's prediction for rates on M1 for 1987.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 241.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You just don't believe your models.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The phrase "You just don't believe your models" suggests that there is a disagreement or lack of belief in the models, indicating some contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 242.
MR. KOHN. That's correct. Some of these models showed ratesonly a little above that for 1986. Others were closer to the mark butimplied such a marked slowdown, especially in the OCD component, thatI have trouble believing them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Kohn, expresses doubt and disbelief in the accuracy of certain models that suggest a significant slowdown in the OCD component.


Passage number 243.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "MR. JOHNSON" simply provides information about a person's name without expressing any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 244.
 You have to put in a set of interest rateassumptions to make it--MR. KOHN. No, these model results are based on the interestrate assumptions behind the Greenbook forecast--that is, essentiallyvery little changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes - The passage suggests that there is disagreement or contention. The speaker says "You have to put in a set of interest rate assumptions to make it" which implies that there may be disagreement on what interest rate assumptions should be used. However, Mr. Kohn's response of "No, these model results are based on the interest rate assumptions behind the Greenbook forecast" suggests a differing opinion or explanation.


Passage number 245.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but growth greatly exceeded what theysaid for last year. Is that before or after the actual declines ininterest rates that took place last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is simply stating a fact about the growth exceeding expectations from the previous year. There is no mention of any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 246.
MR. KOHN. Even after the actual declines in interest rates,several of the models underpredicted money growth last year. Ourquarterly model didn't do too badly; it was under by about 2 to 2-3/4percentage points--that is at about 12-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a statement about the performance of certain models in predicting money growth last year. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 247.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that model shows what for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
MR. KOHN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "MR. KOHN" without any further context or statement to indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 249.
 That model shows about 5 to 6 percent, dependingon the assumptions about offering rates and--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will return to M1, but it's moreproductive to look at M2 and M3 first as we did last time. Doesanybody want to say something about M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents information and invites discussion or input about M2 and M3. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 250.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Alternative II is for me for M2 andM3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their preference for Alternative II for M2 and M3 without expressing any conflicting views or presenting contrary statements.


Passage number 251.
MR. JOHNSON. Alternative II is all right with me, too. ButI think it's important to give some signal that we're moving toward alittle more restraint on the broader aggregates; at least, that isconsistent with continuing to try to keep inflation suppressed. And I-28-2/10-11/87think there is enough room in that target to allow for that in afairly significant way. Given what M2 did last year, with anexplosion in M1 and the decline in interest rates, it doesn't seemthat it's that sensitive. So, I think alternative II would be able tohandle just about any event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 252.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no mention or indication of any contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 253.
MR. ANGELL. I prefer alternative II also. It would seem tome that the accommodation of 1986 is not as apt to occur; so 8-1/2percent, even under a declining velocity scenario, does give us anequal opportunity to snug up a bit. But I do think, as we proceedwith alternative II, that this year we should be aware of the factthat market forces are even more important. That is, if long-termbond rates and intermediate bond rates were to rise, it seems to methat, given the problem with the dollar, we ought to be particularlysensitive to those interest rates--on the down side also. I wantalternative II with a proviso that interest rates ought not to bemanaged by the Fed much differently than the market forces wouldindicate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Angell, prefers alternative II but also wants a proviso that interest rates should not be managed by the Fed much differently than the market forces would indicate. This suggests a disagreement or contention over how the Fed should manage interest rates.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions a person's name without any context or information provided.


Passage number 255.
MR. BOEHNE. I like alternative II, but I get there by askingmyself the question: What kind of a message ought we be sending.Monetary policy has largely been on a one-way street toward ease overthe last two or three years, particularly last year. I think it'stime to send the message that monetary policy operates on a two-waystreet: There are circumstances in which we might loosen some more butthere are also circumstances in which we might tighten some more. AndI think alternative II does send that two-way street message.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, expresses a personal preference for alternative II and explains his reasoning behind it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage is incomplete, as it lacks further information or context to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 257.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I don't really see a great dealof difference among these various alternatives but, for psychologicalreasons, I would prefer alternative II. I think it is important thatwe send a signal to the public and to the markets that we arecontinuing to observe inflation. That will be particularly importantthis year and next year if the estimates of increasing inflation areaccurate, which I think they are. So, I would prefer alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, expresses a personal preference for alternative II but does not argue or engage in any debate or disagreement with others.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, there is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 259.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative II aswell. And I would make a suggestion as far as sending a message aboutthe commitment to price stability. Some work that we've doneindicates that it's quite likely that M2 will grow at the lower end ofthis range and, from reading the Bluebook, I got the feeling that someof the quantitative work the Board staff has done would suggest thatas well. It seems to me that one thing we could do is have 5-1/2 to8-1/2 percent for M3 and 5 to 8 percent for M2. That change, as faras M2 is concerned, would represent a full percentage point declinefrom what we had in 1986. And I think that would send a message.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Parry is expressing his support for alternative II and suggesting a change in the target ranges for M2 and M3.


Passage number 260.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you. Which way did you have this.The 5-1/2 percent would be for what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a simple question asking for clarification or further explanation.


Passage number 261.
-29-2/10-11/87MR. PARRY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The given passage seems to be a simple, alphanumeric representation of a name or code, and does not contain any statements or arguments that can be disagreed upon.


Passage number 262.
 Have M2 at 5 to 8 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 at 5 to 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is straightforward and does not involve any conflicting opinions or perspectives.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 263.
MR. PARRY. And M3 at 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. Some of thework that we've done would support that and--maybe Don can comment onthis--I think some of the quantitative work the Board staff has donesuggests that M2 would grow in the low end of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement about the projected growth rate of M2. Mr. Parry suggests that it would grow in the low end of the range, while the Board staff's quantitative work may indicate otherwise.


Passage number 264.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just pin that down. I read theopposite someplace--maybe you had it--that M3 would grow less than M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the possibility of M3 growing less than M2.


Passage number 265.
MR. PARRY. No, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "No, no" indicates that Mr. Parry is negating or denying something, but without further context, it cannot be determined what he is opposing or disagreeing with.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 266.
MR. KOHN. Actually, that was our judgment given what weexpect for bank and thrift credit growth, which tends to drive M3because of the managed liability component; we expect that todecelerate substantially. We had M3 at 7 percent or a tick below,between 6-1/2 and 7 percent. M2 at 7 percent was judgmental. Mr.Parry is absolutely right in the sense that our quarterly model, as Itried to indicate in the briefing, was showing something on the orderof 6 to 6-1/2 percent for M2 growth, which is in the lower end of therange. I think his model is showing more like 5 to 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kohn and Mr. Parry have different models and predictions for M2 growth. Mr. Kohn's model suggests a higher growth rate of 6 to 6-1/2 percent, while Mr. Parry's model suggests a lower growth rate of 5 to 5-1/2 percent.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is between models and judgment.Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage mentions two different things (models and judgment) but does not indicate any disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 268.
MR. HELLER. Well, I'm in favor of alternative II but nowyou've got me a bit confused. First of all, let me remark on theshort-run alternatives. I realize we may want to discuss it later,but the target for the first three months is rather high. It's at thehigh end of the range for M2 and the lower end of the range for M3. Ithink that's what Chairman Volcker was just talking about. But SanFrancisco also got me confused. You are in favor of discount ratecuts yet you want to have a tighter monetary target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller is expressing confusion and seeking clarification on different alternatives and viewpoints.


Passage number 269.
MR. PARRY. I don't vote on the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a personal statement about their own voting behavior, without any opposing views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 270.
MR. HELLER. I'll stick to alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to establish any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Heller will stick to alternative II without providing any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "Mr. Keehn" without any further information or context.


Passage number 272.
MR. KEEHN. I would definitely not favor alternative I. Thechoice, in my view, is between "II" and "III". We have established apattern over the last few years of reducing the range on a yearlybasis and alternative I would certainly break that. Betweenalternatives II and III, I see no particular reason not to choosealternative II, which we adopted [on a tentative basis] last summer.Certainly, there seems to be an expectation that we can hit that andalternative III might suggest a change in policy that we don't reallyintend at this particular point. So, I'd end up with alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker clearly states their preference for alternative II and provides reasons for their choice.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement. It only mentions a person's name without any accompanying information or context.


Passage number 274.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'd be reluctant to reduce theranges a full percentage point as alternative III suggests, and Ithink we'd risk confusing the market if we went with alternative I.Besides, I think the staff has made a good case for alternative II as-30-2/10-11/87encompassing, probably, all the reasonably likely behaviors that wemight see in velocity of M2 and M3. So I can go with "II" likeeveryone else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is presenting his opinion and agreeing with the staff's recommendation of alternative II.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions "Mr. Melzer" without providing any additional information or context, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 276.
MR. MELZER. I'll try to keep this short: alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Melzer's intention to keep his statement short and does not provide any information about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 277.
MR. BLACK. Well said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that would indicate contention or disagreement. The phrase "Well said" suggests agreement or approval of the previous statement.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, there is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 279.
MR. MORRIS. I vote for alternative II as well. One thing weought to keep in mind is that the elimination of IRA accounts islikely to drive up M2 relative to income. That's why I'd be concernedabout moving the M2 target down to 8 percent. We may need a littlemore room for that. The Bluebook says you don't expect much effect in1987; I'm not sure why you feel that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his agreement with alternative II, but also raising a concern about the potential impact of eliminating IRA accounts on M2 relative to income. He mentions the information in the Bluebook but expresses uncertainty about the reasons behind the expectation of little effect in 1987.


Passage number 280.
MR. KOHN. Well, I agree with you on the direction. Thequestion is the magnitude. Our feeling was that we might havestronger inflows early in the year both from people who might havepostponed putting money in last year, partly because of all theuncertainty with the tax law, and from people who wanted to make surethey took full advantage of their ability to use IRAs under the 1986law since it was going to be the last chance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kohn states that he agrees with the direction, but is questioning the magnitude of the inflows.


Passage number 281.
 Flows later in the yearwould indeed be lower, but this might be offset by the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can still put money in an IRA for lastyear, can't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement followed by a question, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 282.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage because the author presents conflicting viewpoints or ideas.


Passage number 283.
MR. KOHN. That's correct--through the 15th of April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of agreement between two parties; there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 284.
MR. BLACK. Up until April 15th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage only includes a statement without any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 285.
MR. MORRIS. The last one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "The last one" suggests that there is some sort of disagreement or contradictory opinion being discussed. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine the specific nature of the contention.


Passage number 286.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see why it should affect this yearmuch; it may affect 1988.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement reflects the speaker's personal opinion or prediction without any contradiction or conflict.


Passage number 287.
MR. MORRIS. But in 1988 it clearly would be a factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement of fact by Mr. Morris. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 288.
MR. KOHN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, the given passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 290.
MR. BOYKIN. Alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Alternative II" does not indicate any disagreement or contention but rather suggests the presentation of another option or point of view.


Passage number 291.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, therefore it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in it.


Passage number 292.
MS. SEGER. I don't see a big difference, frankly, betweenalternatives I, II, and III. We're talking about 1/2 of a percentagepoint between each one. When we discussed this last summer in July,one of the points I made when I opposed changing from the ranges wehad for 1986 was that I didn't think we had the predictive tools tocome up with these fine gradations of economic impact. Six months-31-2/10-11/87have gone by and I guess I'm still not convinced that we can readilysay with great confidence that there's going to be a major differencein impact on the economy with "I" versus "II". So that leaves me withthe psychological side. I guess if you think that this is the kind ofthing that will send a big message to the world out there that we'retough rather than weak on inflation--I happen to think they look at alot of things and not just our ranges--I could reluctantly go with"II". But I still think a more honest presentation would be justdealing with round numbers, say, 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing their opinion and discussing their thoughts on the topic of economic impact. There is no mention of disagreement with another person or viewpoint.


Passage number 293.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 294.
MR. STERN. I favor alternative II as well. For what it'sworth, our model suggested that M2 growth would probably turn out tobe near 8 percent in the year ahead. But our model also has asomewhat stronger picture of the economy than the Greenbook forecast;if you were to plug in something akin to the Greenbook forecast Ithink you'd get something comfortably within that alternative II rangefor M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Stern agrees with alternative II and acknowledges that his model's forecast for M2 growth aligns with that alternative.


Passage number 295.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as there is no additional context or content provided.


Passage number 296.
MR. GUFFEY. I would also favor alternative II. I don't havea great deal of faith in M2 or M3 as a guide to policy. If you lookback over the history of M2, for example, over the last 5 or 6 yearsit has varied between 8 and 9 percent except, I believe, for 1983.Many things have happened--policies have changed, interest rates havedropped--and still growth comes out to be 8 to 9 percent. As aresult, it doesn't seem to me that it's a very reliable guide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and providing reasons for why they prefer alternative II over M2 and M3 as a guide to policy. There is no direct opposition or argument presented in this passage.


Passage number 297.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Like M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to accurately determine as the passage is missing or incomplete.


Passage number 298.
MR. GUFFEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual passage being provided. Please provide the specific passage you would like me to analyze.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 299.
 We expect to see--MR. BLACK. All guides are unreliable; some are just moreunreliable than others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The statement "All guides are unreliable; some are just more unreliable than others" suggests a disagreement or conflict between different guides and their levels of reliability.


Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Hendricks, do you have something toadd from Cleveland.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is simply asking if Mr. Hendricks has something to add from Cleveland.


Passage number 301.
MR. HENDRICKS. We also believe it would be appropriate toadopt the same ranges for 1987 that were set in July, so we wouldfavor alternative II.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement with adopting the same ranges for 1987 that were set in July.


Passage number 302.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we seem to have great unanimity. I,personally, could make a case for alternative III. I thought theBluebook set that out rather convincingly but I won't make the case.Alternative II is obviously the easy thing to do; it's a nicecompromise. I interpret this to mean, without being very rigid aboutit, that we expect growth to be someplace in the middle of the range;this time it's a target set reasonably symmetrically around wheregrowth should be.Let us turn to M1 with this caveat--that if we wantedsomething like variant I [in the Bluebook], which I think has someinformational content, I'm not crazy about the particular languageproposed. I think it needs a little work, and I'm a little reluctantto rewrite it in detail right now rather than during the break. I-32-2/10-11/87haven't got another proposal to put in front of you, if we end up withthat one. I'm making an assumption that we're going to end up there,which may be wrong. I think we ought to discuss it. But if we thinksomething like variant I is correct I would just defer finalconsideration until we get some possible modification to the languagein front of us. It would be along these lines, but not precisely thislanguage. I may be wrong about whether that's where we'll want to endup, but let's see. We're open for discussion on M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different alternatives and expressing their personal opinions, but there is no conflict or disagreement with others in the text.


Passage number 303.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll try. And this is going tomuddy the waters right off the bat, so I apologize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a willingness to try, and they acknowledge that what they are about to say may complicate or confuse the situation, which shows self-awareness and a sense of responsibility for any potential confusion.


Passage number 304.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not provide information about contention or disagreement. It simply indicates the presence of a chairman named Volcker without any additional context to determine contention.


Passage number 305.
 Well, after all--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just looking at it in terms ofvariant I and variant II, predictably, I come out somewhere betweenthe two. I don't think I have to restate the reasons why that's whereI am. But I would like to suggest that at least we start out withsomething like the first sentence in variant I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. The speaker is sharing their opinion and suggesting a starting point, but there is no conflict present.


Passage number 306.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be the part in the firstbracket or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase in the first bracket is merely indicating a potential reference point without expressing any opposing viewpoint or conflict.


Passage number 307.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, the first sentence. And thenput in something like this: "Looking to 1987, in the context ofmoderate economic growth, continued moderation in inflationary forces,and absent major changes in interest rates and exchange rates, thebehavior of M1 relative to income and prices might return to morenormal relationships. In those circumstances, growth of M1 in a rangeof 4 to 8 percent--or 3 to 8 percent or 3 to 9 percent-- would beappropriate." Then I would say: "Because of the continuinguncertainties, the Committee decided not to establish such a target atthis time, but would be prepared in appropriate circumstances toreestablish such a target range." Now it stops short; clearly, it'snot a target. I don't even really think of it quite as a monitoringrange. Nevertheless, we have a couple of numbers there in a contextof an economic scenario. And we're saying that, in that context,those numbers mean something. So I think of it as a combination of"I" and "II".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their thoughts and reasoning behind the numbers mentioned.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's all you would say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply implies that there is nothing else to add or say on the subject.


Passage number 309.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, we'd have all that otherstuff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that there is other stuff that would be present in addition to something else, but it does not indicate any opposing views or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All what other stuff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is incomplete and does not provide enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 311.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Some flavor of the language at thebottom of Don's current variant I. In other words, put in some ofthis language here that would deal with what we would do--meaningprobably nothing--if one of those assumptions were widely off themark. Clearly, if the exchange rate fell out of bed, signals would beoff. If the economy were very sluggish, signals would be off. I saidit would muddy the waters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the potential consequences if certain assumptions were not accurate.


Passage number 312.
MR. MORRIS. This assumes that we know what the normalrelationship of M1 to income is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
-33-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I have great doubts about that. Mr.Morris, we'll let you talk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses doubt about a statement and implies that they have reservations or disagreements with Mr. Morris, who will speak later.


Passage number 314.
MR. MORRIS. I think we still persist under the delusion thatthere is a normal relationship between M1 and nominal GNP that isgoing to reassert itself at some point. The mistake in this kind ofthinking is that this is a brand new aggregate. It's not like M1 was;interest is being paid on these deposits. And I think it's going tobe a number of years before we know what the normal relationship ofthis new aggregate is to nominal GNP. So I still think it just doesnot make sense to set a range, given this level of ignorance aboutthis new aggregate. I don't think we know any more about it now thanwe did last year and we had a miss of more than 7 percentage points.I think that's a testimony to the fact that this new aggregate, whichwe call M1, has behavioral characteristics that it's going to take usa long time to understand. To set any kind of a range for it for 1987would be a mistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the new aggregate M1 and the uncertainty surrounding its relationship to nominal GNP, suggesting that setting a range for it would be a mistake. There is no argument or disagreement presented in the passage.


Passage number 315.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In general, you like the kind of languagethat's in variant I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 316.
MR. MORRIS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "yes" is not indicative of contention or disagreement. It simply confirms the presence of something without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 317.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make the case for thisbecause, as I obviously indicated earlier, this is the way I'mleaning. I think we ought to take M1 seriously in a sense--in acertain economic context that isn't fully predictable--and we ought totell people that. We can't be very precise about the numbers. But Ithink it is saying something. We could say: If inflation is buildingup or the dollar is very weak we would expect M1 to be quite low andthat would be appropriate. In other circumstances, we would expect itto be quite high without getting worried about it. That is sayingsomething. We ought to try to say something about it and if muddiesthe waters--. It seems to me that to suggest some normality over avery wide range doesn't mean much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 318.
MR. JOHNSON. What you're basically saying is that ifvelocity starts to rise we need to pay attention to it. If it goesdown we don't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply summarizing what has been stated without expressing any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 319.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one way of putting it is that wewould expect velocity to rise under certain circumstances or we mighteven force it to rise, in a sense, and that would be entirelyappropriate. What we really want to say is: You shouldn't besurprised by a low M1 number; on the other hand, we wouldn't getconcerned in certain circumstances about it remaining high. I'm notsure what sticking a number in there that we don't know much aboutadds to that. We end up with a range so wide that it's meaningless.What we really want to say is that we think a low number would beappropriate under certain circumstances and we think a high numberwould be appropriate under other circumstances. But we've got todescribe the circumstances in which that would be true. It getscomplicated, and that's what makes writing the precise wordsdifficult. But I think that's the sense of what we ought to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and difficulty in finding the right words to convey their thoughts accurately. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 320.
MR. KEEHN. Would you go on in those circumstances to suggestthat if certain events transpired that, at a later date, we wouldthink about a range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Keehn.


Passage number 321.
-34-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we could say that moregenerally. It's hard to put it in the directive. I think we couldput in a sentence later on. I don't know what we would say because Ihave some sympathy for Mr. Morris' point that if it's going to be veryinterest-rate sensitive we're always going to be saying that it'sgoing to be high or low depending upon the trend in interest rates.And I'm not sure what that's saying. I guess the point we ought tomake is--we can't put this all in the directive but we could put it inthe other discussion--that we have a much more highly interest-sensitive aggregate here. And the message we ought to be emphasizingis that, depending upon circumstances, M1 might vary widely into theextended future based upon what we know now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 322.
MR. ANGELL. I think that's an excellent way of doing it. Itseems to me that in a reemergence of an inflationary environment inwhich interest rates were trending up the range should be as low asmaybe 2 to 6 percent. On the other hand, if deflationary forces wereto pick up speed again and we had this demand for financial assets itmight very well be that 8 to 13 percent would be right. Whatever thecase, I think it ought to be less than last year. But I like thesuggestion. I think it would be appropriate for us to suggest thatsince we've had a period in which M1's growth has been very, verystrong, we realize that there must be another period in which M1'sgrowth path is indeed going to be below what we would ordinarilyexpect it to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is discussing different scenarios and expressing his opinion on what would be appropriate in each scenario. However, he does not contradict or challenge any previous statement or argument.


Passage number 323.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is part of my concern. We may wellrun into such a period whether it is this year or not. But we're[not] going to want people jumping off wildly if M1 is very low for awhile because it might be entirely the reflex of what we've had in thepast and be entirely appropriate. On the other hand, I don't want togive Mr. Proxmire too many hostages--just to name one, that we thinkit's a disaster that it has been as high as it has been under theparticular circumstances that have prevailed to date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 324.
MR. ANGELL. If M1 growth were to be low and deflationaryforces were to pick up again and the dollar was not weak, that'sanother matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a hypothetical scenario and discussing the implications of different factors.


Passage number 325.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the way I see it. I just don't seethat you add much by putting in a figure which could be exceeded ineither direction from an already large range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage expresses the author's opinion and does not mention any conflicting viewpoints or disagreements. It simply discusses the potential addition of a figure to a range and states that the author doesn't see much value in it.


Passage number 326.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I hear this, I think thedifference between what you're saying and what I said is a fairlynarrow difference, because all I was trying to say is use a number toindicate where we thought M1 might be if everything were, in a sense,working right. In other words, if the economy were growing at areasonable rate and nothing was happening on inflation, exchangerates, or interest rates, this is a kind of central tendency where wethink M1 will come out. But if any one of those conditions is notpresent, M1 could come out way above or way below it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Rather, it is explaining the speaker's understanding and interpretation of a concept.


Passage number 327.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not arguing that the difference ishuge. This is an extreme example, but suppose we really thought thesituation was such that inflationary forces were picking up, theeconomy was at the high end of all the ranges of projected growth, andthe dollar was weak--we put in all these assumptions--and M1 really-35-2/10-11/87came out very low for a few months, anyway. I'm not sure I wantpeople hollering at me that we have a range that is 4 to 9 percent orsomething and the middle of that is 6-1/2 percent and M1 is onlycoming in at 4 percent and saying oh my heavens [policy is] way tootight. Because I'm not sure it would be way too tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and discussing a hypothetical situation. They are questioning whether a certain level of M1 would be considered "way too tight" in that scenario.


Passage number 328.
MR. ANGELL. But under some circumstances it might be way toohigh because if we come down the demand curve for money with interestrates falling, if interest rates were to rise it has to hold that ourgrowth path would have to be much, much less than we normally wouldhave thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 329.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think that's the problem--it wouldchange that interest rate differential even if we hadn't acted tochange short-term interest rates because of inflationary expectationsaffecting the long end; we could get a decline in the aggregates or aslowdown even if we hadn't tightened at all. And we might want totighten, and everybody would think that we had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing his personal opinion and analysis.


Passage number 330.
MR. ANGELL. Yes. Or, if we had not accommodated last yearand the discount rate were still at 7-1/2 percent, it seems to me thatwe would have had a macroeconomic result of a lower real GNP growthpath than we had and we still would have had dramatic declines invelocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario and discusses the potential macroeconomic result.


Passage number 331.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does somebody else want to add tothis. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement is simply asking if someone else wants to contribute or share additional information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 332.
MR. MELZER. Basically, I like this language or the conceptof it. I might just suggest an extension to what you've suggested.What you have suggested makes a lot of sense. In general, I have someproblem with the signaling effect of abandoning a narrow aggregatealtogether. As I said at the last meeting, I'm not sure that we havethe right one in M1 as it is now. Also, I'm not sure that we canreally pick another right one right now. I think we have to let thisunwinding of inflationary expectations that's been in process sort ofrun its course. I don't think any of us is confident that it has donethat, so I don't think it's a good time to pick another narrowaggregate. Roger Guffey commented before, and I agree with him, thatwhat we do with respect to M2 and M3 doesn't have much of a signalingeffect at all. I'm afraid that not setting any target at all for M1could potentially have a negative signaling effect. And as you'veobserved, Mr. Chairman, it could have a negative effect on Mr.Proxmire. I would suggest that we consider setting a target along thelines of what Don suggested based on what we know now. We could set atarget range for M1 of, say, 7 to 13 percent, but with languagesurrounding it indicating that we might miss that on the up side orthe down side. Now, when I thought about this, I was concerned aboutwhat the implications of that might be. But if we add to that thekind of language that's in variant I with respect to missing thatsubstantially on the down side--and also recognize that we've got toapproach this target flexibly and we ought to be prepared to changeit--I think that there's some advantage to having the target outthere. As I said, not having a narrower aggregate--which is what wecan really exert some control over based on our behavior and what wedo with reserves--could send a negative signal. What you'resuggesting could potentially be misread in the other direction aswell. The 7 to 13 percent range certainly puts out a clear message in-36-2/10-11/87the market that we expect the very rapid growth rates in money thathave occurred in the last two years to come down. We expect, andintend in a way, to commit ourselves under certain circumstances tobring those down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the idea of abandoning a narrow aggregate and suggests instead setting a target range for M1. The speaker also acknowledges potential negative signaling effects of not setting a target for M1.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Boy, 7 to 13 percent sounds to me--andthis is part of the problem--wildly high in terms of sending out amessage right now. It may not turn out to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is just expressing a personal opinion about the percentage being discussed.


Passage number 334.
MR. MORRIS. And the 7 percent could turn out to be much toohigh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a possibility that the 7 percent could be too high.


Passage number 335.
MR. MELZER. Oh, I understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing comprehension and understanding, indicating agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 336.
MR. ANGELL. But I thought Tom Melzer was saying that 2 to 6percent under certain circumstances might be the right range, but 7 to13 percent under other circumstances might show restraint compared towhat happened in 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating differing viewpoints expressed by different individuals.


Passage number 337.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Boehne or any statement made by him that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 338.
 Well, I think putting a number--MR. MORRIS. It doesn't sound very restrained to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their personal opinion and discussing their perspective on the topic.


Passage number 339.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is precisely the trouble. If we talkabout a range that high I don't know what we can say. We have aproblem with what we say if we use something like variant I. It couldbe misinterpreted; I have no doubt about that. A lot depends uponwhat we say. My own gut feeling is that, ideally, by putting it in amore realistic context we're putting more weight on M1 than by puttingout a target like 7 to 13 percent and saying it may go below it orabove it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It mainly expresses uncertainty and the author's personal opinion.


Passage number 340.
MR. MELZER. In a way, with inflationary expectations on therise right now, somehow I would like to see the message out there thatwe've noticed that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's desire to see a particular message being communicated.


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But 7 to 13 percent doesn't give thatmessage to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement does not express any form of disagreement or contention. It simply states a personal perception or interpretation of the given percentage, without opposing or contradicting any other viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 342.
MR. JOHNSON. I think something like variant I in combinationwith ratcheting down M2 and M3 at least gives that signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a statement or opinion expressed by Mr. Johnson.


Passage number 343.
MR. BOEHNE. I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, explicitly states that they agree with the previous statement.


Passage number 344.
MR. JOHNSON. It conveys that message.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Mr. Johnson conveying a message without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 345.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I agree with that. I think putting anumber in gets in the way of what you're trying to explain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne agrees with the viewpoint mentioned and further explains his agreement.


Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's my point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided phrase "That's my point" does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 347.
MR. BOEHNE. People are going to have to think a bit aboutthe implications of what is in variant I. If we put a number in therepeople are going to look at the number and forget about what we'rereally trying to say. That's why I like variant I without a number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Boehne is simply expressing his preference for variant I without a number and explaining his reasoning behind it.


Passage number 348.
-37-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have expressed my gut feeling. Ithink that we send a better substantive message without a number--andwe don't know what the number means anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 349.
MR. MELZER. Okay, if you accept that part, how do you getaway from the fact that we're walking away from a narrow aggregatetarget at all. It's not that M1 is the right one, but how do we getback into that ball game down the road.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question about how to achieve a specific goal, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 350.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't interpret it that way.Given all the difficulties of explaining this, that is not my feeling.Unfortunately, the fact of the matter is that we are in a situationwhere we can't interpret M1 in terms of anything like an appropriategrowth rate. So we're going to be very vague anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the speaker's viewpoint and acknowledging the difficulties in interpreting a certain situation.


Passage number 351.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage "MR. JOHNSON" as it is only a name without any context or information provided.


Passage number 352.
 If it's as interest sensitive as it appears tobe--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't evaluate M1 without takingaccount of what's going on elsewhere, and that's what we ought to betelling people. We want to take it into account but only in thecontext of specific economic circumstances. And that's what we oughtto be trying to tell them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is focused on the need to consider external factors when evaluating M1 and the importance of communicating this information accurately.


Passage number 353.
MR. ANGELL. Tom, doesn't that say more precisely that if wereturn to a period of inflation actually being there--and with thebehavior in regard to preferences for financial assets waning--that wewould then expect to come in with some rather conservative numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Angell.


Passage number 354.
MR. MELZER. Yes. As long as abandoning the concept ofsetting a target does not take away the fact that we think it'simportant to pay attention to what M1 does and that it has to beevaluated under certain circumstances, that's fine. As a matter offact, on that point I asked our people to look at what would happen ifvelocity went back to what it was--roughly a level of 7 at thebeginning of 1982--over a two-year period. If that were to happen,based on the liquidity that's in there, we could have roughly 5percent nominal GNP growth each year without adding any more money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea of abandoning the concept of setting a target but still believes it is important to pay attention to M1 and evaluate it under certain circumstances. The speaker also mentions asking their people to look into a specific scenario, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 355.
MR. ANGELL. That's right. Zero would be appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the statement that zero would be appropriate.


Passage number 356.
MR. MELZER. I'm very sensitive to the problem on the downside. I just also am very concerned about the signaling effect--making sure that the message out there is that we can't set a rangebut we're paying close attention to this narrow aggregate in thecontext of what's going on more broadly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Melzer, is expressing both his concern about the downside of a problem and his determination to closely monitor and understand the broader context of the issue.


Passage number 357.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 358.
 If M1 is really symmetric, interest-sensitivewise, we could be sitting around trying to ignore 2 percent M1growth--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is providing a hypothetical scenario with a condition (if M1 is really symmetric, interest-sensitivewise).


Passage number 359.
MR. JOHNSON. --when the economy was growing, just like we'retrying to ignore 15 percent now when the economy is sluggish. I thinkthat lends some weight to what Bob Black has been talking about--moreof a price rule. I'm not sure how you do that either, but in a period-38-2/10-11/87like this it seems to me that we have to be more sensitive to somesort of price signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging the possibility that Bob Black's argument about implementing a price rule may have some merit, but admits uncertainty about how to implement it. There is no direct disagreement or conflicting viewpoint expressed.


Passage number 360.
MR. ANGELL. It also supports what President Morris has beensaying, and I think he's right: that we haven't seen all of thereshuffling that will take place under the deregulated environmentthat we're in. But at some point in time, those savings accounts aregoing to get reshuffled with the transactions account to the extentthat they're going to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell is agreeing with President Morris and stating that further reshuffling will occur under the deregulated environment.


Passage number 361.
 And I think that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's quite specific. What I thinkwe ought to be able to say when we are attacked [and accused of] beingwildly expansionary now and building up inflationary pressures and allthe rest, is: Look, [we will act] if we see evidence that that's true,which we haven't seen heretofore with the weights, trends, and a lotof other things. But we recognize all those dangers. We agree withyou that we couldn't keep feeding out M1 like this and we ought to beprepared, and you ought to be prepared, to see M1 level off ratherabruptly under those circumstances. We contemplate that under thatparticular set of circumstances. On the other hand, if there are noinflationary pressures, and the economy is weak, and we haven't gotany particular dollar problem, and we have not seen the dangers ofthis kind, and M2 and M3 are behaving all right, then we don't thinkyour criticism that we're unduly easy is valid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their views and explaining their perspective without contradicting or arguing against anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 362.
MR. ANGELL. Would you want that check list to be in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any words or phrases that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 363.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I think we have to be quite carefulabout how we put it in there--that's why I have some quibbles aboutthis language here--but that's what I want to convey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 364.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, it seems to me that we do need to draftthat [unintelligible] because we need to indicate what might occur inthat check list that would bring back these M1 targets in a meaningfulway. The market has to expect that, if those things occur, we willact. Of course, if the market believes this and those things start tooccur, then we're going to have a market forced interest-rate responsebased upon that expectation, and we will have achieved our objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 365.
MR. MORRIS. I think a 7 to 13 percent range would be tellingthe market that we don't intend to push interest rates up this year nomatter what happens, because as soon as there is a little rise ininterest rates the growth of M1 has got to swing pretty rapidly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, is expressing his opinion on the range of interest rates and its potential impact on the market. There is no opposing view presented in the passage.


Passage number 366.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think this variant I as you'vesuggested is really the one that we ought to use for the reasons thatyou indicated. I was inclined to be sympathetic to Jerry Corrigan,but you made some pretty tough points on that. At the same time, Ithink Tom Melzer has a point, too. In a period when the risk ofinflation seems to be increasing and the risks of [rising]inflationary expectations also are increasing, there could be concernabout the dropping of M1 [as a target]. That's the reason, really,that we put forth that idea of putting an inflation target in there toreassure the public that we had not lost our determination to dealwith inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges different perspectives and considers different points, but ultimately agrees with the suggestion and reasoning given by the Chairman.


Passage number 367.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a lot depends upon the language thatwe use in the testimony and so forth. I would see at least as much-39-2/10-11/87danger there. It will be delicate to write it. I could easily writethis in a way that locked us in more than we might want to be lockedin to a lowering of M1 if we saw any sign of increasing inflationarypressures. I don't want us to be locked in too much either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their concern about the language used in the testimony and the potential risk of being locked into a certain course of action regarding the lowering of M1. They mention the need for delicacy and avoiding being locked in too much, indicating a cautious and balanced approach rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 368.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I think we should create that expectation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Angell, expresses his opinion stating that creating an expectation is necessary.


Passage number 369.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think people have to be warned. Myprincipal concern is that we should warn them that under thosecircumstances, which may or may not eventually occur, we expect apretty low Ml.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not mention any opposing views or conflicting opinions. It simply states the speaker's belief and concern about warning people.


Passage number 370.
MR. ANGELL. And I think a continued depreciation of thedollar should be included among those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell is expressing his opinion that a continued depreciation of the dollar should be considered as one of the factors.


Passage number 371.
MR. MELZER. The question is the difference betweenexpectations and actions, too. It may go beyond just expecting it; wemight be prepared to take steps to achieve it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It discusses the difference between expectations and actions, suggesting that one might be willing to take steps to achieve their expectations.


Passage number 372.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "sure" denotes agreement or certainty, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 373.
MR. MELZER. That is the desirable aspect of a narrowaggregate [target] because we can affect its behavior.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is presenting a viewpoint or belief without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 374.
MR. PARRY. If it's written with that warning, the fact thatwe dropped a specific range won't be interpreted as meaning that we'redropping M1 as something of significance or potential significance inthe future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that if a certain warning is included in a written document, the dropping of a specific range will not be misunderstood as a sign of dropping M1 as significant or potentially significant in the future.


Passage number 375.
MR. ANGELL. And it avoids this problem of where we wouldstart off the year if we used any M1 range. Where we would start offthe year when we're so far behind in the cone. We'd have that problemto look at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement apparent in this passage. Mr. Angell is simply discussing a problem and the potential difficulties associated with it.


Passage number 376.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I visualize, in just describing policy asthe year progresses, that if we put in some range, we'd be stumblingall over ourselves to say there's a range but it doesn't mean anythingunder certain circumstances. I don't think that does us any good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is expressing the speaker's belief or opinion about the usefulness of describing policy in a certain way.


Passage number 377.
MR. ANGELL. What we'd be saying, I presume, is that at afuture FOMC meeting we might announce a short-term target range forM1. It might be the case that that would even be announced prior tothe next FOMC meeting, in some circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I don't think that would exclude thatat all. I haven't thought about that, but I think that's right--thatin particular circumstances as the year progresses we might want tostick in an M1 target. And I think we can even say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement and support for the idea mentioned by someone else.


Passage number 379.
MR. MELZER. Well, that goes a long way in addressing myconcern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Melzer is expressing that the previous statement has helped alleviate his concern.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply refers to someone without any indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 381.
 I'm not saying that I can't anticipate thesituation in which we would do that, but--MR. MELZER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any clear disagreement or contention. It simply states that the speaker is not ruling out the possibility of doing something in a certain situation.


Passage number 382.
-40-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I think we can certainly say that incertain circumstances we might, in the short run, name a target forM1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is about naming a target for M1 under certain circumstances.


Passage number 383.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To put this in a slightly differentcontext: If you took the sentence in variant I that people arefocusing on and the Committee decided not to establish a range--not atarget, not a monitoring range, nothing--it's as though we're puttingM1 lower on the ladder than debt. That's the danger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting a hypothetical scenario and expressing a potential danger or concern.


Passage number 384.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Operationally, I don't think it has to beinterpreted that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion or perspective on a certain matter.


Passage number 385.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agree with that, but that's thedanger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with something said previously.


Passage number 386.
MR. ANGELL. But the language should be changed. Thelanguage should be changed to say that and [to indicate] thecircumstances under which M1 will be established rather than thatwe're not establishing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell is suggesting a language change for clarity, but there is no opposition or conflict present.


Passage number 387.
MR. STERN. Well, if we have a full paragraph devoted to M1,I doubt that people will view that as downplaying the significancefrom where it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing doubt about the perception of downplaying the significance of M1.


Passage number 388.
MR. FORRESTAL. I think we need to be clear in thisdiscussion that we're not really abandoning M1. I don't interpretthis language as doing that. In fact, quite the contrary. This doesindicate that there will be continuing observation and surveillance ofM1. And I would think that, as the Chairman has indicated, the marketwould respond favorably to this because I think basically now they'rejust ignoring M1 completely. In this variant I, no matter how wechange the language, the thrust of the language is important to getout to the market. I think that this really is just going to be aconfirmation of past events and that they'll respond favorably. Idon't interpret this at all as being an abandonment completely of M1nor do I think, if the language is done correctly, that it puts M1lower than the debt aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, is expressing his interpretation and perspective about the language and its impact on the market response. He believes that the language does not imply an abandonment of M1 and that the market will respond favorably to the clarification.


Passage number 389.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I like variant I with maybe a provisothat we might bring M1 back on an intermediate-term basis if we needit and if conditions arose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson expresses his preference for variant I but also suggests the possibility of bringing back M1 if needed, indicating a flexibility in his stance.


Passage number 390.
MR. GUFFEY. I have a little problem with the thought that wewould, at a particular meeting, resurrect M1 for some limited periodof time or forevermore. I don't think we know enough about it to dothat unless we got into a real bind in which we needed to call upon M1in order to move interest rates to 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and raising a concern about resurrecting M1 without sufficient knowledge. There is no indication of any disagreement or confrontation in the passage.


Passage number 391.
 I wouldn't want touse--MR. JOHNSON. I don't think it's very likely that we would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion and Mr. Johnson expresses his own thoughts without contradicting the previous statement.


Passage number 392.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we're going to move to 20percent, but I can visualize a circumstance--suppose M1 were risingrapidly and some of these were moderating at a time when we wereincreasingly worried about inflation and saw some signs of the economydoing pretty well and, say, we wanted to tighten up. In that contextI could well see a change in the particular arrangement we're doing.-41-2/10-11/87In the Committee's operating directive presumably we'd say we'reputting more pressure on reserve positions and the Committee islooking toward a slowdown in the rate of growth of M1. I can quitesee that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a hypothetical scenario and presenting their own opinion and visualization. There is no conflicting viewpoint or disagreement with another person.


Passage number 393.
MR. GUFFEY. That's a bit different than establishing atarget for an intermediate period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a difference between two things.


Passage number 394.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we might want to say the Committeeis looking toward a slowdown to no more than [unintelligible], if wefelt strongly enough in a particular circumstance. There's somevariance between putting in 7 percent or 5 percent or something andsaying we're looking for a clear slowdown. And all those [options]are open to us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing different options and possibilities without expressing conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 395.
MR. JOHNSON. What would you say if the long end of the bondmarket had been deteriorating because of building inflationaryexpectations from a decline in the dollar or something like that andM1 was already decelerating quite rapidly because of the change in theinterest rate spread. I don't know what you should say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is simply presenting a hypothetical scenario and expressing uncertainty about what the response should be.


Passage number 396.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We welcome the slowdown in M1 under thecircumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses a positive acceptance or approval of the slowdown in M1 under the given circumstances.


Passage number 397.
MR. JOHNSON. But we may want to tighten under thosecircumstances and yet M1 is decelerating sharply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement suggests that there may be a need to tighten under certain circumstances, but it also acknowledges that M1 is decelerating sharply. It is merely presenting different factors or possibilities without any clear conflict.


Passage number 398.
MR. ANGELL. But under those circumstances M1 is going toslow down later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It is a statement made by Mr. Angell explaining that M1 will slow down later.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 399.
 Bond buyers are not going to be very pleased by thatcircumstance and rush into long bonds until they think the recessionis tightly--MR. JOHNSON. We might see a rush out of liquid balances--ifthere's an interest sensitivity there--into CDs fairly quickly; Idon't know. When that change in interest rate spreads develops andall of a sudden M1 starts falling quite sharply, that would have anexpectational effect on the long end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The first statement suggests that bond buyers will not be pleased with the given circumstance and rush into long bonds. However, Mr. Johnson's response expresses uncertainty and suggests an alternate possibility of a rush out of liquid balances into CDs. This difference in perspectives shows disagreement or contention.


Passage number 400.
MR. ANGELL. I always wished that the bond buyers wouldbehave that way, Manley, but I never found that they did. Onceinterest rates start up on the short end bond buyers get scared thatit's going to continue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing a personal wish and observation about the behavior of bond buyers when interest rates start to rise.


Passage number 401.
 So it takes a while before that response--MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's their response to a tighteningmove. I think that you can see bond buyers move on inflationarysignals without moving the short rates at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. It simply presents a statement and an opinion without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 402.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does somebody else want to add to thisdiscussion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question inviting others to contribute their thoughts to the ongoing discussion.


Passage number 403.
MR. HELLER. I think the bottom line still is that we have noidea what the demand for money function looks like.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This statement is an expression of uncertainty or lack of knowledge about the demand for money function.


Passage number 404.
 And to put in aquantitative target--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're overstating it a bit. Inprecise terms, I agree with you. But I think we do have a sense thatit's very interest sensitive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the general idea but suggests that the statement may be slightly exaggerated.


Passage number 405.
-42-2/10-11/87MR. HELLER. Yes, but there are a lot more factors in it too.There's the whole deregulation angle still in it. And, as Mr. Morrissaid earlier, that makes it very difficult to do. The one trouble Ihave with the different economic scenarios in defining the alternativegrowth path is that if you mention the dollar--if the dollar should godown or if the dollar should do this--you're hooking yourself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement and adding additional factors to consider.


Passage number 406.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is there are too many "ifs".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there are too many "ifs," which implies uncertainty or possibility, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 407.
I agree, but I think all we can do is give some sense--MR. HELLER. But what are you going to do if some senatorthen says: Well, what do you expect the dollar to do. And what willyou do if the dollar goes down by 10 percent. And then what if itshould do this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an agreement followed by a consideration of potential scenarios.


Passage number 408.
 That's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to have at least threevariables and, fortunately, they're not all likely to be moving in thesame direction. We have growth, inflation and inflation expectations,and the dollar. And it leaves us open to all kinds of questions. Ifgrowth is weak but inflation is strong and the dollar is mixed, whatdo you do. Those questions are just unanswerable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It merely presents a scenario and mentions the uncertainty of how to respond to certain economic factors.


Passage number 409.
MR. HELLER. I trust you can dress it up well in thetestimony. But I think one of the things we really should do isredouble our efforts to study M1 and the proper definition of M1 sothat we will be able to sort out some of those behavior patterns.Maybe we'll be able to do that in a better way than we're able to doit right now. In any case, I would avoid setting a figure for M1growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller expresses his belief that efforts should be made to study M1 and its definition in order to better understand and analyze behavior patterns. He also suggests avoiding setting a figure for M1 growth, indicating a cautious approach rather than disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 410.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say if we don't set a figure,presumably we will say, in some words, that we're not going toestablish a range for the year as a whole at this time--which is whatthis says. Probably some general language that we expect it to belower this year than last year is appropriate. And then we give someclear flavor about the conditions in which we would expect it to beeither high or low without being definitive about it. Those are theessentials we want to get in this paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation or clarification of what they would include in a paragraph.


Passage number 411.
MR. MELZER. And the idea that it might be or could betargeted [later].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Melzer is simply presenting an idea that something could be targeted later.


Passage number 412.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And at a particular time during the year,the implication is that we may specify a target. Those four thoughtssomehow we should get in the paragraph. I know that's pretty vague.We'll come back with [specific] language; I think it needs a littlemassaging. Is that acceptable, generally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is proposing a plan and seeking agreement or acceptance from the other person.


Passage number 413.
MR. GUFFEY. I assume also that this M1 performance would beevaluated in view of the other aggregates that we have set targetsfor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is assuming that the M1 performance will be evaluated in view of the other aggregates that have been set targets for.


Passage number 414.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that point would be made. Thecontext in which rapid or slow growth would be appropriate woulddepend upon the other aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply affirming that a certain point would be made, and then explaining that the appropriateness of rapid or slow growth would depend on other factors.


Passage number 415.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me see. I think I've got fivepoints. You have four, you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply includes a statement about the speaker having five points and the other person having four points.


Passage number 416.
-43-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can get but so many in the paragraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage consists of a mathematical expression (-43 - 2/10 - 11/87) and does not include any statements or arguments that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 417.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, no I think I've got it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker confidently states that they understand something without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 418.
 You'resaying: first, there's no target as such; second, there is some broadexpectation that M1 will be slower this year than last year; third,you loosely specify some conditions under which it could be very highand loosely specify conditions under which it could be very low; andthen--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say "should be." That's one ofmy language changes here: not just passively "could" but "should.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply summarizing the points being made.


Passage number 419.
"VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Then you have some language thatwould suggest there are also conditions in which we would react to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply explains that there might be certain conditions that would lead to a reaction.


Passage number 420.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes, I think that's clearly the case.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates agreement by using the phrase "Oh yes" to express certainty about the statement being discussed.


Passage number 421.
MR. JOHNSON. That's if the "should" doesn't come about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement from Mr. Johnson. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 422.
MR. PARRY. Just a point of clarification. The way it hasbeen discussed it's almost as though we're not talking about anoperational target but we're talking rather about predicting M1 on thebasis of the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply discussing a point of clarification regarding the discussion topic. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 423.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has that flavor. But, as I seeit, it's more operational than setting out a target that we don't knowwhether we should exceed or undershoot. In my view, I am trying tomake it operational.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It appears to be a statement expressing the speaker's perspective on the topic being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 424.
MR. PARRY. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Parry's agreement can be inferred from the fact that he responds affirmatively to whatever was stated before his response.


Passage number 425.
MR. JOHNSON. If the "should" provisos are violated, it wouldmake it operational.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply presenting a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 426.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. As I see it, we face justthe mere fact of complexity here. Now we look upon M1 differentlydepending upon what's happening. That's what we have to try todescribe. And it is operational; it's not operational in a 2 percentrange or something because we don't know that much about it. Butwe're pretty clear that we want it low under certain conditions orhigh under certain other conditions. If there are no violentobjections to that, why don't we move on. We have to try and writethis in a way that's precisely acceptable. But if we assume that thatis the framework in which we will modify or fool around with thislanguage a bit, we'll try to fool around with it. That's better thansitting around the table doing it, in my opinion. Somebody's got tobe a draftsman, namely me. I'll try to get something typed up and youcan look at it after the break. But why don't we pass on. I willassume that the M2 and M3 targets are going to be those in alternativeII with the surrounding language saying that we think these arereasonable targets and the midpoints are appropriate. I think thattemporarily closes the long-term ranges to which we will return.Let's turn to the short-term ranges. Mr. Kohn, do you have somethingto say about the short term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of one individual expressing their thoughts and plans.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 427.
MR. KOHN. A little, sir. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Kohn expresses a disagreement by saying "A little, sir."


Passage number 428.
]-44-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will only comment that when I look atthis, we are now in the middle of February and so little of whathappens between November and March depends upon what we do now. Thatraises a little question in my mind about whether it's appropriate andwhether it's conveying much information to stress these objectives interms of a November-to-March period that included all this veryexceptional stuff at year-end. Maybe we want to say something aboutM1, at least in terms of its direction, given that enormous bulge overthe year-end. With the completely neutral statement that we have inthe directive now, in line with the conversation we just had, I don'tthink we can be very precise. I don't know; it would be totallyunconventional, but maybe this is the time we want to have a forward-looking range for M2 and M3 rather than one that encompasses almost 2-1/2 or 3 months of history and only a month and a half that is forwardlooking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and questioning the appropriateness of certain objectives and statements, but there is no contradiction or argument present.


Passage number 429.
MR. ANGELL. It might be better to say January to March thanit would to say November to March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply suggests a different alternative for a time period without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 430.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" simply identifies a person, without expressing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 431.
 Or else even make it--MR. MORRIS. Go to April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple instruction or suggestion.


Passage number 432.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage being provided, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 433.
MR. JOHNSON. Go into the second quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply involves a person named Mr. Johnson being instructed to go into the second quarter, without any conflicting opinions or opposing views presented.


Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could almost put it as the second-quarter objective or February to June or something. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is unsure about precisely how to express something and is simply brainstorming different possibilities.


Passage number 435.
MR. BLACK. That has a lot of appeal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This sentence does not express any form of disagreement or contention. It simply states that the idea or statement being referred to has a significant appeal.


Passage number 436.
MR. HELLER. We could just set one for the first half of theyear, January to June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a suggestion being made by Mr. Heller.


Passage number 437.
 Set the whole thing--MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to be that there's a lot that wedon't know. I hate to look that far ahead. It seems to me that we'regoing to know more about what we would want it to be in June when weget to March than we do now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and hesitation about the future, stating that they do not have enough information at the moment and that their understanding may change in the future.


Passage number 438.
MR. JOHNSON. I think we'll be looking at the second half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, is simply stating their perspective or opinion without contradicting or opposing anyone else.


Passage number 439.
MR. HELLER. [March is] only two or three more weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any conflicting opinions or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the number of weeks until March.


Passage number 440.
MR. BOEHNE. I agree with Wayne on that. We just set ourlong-run targets. And the purpose of these meetings twice a quarteris to set policy for the next six weeks, really. I think that's whatwe ought to do: set policy for the next six weeks rather than try toset it for the first half of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Boehne agrees with Wayne and suggests setting policy for the next six weeks rather than trying to set it for the first half of the year. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 441.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or content provided. The given information "MR. ANGELL" does not provide any clues or information to make a judgment.


Passage number 442.
 We can call it January to April, which would beunder the control of this--MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests naming a time period "January to April" and placing it under the control of someone named Mr. Johnson.


Passage number 443.
 But with April--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know; the thought just occurred tome. But, is it so bad saying the first half of the year. Obviously,-45-2/10-11/87we can review that again, but right now that's what we're saying isconsistent with our stated objectives for the year as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the possibility of stating the first half of the year as consistent with their objectives.


Passage number 444.
MR. ANGELL. I hate to get us in the position of having toback off or of having to change that. What we were saying previouslywould indicate that conditions might be such that what we say nowwould need some adjustments. So, I'd rather not stretch the timeperiod out and then have to alter it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing a desire to avoid making adjustments or changes to their previous statements if conditions were to indicate the need for it.


Passage number 445.
 In the past we've found thatonce we set it and then needed to alter it that that createdexpectations--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I've been sitting on the side ofbeing against altering it in the past from a quarterly period,although we do that now infrequently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges a past practice of setting something and then needing to alter it, which created expectations. They also mention their previous stance against altering it on a quarterly basis, although they now do it infrequently. However, there is no clear disagreement or argument stated in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 446.
 We would do it this time ifwe--MR. BLACK. If we did it for the first half of the year wouldwe use December to June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests doing something for the first half of the year, but Mr. Black interrupts and questions if they would use the months of December to June for this activity. This interruption and query indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 447.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, no. We could do it from January toApril but that's unorthodox, too, in getting in the middle of aquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing that doing something from January to April is also unorthodox.


Passage number 448.
MR. ANGELL. I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It merely mentions that someone named Mr. Angell is known without delving into any conflicting opinions or disputes.


Passage number 449.
MR. BLACK. I think it would be best to use January for thebase because that's really the latest date.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about using January as the base date, without any opposition or argument from another party.


Passage number 450.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's kind of unorthodox, but in some waysit makes more sense than using November as a base in this particularcase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that using a different base than November may make more sense in a specific situation.


Passage number 451.
MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only contains a name "Mr. Heller" without any additional information or context.


Passage number 452.
 If you take the end of December as a base thenyou have a good chance that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me approach it differently. Let'sdiscuss what we actually want to do in terms of reserve pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a different approach to discussing reserve pressures but does not express any disagreement or contention with the previous statement about taking the end of December as a base.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 453.
MR. JOHNSON. I don't know, given what's been happening withthe dollar and the stronger data we've had--although I think there's alot of year-end influence on those data, and we don't have a clearpicture yet. But I think, as Ed Boehne and some other peoplementioned yesterday, there are some expectational effects out therethat are starting to develop from a lot of this move in the dollar andsome of the things that have been going on in the internationalsector. So, I don't know. I'm not for any major changes but I am forgoing back to tilting our nuances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, expresses uncertainty about the situation with the dollar and the data, suggesting that there may be year-end influence on the data and that a clear picture has not yet emerged. However, he acknowledges that there are expectational effects developing from the movement of the dollar and international sector. He ends by stating that he is not in favor of major changes but supports going back to tilting their nuances. The mention of different perspectives from Ed Boehne and others also suggests the presence of disagreement or differing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 454.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the following passage. The statement "The other way" implies that there is another way or alternative perspective, which suggests a disagreement or difference of opinion from the previous statement or context.


Passage number 455.
MR. JOHNSON. Keeping a $300 million borrowing target butshifting the nuance back to asymmetrical language toward the tighterside.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating that the person named Mr. Johnson wants to maintain a $300 million borrowing target but adjust the language to emphasize a tighter approach.


Passage number 456.
MR. BLACK. That's exactly the way I'd come out, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 457.
MR. BOEHNE. I agree with that, too. I think that's justright.-46-2/10-11/87SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Both Mr. Boehne and the speaker agree with each other's statements, indicating a lack of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 458.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe we don't have to go around thetable. Is that the [consensus].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not expressing disagreement or contention. The speaker is suggesting an alternative solution or idea.


Passage number 459.
MR. ANGELL. That's good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states "That's good," indicating that Mr. Angell is expressing approval or agreement, rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 460.
MR. HELLER. That sounds good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller expresses that something sounds good, indicating agreement or approval.


Passage number 461.
MR. MELZER. I'd like to make some comments. I came insomewhat predisposed to leaning toward a greater degree of reserverestraint. But I really wanted to hear the discussion; it has been along time since we've gotten together. And I was really struck by thediscussion yesterday [unintelligible] really the whole time I've beensitting in. I would characterize people's general feeling on the realside as one in which the risks, if anything, are that the staff'sprojections might be a little low. But I wouldn't put too much weighton that or necessarily too much weight on the December economicnumbers. What struck me more was the broad expression of concern,made in a number of different ways, about inflation and inflationaryexpectations. There are some things that trouble me right now andthere are some things down the road that I think could put us in adifficult position, possibly. The things that trouble me now are theextraordinary growth of money, reserves, bank credit, etc. over athree-month period--November, December, and January. Some of it haswashed out but, still, over a three-month period it's quiteextraordinary. We all know about the year-end factors, but I justhave this feeling that there may be something more afoot than that.As I said yesterday, even some of those special year-end factors havethe effect of liquefying unrealized profits. And that money is inthere; that's grandfathered.The other thing that has been troubling me right along, as Ihave been saying, is that I'd be concerned about continued rapidgrowth in M1 against a backdrop of stable to rising rates. We stillcould have some lagged effects from earlier declines in rates, butbasically we have been pouring in reserves at an extraordinary rate totry to hold funds somewhere around 6 percent, although some marketobservers have interpreted it differently. Now, that really begins tobother me in the context of these other things. There are somepressures building up, and as Jerry Corrigan pointed out, we're reallypumping in reserves at an extraordinary rate to try to hold the line.Again, that's a straw in the wind that troubles me. I don't think Ineed to comment about the dollar, and we've talked about the buildupin liquidity before. As I look down the road, what bothers me is thebox we could be in--really, as early as later in the first quarter.The staff's projection on the CPI is 4.6 percent; it wouldn't takemuch of a miss on the upside for us to be looking at a 5 percent CPIin the first quarter. Secondly, I really think that this yearCongress will not be able to come up with anything close to crediblein terms of that $108 to $118 billion Gramm-Rudmann-Hollings deficittarget. Now, maybe this would come a little later than these CPInumbers, but I think we very likely could see--even though theprogress on deficits might be in the right direction--a need to walkaway explicitly from the Gramm-Rudmann-Hollings legislation and thegeneral concepts and guidelines there. And that, too, I think couldhave a negative psychological effect. So, basically as I look atthese straws in the wind now and then look at the position we could be-47-2/10-11/87in down the road--and I don't think we're ever absolutely sure attimes when we have to move--what I say to myself is that if we don'tstart to lean against this now we very likely could be in a positionwhere we're going to have to do a lot more down the road if we losecontrol of these inflationary expectations.One final comment I would have is that if we were to havetightened policy last summer and last fall there would have been adramatic impact, in my judgment, on short-term rates--markets werediscounting the possibility of further ease. I think all of that hasbeen washed out now. The three-month bill is trading essentially evenwith the funds rate on a yield basis, whereas I suspect that at pointsin time it might have been 50-60 basis points below the funds rate.Would that be about right, Don.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns.


Passage number 462.
MR. KOHN. I think it's still a bit below where funds havebeen most recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply expresses an opinion and does not involve any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 463.
MR. MELZER. Okay. But it's around 6 percent now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact regarding the current rate of something.


Passage number 464.
MR. KOHN. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms that the statement is correct.


Passage number 465.
MR. MELZER. It might have been trading substantially belowthe funds rate in the summer and fall--maybe 50 basis points. So, alittle snugging on our part now, in my judgment, is not going to havea major adverse impact on short-term rates. It could have a salutaryeffect on long-term rates, although we haven't really seen the samekind of negative signals in the long-market to the extent that we didearlier in the year, at least in terms of the yield curve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. Mr. Melzer is discussing the potential impact of tightening monetary policy and expresses his opinion that a small tightening would not have a major adverse effect on short-term rates and could have a positive impact on long-term rates. He also mentions that there haven't been significant negative signals in the long-market as earlier in the year.


Passage number 466.
MR. JOHNSON. I think, Tom, that because of this supposedshift in the borrowing function--which may be permanent from what weknow--we've added to reserve pressures and done some snugging withoutchanging our borrowing target. We've seen Treasury bills edge uptoward the higher funds rate. We've actually achieved that, I think,without having to change our borrowing target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement that gives an explanation of a situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 467.
MR. MELZER. Well, I don't think we have achieved that,really. I think what has happened is that we are pouring in atremendous amount of reserves to try to avoid it, and the market issending us a signal. To the extent that we keep trying to do that, Ithink we are really going to create some problems in the longer-termmarket.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker states that they do not believe they have achieved something, and that their actions may create problems in the long term. This suggests a disagreement or contention with the current approach.


Passage number 468.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to be clear. You started outby saying that you came into the meeting thinking maybe we ought totighten up a little; it sounds to me like you are ending up there,too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 469.
MR. ANGELL. Sounds like alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the speaker is suggesting that the option being discussed (alternative C) may have some negative aspects or challenges that they are implying should be considered.


Passage number 470.
MR. MELZER. I am for alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about the possibility of contention or disagreement. It simply states the author's preference for alternative C without presenting any opposing views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 471.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The difference, I suspect, between whatyou say, which is very eloquent, and what others have said, byimplication, is that right at this moment in time the short-runbusiness situation is not all that clear. It could turn south on usand [some feel that] we better wait a little while before-48-2/10-11/87[tightening]. You are quite persuasive; but it's a question of movingnow or waiting for some more confirmation of the business situationover the next few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention. The passage indicates that there is disagreement about whether to take action now or wait for more confirmation of the business situation. Some feel that waiting is necessary while others are convinced that action should be taken immediately.


Passage number 472.
MR. ANGELL. There is a scenario that could develop in thenext month that I would feel exactly like you do, Tom, but I wouldhate to think about releasing the minutes six weeks from now with thatscenario in there after it didn't develop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing agreement with Tom's viewpoint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 473.
 I would rather havealternative B, as Manley specified, but with an understanding that oursymmetric language would cause us--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Our asymmetric language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there is a disagreement or contention about the use of symmetric language and its impact on the situation.


Passage number 474.
MR. JOHNSON. Asymmetric language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Johnson using asymmetric language, but it does not mention any contention or disagreement related to it.


Passage number 475.
MR. ANGELL. --asymmetric language, which would give us alittle flexibility over the six weeks if that were to turn out to bethe real scenario.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It mentions the possibility of asymmetric language providing flexibility over a six-week period, but there is no conflict or dispute about this idea.


Passage number 476.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes. I was one of the ones who brought upinflation yesterday, but I am not yet ready to stand up and say let'stighten. I like the idea of preparing ourselves to tighten and havingasymmetrical language, but I think we ought to be cautious about the[unintelligible] at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne expresses some caution and hesitation regarding tightening, but he does not directly disagree with anyone or engage in a disagreement.


Passage number 477.
MS. SEGER. Remember a few months ago, though, we voted notto change policy but then when the minutes were released withasymmetrical language everybody jumped to the conclusion that we had.So I think we have to be sensitive about what we say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. SEGER is simply stating a fact and expressing the need for sensitivity in their language.


Passage number 478.
MR. BOEHNE. But in this context, I think that asymmetricallanguage would send a very healthy signal, because I think we have toconvey to the markets that, yes, we are prepared to tighten in theright circumstances. And we ought to be clear about that message.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is emphasizing the importance of using asymmetric language to send a clear message to the markets about their willingness to tighten in the appropriate circumstances.


Passage number 479.
MR. HELLER. One thing we might want to keep in mind also isthat our last directive was asymmetric in the other direction andthat's what will be released.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about a previous directive.


Passage number 480.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure that is going to make a lotof difference because in this particular instance I will betestifying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a personal uncertainty about the potential impact of testifying in a specific instance. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 481.
MR. BLACK. That's another factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It appears to be a statement or comment made by Mr. Black, without any opposing viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 482.
MR. HELLER. In the testimony, do you release the language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a question asked by Mr. Heller about the testimony.


Passage number 483.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. But de facto I do, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The explanation provided does not explicitly mention contention or disagreement. However, the statement "No. But de facto I do, yes" suggests that there might be some internal conflict or contradiction. Without further context, it is difficult to determine the exact nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 484.
MR. HELLER. Okay. And the minutes from the last meeting aregoing to be released when.SPEAKER(.). This Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of information about when the minutes from the last meeting will be released.


Passage number 485.
MR. HELLER. Friday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It only states "MR. HELLER. Friday" which does not show any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 486.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, there may be a little confusionbecause they are being released on Friday and I don't testify until-49-2/10-11/87next Thursday. I don't think that's bad if, in fact, we decide not tochange anything between now and the time I testify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "I don't think that's bad" suggests that there is a potential disagreement or alternative viewpoint.


Passage number 487.
 But thetestimony--MR. HELLER. You are going to get that whammy--the market isgoing to see the earlier language and a week later the tighter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 488.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would guess, given where the funds rateis and so forth, that they will simply assume that we didn't doanything, which is correct. And I would confirm that, but I would addsome warning language about the future.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a guess or assumption about a future action and suggesting the addition of warning language.


Passage number 489.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes. I don't think that's a problem givenwhere the funds rate is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Johnson's opinion or belief without presenting any conflicting views.


Passage number 490.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have one point of view expressed.And we have other points of view expressed. Does anybody have anyother point of view.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that different points of view have been expressed and asks if there are any additional perspectives.


Passage number 491.
MR. STERN. I think Mr. Melzer makes a persuasive case. Iwouldn't go as far as alternative C, but one thing that would havesome appeal to me that we might want to look at is a borrowing targetof $300 to $350 million, on the argument that we don't want the fundsrate to slip back down below 6 percent for any successive number ofdays. That should help, if in fact it's true, that what really hasbeen going on here is some change in the preference [for excessreserves] and the way banks are managing their reserve positions. Ihappen to think that there is probably more to it than that, but ifthat were the case, we could build ourselves a little protection thatway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stern is expressing agreement with Mr. Melzer's argument and suggesting a potential borrowing target as a solution.


Passage number 492.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A more modest way of stating that is justthat we don't lean over backwards simply to get the federal funds ratebelow 6 percent again, I'd say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a more modest way of expressing a statement without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 493.
MR. ANGELL. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 494.
 The $300 million is what we aimfor and I would not expect the funds rate to go below 6 percent withthat, given the preference for excess reserves and given--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think where the funds rate goes will bedominated by the expectations in these very short-run circumstances.If we got some weak business news and the expectations turned towardmore easing, the federal funds rate could easily go below 6 percent.If the markets don't have that expectation, then it probably wouldn't.If they have the expectation that, if anything, we would tighten up,the federal funds rate probably would stay higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the federal funds rate could go below 6 percent if there is weak business news and the expectations turn towards more easing. However, they also suggest that if the markets expect tightening, the federal funds rate would likely stay higher. This indicates a difference in opinion or expectation about the future direction of the funds rate.


Passage number 495.
MR. ANGELL. Gary Stern is saying that he would like us totake action to stop it from occurring in the face of weak businessnews.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents an statement made by Gary Stern, suggesting the need for action to address a possible occurrence in weak business news.


Passage number 496.
MR. JOHNSON. But if the weaker business news develops, I amnot sure that we would want to stop it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any particular disagreement or contention. It simply presents a situation where the speaker, Mr. Johnson, expresses uncertainty about potentially stopping weaker business news.


Passage number 497.
MR. STERN. We always write the directive, though, with allof those caveats, in any event. So I don't think that what I amsuggesting would preclude us from changing our views if we did get alot of weak business news. It would seem to me that it is going to-50-2/10-11/87take a minimum of a month before we have enough evidence to changeviews on that; but even if we did, we still have those caveats in thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 498.
MR. BLACK. Well, we are not going to have much between nowand next Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating that there won't be much happening between now and next Thursday.


Passage number 499.
MR. STERN. We certainly aren't going to have much betweennow and next Thursday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Stern is stating a fact and there is no opposition or contradiction presented by anyone else.


Passage number 500.
MR. BLACK. That's what we are going to be listening for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of Mr. Black's opinion or intention, there is no proposition being argued or disagreed upon.


Passage number 501.
MS. SEGER. How many weeks has it been, though, since thefederal funds rate averaged below 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking for a factual answer.


Passage number 502.
MR. STERN. You have to go back into October, actually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Mr. Stern had to go back into October.


Passage number 503.
MR. STERNLIGHT. To October for 5-7/8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage is a statement made by Mr. Sternlight, without any mention of disagreement or contention. It simply states the interest rate for October as 5-7/8 percent.


Passage number 504.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, it looks to me like maybe we needa vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting the need for a vote.


Passage number 505.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we are pretty close. Ithink we ought to look at this. If nobody else has anything to add tothis discussion, why don't we turn to the language and how we want tophrase it. I assume that the prevailing view is not to change the[stance] anyway, which will be reflected immediately in this firstsentence, but to be asymmetric. I am not saying there's unanimousagreement for that, but I sense that's where the central tendency is.In that case, I presume that we would simply say maintain in the firstsentence. I am eliminating nuances now, which we can return to whenwe return to this question of how we express it. What projection doyou have for M2 and M3 if we began in January and went through April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It mostly consists of the speaker sharing their thoughts and assumptions, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 506.
MR. KOHN. Well, I don't have a specific projection in frontof me for April, but I would be tempted to maintain M2 and M3 at abouttheir March growth rates. I don't see why they would deviatesubstantially, so that means 7 percent for M2 and 6 percent for M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and projection for maintaining M2 and M3 at certain growth rates. There is no contradicting or opposing viewpoint presented.


Passage number 507.
So January to April--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be 7 percent for both.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement is stating a fact and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 508.
MR. KOHN. No, I was thinking 7 percent for M2 and 6 percentfor M3. It could be 7 percent for both, too. So January to Aprilmight be 6-1/2 percent, or a range of 6 to 7 percent for M2 and around6 percent for M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is considering different options and suggesting different possibilities for the percentages, but there is no disagreement or conflict involved.


Passage number 509.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that gives us one alternative--I amnot sure that this is the way we want to say it--but if we wanted tosay January to April, we would say we expected the growth of M2 and M3over the period from January to April to be at annual rates of 6 to 7percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents an alternative way of expressing a timeframe and expected growth rates without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 510.
MR. ANGELL. That's narrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 511.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we ever make it wider thanthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion or belief.


Passage number 512.
-51-2/10-11/87MR. ANGELL. 6 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage seems to mention a number without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 513.
MR. BLACK. I sure do like that idea of using the Januarybase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions Mr. Black expressing his liking for an idea.


Passage number 514.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 515.
 Well, it's unusual and I would resist itordinarily on the basis that we normally use quarters, but that greatdistortion at year-end--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that the situation described is unusual and expresses their hesitation or resistance towards it, but there is no indication of any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 516.
 The way you could present--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 517.
 It looks like the only way we could reallyget rid of that distortion is to use February as the base, but I--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Couldn't you preserve your positionby just saying 6 to 7 percent over the balance of the quarter. That'sright where all the numbers are anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The individual is suggesting a possible solution to get rid of distortion, and the response agrees with the suggestion and adds further support by stating that the numbers align with the proposed solution.


Passage number 518.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you use one month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It simply states a statement without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


Passage number 519.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Use two months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Use two months" is a directive or instruction rather than a statement that can be disagreed with.


Passage number 520.
MR. BOEHNE. Two months: February and March. Vote for two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about voting for two months, and does not present any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 521.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We are only talking about M2 and M3,so theoretically, the weekly numbers don't matter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage implies that the weekly numbers don't matter because only M2 and M3 are being discussed. However, there may be disagreement or contention regarding the importance of weekly numbers in understanding the overall economic situation or in making informed decisions.


Passage number 522.
MR. KOHN. Last April, we did have a big jump in the M2 andM3 numbers; it is the tax period and there has to be--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the increase in M2 and M3 numbers during the tax period.


Passage number 523.
 Of course, wehad reduced interest rates in March and April, so--MR. PRELL. We always run into a lot of uncertainties at thattime in terms of how fast tax payments are made. And this time wewill have capital gains taxes that will have to be paid, so it's avery uncertain period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there are uncertainties during that time period related to tax payments and capital gains taxes that need to be paid.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 524.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the argument for saying January toJune or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage presents a statement without clarity or specificity, leaving room for contention or disagreement. The phrase "January to June or something" lacks clear reasoning or evidence to support it, allowing for different interpretations or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 525.
MR. ANGELL. Or January to March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement of dates and does not involve any form of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 526.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. January to March gives you what kind of anumber.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 527.
MR. KOHN. That would be around 6 percent. Under alternativeB January to March would be 6-1/2 percent for M2 and 6 percent for M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents two different percentages for M2 and M3, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 528.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those numbers were 6 percent and 6-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage only provides numerical values (6 percent and 6-1/2 percent) and does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states the numbers.


Passage number 529.
MR. KOHN. 6-1/2 percent for M2 and 6 percent for M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states the interest rates for M2 and M3 without presenting any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 530.
MR. ANGELL. I think that makes the best choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell is sharing his opinion on what he considers the best choice.


Passage number 531.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What about February and March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple question asking about the months of February and March.


Passage number 532.
MR. KOHN. Well, that would be 7 percent for M2 and 6 percentfor M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states two different percentages for M2 and M3 without any conflicting opinions or disagreement.


Passage number 533.
-52-2/10-11/87MR. BLACK. That pretty well covers the intermeeting period,too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the mentioned time period is well covered.


Passage number 534.
MR. ANGELL. Don, are you expecting February to come in ashigh as you have here now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question being asked.


Passage number 535.
MR. KOHN. We got some information yesterday that suggestedthat M1 might be a little lower, but we didn't get any new informationon M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that they received information about M1 possibly being lower, but there is no mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 536.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am sorry: what are you projecting forFebruary and March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for information or clarification.


Passage number 537.
MR. KOHN. On page 14 [of the Bluebook], Mr. Chairman, for M2I have about 6-1/2 percent for February right now and 7 percent forMarch. For M3 I have 6 percent for both months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents percentages for M2 and M3 without any conflicting viewpoints or disagreement present.


Passage number 538.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sounds like we say 6 to 7 percent,whatever months we pick.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 539.
MR. GUFFEY. It doesn't make any difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a neutral opinion or observation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 540.
MR. BLACK. Aim at 6 to 7 percent for whatever month youpick.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a target percentage without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 541.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it makes a lot ofdifference. I guess somebody might argue that nothing we are going todo now is going to affect February or March anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their opinion about the topic but does not engage in any argument or disagreement with others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 542.
 That's theargument for going through June, but I--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the problem with M2 and M3 ingeneral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests disagreement or contention as the speaker introduces a different perspective or objection with the phrase "but I..." and expresses a problem with M2 and M3.


Passage number 543.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it makes a great deal ofdifference. Do you want to say from January through March. The realchoice, as I see it, is to say January through March or Januarythrough June. We could say April, but there's a seasonal problem inApril.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different options and considerations without expressing any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 544.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, but that seasonal problem doesn't affectthe three-month growth rate that much, does it, Mike.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is asking for clarification or confirmation from Mike.


Passage number 545.
MR. PRELL. It could, depending. Last year, if I remember,we also had a delay in tax refunds due to IRS processing speed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Prell is simply stating a fact and recalling a similar situation from the previous year.


Passage number 546.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The seasonal adjustment factors aresupposed to take care of the seasonality, but I guess what you aresaying is that it's very uncertain. It could be high or low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging the uncertainty regarding the seasonal adjustment factors, which could be either high or low.


Passage number 547.
MR. ANGELL. There's a high standard deviation, you mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell simply seeks clarification or confirmation of a statement made by someone else.


Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. April is just an uncertain month. But thenumbers are going to be the same anyway. Do we want to say January toMarch, January to April, or January to June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply questioning which time frame they should use, without expressing any strong opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 549.
MR. KEEHN. January through March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the given passage to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 550.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Through March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or content provided.


Passage number 551.
-53-2/10-11/87MR. GUFFEY. Isn't that the same as January to April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple mathematical equation that can be solved to find the answer.


Passage number 552.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that what we want to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a question and does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply seeks clarification about the intended message.


Passage number 553.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. January to March, 6 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a range of percentages (6 to 7 percent) without any context or additional information. It does not present any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 554.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The preference is to say January to March,6 to 7 percent. We don't need the "respectively;" the range coversboth of them. Now what do we say about M1. I think with respect toM1 we ought to say something. It's very easy to say that in thecurrent circumstances we expect it to slow from the extraordinaryrates of recent months. Maybe that's it: simply say that growth in M1should slow from the extraordinary rates of recent months--period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing a preference for how to express a certain range (January to March, 6 to 7 percent) and then suggests how to discuss growth in M1. There are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments present.


Passage number 555.
MR. ANGELL. "Should" is stronger than "expected." I think"expected" is a little better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their personal opinion on the strength of the words "should" and "expected."


Passage number 556.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We expect it to slow appreciably from thehigh rate of recent months, or of earlier months. Is there anythingelse anybody wants to say about M1. "Appreciably" or "substantially".Decrease substantially from the rate of growth of 30 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their expectation for a decrease in the growth rate of M1. They mention two potential words (appreciably or substantially) that could be used to describe the level of decrease, but there is no conflict or disagreement presented.


Passage number 557.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 558.
 I thought "substantially" went with "chiefly"but--MR. HELLER. Also say "primarily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing their initial understanding of how the word "substantially" is used with the word "chiefly." They then mention another word, "primarily," that can also be used in a similar way. There is no conflict or disagreement presented.


Passage number 559.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Growth in M1 is [unintelligible]. Weprobably should say "substantially," it's so high. Does anybody haveanything to add about M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement about the growth in M1 and asking if anyone else has additional information to add.


Passage number 560.
 Then we fiddle around with--MR. ANGELL. The nuances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is mentioning that they will "fiddle around" with something, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 561.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat greater reserve restraint wouldor slightly lesser reserve restraint might". Does that do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting different possibilities or options regarding reserve restraint without expressing any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 562.
MR. MORRIS. I thought we agreed to make this [asymmetric].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement by Mr. Morris is presented without any opposition or differing viewpoint.


Passage number 563.
MR. ANGELL. That's what we just did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement of agreement or acknowledgement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 564.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat greater reserve restraint wouldor slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a suggestion for either somewhat greater reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint, indicating a difference in opinion or preference.


Passage number 565.
"MR. MORRIS. I would like to make it even more asymmetric andnot mention the possibility of lesser reserve restraint because Ican't see that as a possibility for the next six weeks unless thebusiness numbers come through very much differently than we expect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the possibility of lesser reserve restraint, based on the expected business numbers.


Passage number 566.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's perfectly reasonable to discuss that.I don't think we have ever done that. Or have we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. The statement "it's perfectly reasonable to discuss that" indicates an openness to considering a certain topic, while the second sentence expresses uncertainty regarding whether the topic has been previously discussed.


Passage number 567.
MR. ANGELL. Ever done what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: is described in that second paragraph, Randy?
Back to Intruder apprehension.  Answer yes or no and give an explanation: MR.  ANGELL.  No, sir.


Passage number 568.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes we have on one or two occasions; but it ishighly unusual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there have been one or two occasions of something being highly unusual.


Passage number 569.
MR. KOHN. Not recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 570.
-54-2/10-11/87MR. JOHNSON. It gives the right connotation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The expression "-54-2/10-11/87" is a mathematical calculation that does not involve any conflicting ideas or opinions. The statement "It gives the right connotation" also does not imply disagreement, but rather suggests that the calculation accurately represents or portrays something.


Passage number 571.
MR. ANGELL. Well, let's suppose oil prices broke down; let'ssuppose Germany announced that they were going to grow at zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply presenting hypothetical scenarios without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 572.
 Youcould--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Which way would that work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a question and does not contain any statements or arguments that could generate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 573.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way I wrote this, the language has twoasymmetrical words: one is "somewhat" as opposed to "slightly;" andthe other is "would" as opposed to "might.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply pointing out the use of two asymmetrical words in the language.


Passage number 574.
"MR. BOEHNE. It's the double whammy nuance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 575.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Somewhat greater than an[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is unintelligible, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 576.
MR. JOHNSON. I think the markets are tuned in to thislanguage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states Mr. Johnson's opinion about the markets being tuned in to a certain language. It does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 577.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 578.
MR. BLACK. They can use this double asymmetry. I can seethe caption on that now. That may be symmetric double negatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement made by Mr. Black without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing ideas.


Passage number 579.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have any further comments. Itake your silence as saying double nuance asymmetry is about right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for additional comments or input from others.


Passage number 580.
MR. ANGELL. That's plenty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell simply states that there is enough of something.


Passage number 581.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me assume 4 to 8 percent down inthe federal funds range clause. Is there anything else in thislanguage. It would then read: In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. This action is expected to beconsistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from Januarythrough March at annual rates of about 6 to 7 percent. Growth in M1is expected to slow substantially from the high rate of earliermonths. Somewhat greater reserve restraint would or slightly lesserreserve restraint might be acceptable depending on the behavior of theaggregates, taking into account, etc. Then 4 to 8 percent [on therange for the federal funds rate]. Any other comment. If not, we canvote on this one and adjourn while we work on the language of theother one. When we turn to the long term, this is highly consistentwith what we would be saying in the long run. Ready to vote. If so,we will vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It consists mostly of statements and suggestions regarding the implementation of policy and the expected growth rates of various aggregate measures.


Passage number 582.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 583.
Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesPresident Melzer NoPresident Morris YesGovernor Seger Yes-55-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Let's [break and come] back on the[long-run].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. All individuals mentioned have answered "yes" except for President Melzer, who is the only one who answered "no."


Passage number 584.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just describe the market today. Wewon't discuss this but the federal funds rate is 6-5/16 percent and weanticipate 6-5/8 percent. Oh. Now it is at 6-5/8 percent, not 6-5/16percent, despite the fact that, according to the estimate, we arerunning $500 million or $600 million over target in providingreserves. So we decided to do nothing. Unless there is a wildreserves miss, we will end up way over target with a high federalfunds rate, at least until the 7th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the market and explaining their decision to do nothing.


Passage number 585.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, many years ago--20 to 25 years ago--the market at one time had a sentence that said, "The federal fundsrate is hanging at this level apparently out of respect for what themarket thinks the Open Market Committee has done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the federal funds rate and the market's perception of the Open Market Committee's actions.


Passage number 586.
"MS. SEGER. That's when rates never moved anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 587.
MR. BOEHNE. They had better respect then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the statement. It simply suggests that someone should respect something or someone.


Passage number 588.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if the federal funds rate doesn'tcome way down this afternoon there really is something screwy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that if the federal funds rate does not decrease, there may be something wrong or unclear.


Passage number 589.
MR. MORRIS. While we have a little time here, Paul couldtell us about this story about Mr. Baker pushing target zones forcurrencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 590.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's putting it in a morepermanent or long-range context than he, or really his staff, wouldadmit. There is, obviously, discussion about some agreement. You seesomething in the paper every day about his being more forthcomingabout saying he is relatively content with the broad range [ofexchange rates] currently prevailing and there ought to be awillingness to--I will say "defend" but that may be too strong a word--to engage in joint and reciprocal actions in the markets. Thatobviously, as I mentioned yesterday, has implications beyond just whathas been mentioned, if one really believed it. [It would] demonstratethat we are altogether content with the broad present range ofexchange rates depending upon reasonable satisfaction that the othercountries will do something to grow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker believes that the person they are referring to and their staff do not fully admit or acknowledge the long-term implications of their statements. The speaker also suggests that there is discussion and disagreement about the level of contentment with the current range of exchange rates and the need for joint actions in the markets.


Passage number 591.
MR. MORRIS. We are not thinking in terms of a formal system.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Morris, and there is no opposing opinion or conflicting information provided.


Passage number 592.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no. But having taken that step,obviously it is consistent with and will be read by many, anyway, as astep toward something more permanent. Whether they are called targetsor some levels of resistance, the word would be "resistance." Therewon't be any formal expression of that kind but, obviously, therewon't be a lot of speculation. This is a step, at the very least, inthat direction. Indeed, I think it is a tentative step in thatdirection without any sense of commitment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and opinions without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 593.
MR. JOHNSON. You can bet the currency markets will try andsearch for those levels.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 594.
-56-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then there will be [unintelligible]. Oneof the problems, I think we ought to remind ourselves, is that thereis a rather broad range--a much broader range than the currencymarkets will be probing for in the short run. So there is lots ofroom for misunderstanding. One of the problems is that without makinga commitment--even to discourage a loose arrangement--it becomes moredifficult in the short run because people want to make payments. Youget caught unless you're willing to make a full-blooded commitment.The French might be willing to but I don't think anybody else iswilling to [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the potential challenges and difficulties in making financial arrangements without a commitment.


Passage number 595.
MR. ANGELL. Did the markets ever pick up broadly ourintervention before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 596.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think they did right at firstbecause they thought it was the Japanese. But they do have theimpression that we intervened [unintelligible]. They assume thatthere was some.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents the speaker's opinion or perspective.


Passage number 597.
MR. CROSS. Well, it got reported. The last time there werereports in Japan and also elsewhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact without expressing any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 598.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, the Japanese said so. I forgot that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeing statements. It simply mentions that the speaker forgot something after mentioning that the Japanese said something.


Passage number 599.
MR. ANGELL. But another low-key move like that, if it workedas well, together with heavy Japanese and German [intervention]wouldn't be too bad an environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that another low-key move, along with heavy Japanese and German intervention, would not be a bad environment.


Passage number 600.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is the kind of thing they wouldlook for, but the problem that I foresee is that that interventiontook place well above where I would conceive the lower part of anybroad range would be. I am not saying there is anything the matterwith it; I think it is fine. But we don't want the market to think weare defending 152 yen per dollar, or something, with our life's bloodif we are not, and then have market participants greatly disappointedwhen they see the exchange rate go above that. In my mind it's a verytricky, psychological, thing. I have no problems with what they aretrying to do but it is a very tricky problem, operationally--that themarket doesn't read much more into ranges or zones, whatever you callthem, than anybody has in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the potential market reaction to a specific intervention but acknowledges that there is nothing wrong with it. The speaker also acknowledges the complexity of the situation and states that they have no issues with the intervention itself.


Passage number 601.
MR. ANGELL. But isn't there a case that could be made that,for the foreseeable future, that is about as high as the yen ought togo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Angell posing a question or suggesting a possible viewpoint.


Passage number 602.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is that we are in a rangewhere that is debatable. It is just a question of whether you say 150is the limit, which implies that on the other side--assuming youretain the concept of a broad range--you probably wouldn't mind if itwas at 170.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain a contention or disagreement. It presents a scenario where a range is being discussed and the speaker proposes different numerical limits for that range.


Passage number 603.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not provide any information about Mr. Angell's beliefs, opinions, or statements that could indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 604.
 Whether you would want it that high--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whether you wanted it that high[unintelligible]. Personally, I think 150 is fine, but I don't wantto make that the absolute low point, probably because I wouldn't wantto see it go all the way to 170. But I don't want to get caught with150 to 155 or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their personal opinion that a value of 150 is acceptable, but they also mention not wanting it to go all the way to 170. This implies a disagreement or uncertainty about the specific value.


Passage number 605.
-57-2/10-11/87MR. ANGELL. How about 150 to 160.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "How about 150 to 160" is a question asked by Mr. Angell, indicating a suggestion or proposal rather than a disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 606.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That still seems to me to be prettynarrow. I suppose substantively it may be all right. But it isnarrow and when people talk about these, even on [unintelligible]. Idon't want to get trapped into thinking something narrow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement or contention with the idea being discussed. They believe that the idea is pretty narrow and don't want to be trapped into thinking something narrow.


Passage number 607.
MR. CROSS. I don't think we would find it easy to get theothers to start intervening on the other side at very low levels ifthis was to be cooperative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 608.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even if there is a judgmental agreement tothis kind of thing, it is still a good idea to argue about where therange should be set.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "even if there is a judgmental agreement" suggests that there may be some level of consensus among people, but it is still important to engage in argument or debate about where the range should be set. This indicates a recognition of the value of discussion and differing opinions, rather than disagreement itself.


Passage number 609.
MR. GUFFEY. Isn't a precedent condition of this arrangementthat they agree to stimulate their economies. And is that to be apublic announcement of some sort.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a direct question seeking clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 610.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is very much a condition in Mr.Baker's mind for both substantive and symbolic reasons. But I thinkthere is a real question as to what they would do, in fact, that wouldmake much difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating the speaker's opinion and raising a question for further discussion or exploration.


Passage number 611.
 Our talking in terms of concerted actionagainst the background that their economic outlook seems to bedeteriorating--MR. ANGELL. But is a Japanese discount rate cut likely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement followed by a question.


Passage number 612.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It certainly would be in the context ofthis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but you haven't provided the passage or any context for me to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage you are referring to.


Passage number 613.
MR. ANGELL. Well, that certainly would make a differenceregarding the spread between capital flows, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is expressing his opinion that a certain factor would make a difference in the spread between capital flows.


Passage number 614.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It can't make much difference interms of growth in the Japanese economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that something (not specified) cannot have a significant impact on the growth of the Japanese economy. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the statement.


Passage number 615.
MR. ANGELL. I know, but it will make a difference in regardto capital flows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply stating that understanding the information will have an impact on capital flows. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in the passage.


Passage number 616.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I should hope.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "I should hope" implies a personal opinion or desire rather than a disagreement with someone else.


Passage number 617.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the Japanese did. Ithink one of their problems before was [unintelligible] as much asthey did, but their savings deposit rates are close to zero now. Iknow they were close to zero before they reduced the discount ratelast time. I don't know what happened after they reduced it. That'sthe big savings vehicle for Japanese citizens as opposed to peoplewith access to the money markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about the Japanese savings deposit rates and the effect of a previous discount rate reduction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 618.
 They may be [unintelligible] butthere are some very close to zero and some deposits may have--MR. JOHNSON. What is their postal rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the interruption by Mr. Johnson, which suggests a disagreement or contention regarding the topic being discussed.


Passage number 619.
MR. TRUMAN. The discount rate is above the postal rate, Ithink.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Truman expressing his belief that the discount rate is higher than the postal rate.


Passage number 620.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they have a variety of rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage simply states the opinion of the speaker regarding the different rates without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 621.
-58-2/10-11/87MR. TRUMAN. There has been some responsiveness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 622.
MR. JOHNSON. If they are going to deflate, a zero rate[unintelligible].[Secretary's Note: A draft of proposed directive language,labeled "Variant I for M1" was circulated to the meeting participantsat this point. See Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The passage does not contain any conflicting opinions or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 623.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just as a technical matter, where is thisparagraph we are talking about inserting to be placed--before or afterthe discussion of the broader aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 624.
MR. KOHN. I guess after the discussion of the broaderaggregates in the longer-run part of the directive: between the broadaggregates and the short-run part.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Kohn indicating that there was a discussion about the broader aggregates in the longer-run part of the directive.


Passage number 625.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you have this paragraph above statingthat the FOMC seeks all these things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting the FOMC's objectives without any conflicting or contradictory information.


Passage number 626.
MR. KOHN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that someone named Mr. Kohn is speaking, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 627.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then: "In furtherance of these objectivesthe Committee established growth ranges of--" What are we talkingabout, 6-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the Committee established growth ranges of 6-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent.


Passage number 628.
MR. KOHN. 5-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any statements or ideas that contradict each other or raise any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating the name (Mr. Kohn) and a numerical value (5-1/2).


Passage number 629.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for both M2 and M3.Total nonfinancial debt was set at what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply providing information about the percentages for M2 and M3, as well as the total nonfinancial debt.


Passage number 630.
MR. KOHN. 8 to 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statement that could indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states a percentage range without any conflicting information or opposing views.


Passage number 631.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8 to 11 percent, the same as for 1987.With respect to M1, why don't we take a minute to peruse this. Idon't argue that it is a literary masterpiece.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author simply states a numerical percentage and expresses their opinion about a literary masterpiece, without any opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 632.
MR. ANGELL. On page 2 is the word excessive--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that the word "excessive" appears on page 2 without expressing any conflicting opinions or disagreements.


Passage number 633.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we just give everybody a chance[to read this]. Have you all had a chance to get some flavor of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that they should give everybody an opportunity to read or experience whatever is being referred to.


Passage number 634.
MR. ANGELL. I think it very well reflects what we suggested.On page 2, I wonder if the word "excessive" in front of weakness ofthe dollar is a little strong. Would it be better to leave the wordout or maybe use the word "continuing." I wouldn't want to indicateto the markets that it really has to be pretty bad before anythinghappens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell is simply expressing his opinion and suggesting a possible alternative.


Passage number 635.
MR. PARRY. How about "significant".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or additional information about the word "significant." Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement regarding its usage.


Passage number 636.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, that would be better, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell simply expresses his opinion that the suggested alternative option would be better.


Passage number 637.
MR. MELZER. In citing those conditions it is possible to usean "and/or" structure. In other words, I could imagine circumstanceswhere you wouldn't necessarily have all four of those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage suggests using an "and/or" structure in citing conditions, indicating flexibility and acknowledging the possibility of not having all four conditions. There is no contention or disagreement evident.


Passage number 638.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "obviously" is often used to indicate a statement that is widely accepted or unquestionably true, so there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 639.
 Oh, I---59-2/10-11/87MR. JOHNSON. That's why velocity is such a useful word. Itcaptures all those things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that "velocity" is a useful word that captures various things.


Passage number 640.
MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me, since that is an "and"list, that you could take "excessive" out and just say "weakness inthe dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell is simply making a suggestion or expressing his opinion about removing the word "excessive" from the list.


Passage number 641.
" If all those other three--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, that is the problem. I wasabout to say that it is easier to list when all those things are goingin the same direction than when you have some going in one directionand some going in another direction. I was just going to summarizeour discussion in terms of the broad message we are trying to give.The message I would try to give is: It is not that M1 is meaningless,but that it can only be evaluated in the context of the surroundingcircumstances. I can't read my own writing. It is not meaningless;it can only be evaluated in the context of the surroundingcircumstances. That can't be a mechanical judgment but rather aqualitative judgment. [Unintelligible] enter into the qualitativejudgment. We can [not] get a formula that can take all four of thesefactors and weigh one 20 percent and the other 32 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is summarizing the discussion and presenting their viewpoint on evaluating M1 in the context of surrounding circumstances.


Passage number 642.
MR. MELZER. You could use "in the context of signs of" or"in the context of surrounding circumstances" and you could use an"including" structure and an "or" at the end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply offering different alternative phrases or structures that could be used to convey a similar meaning.


Passage number 643.
MR. KEEHN. At the end of the sentence rather than using theword "and" I wonder if you used the word "or" if that would deal withthe possible alternative situations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 644.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The usage of "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply refers to the person who holds the position of chairman.


Passage number 645.
 I don't think you can quite say "or"because we are not saying that any one of these factors is going to--MR. KEEHN. It gives you a little more flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining their opinion and stating that they believe there is flexibility in the situation.


Passage number 646.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, what was this other suggestion ratherthan "or".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "or" is not present in the given text, so there cannot be any contention or disagreement regarding the suggestion mentioned.


Passage number 647.
MR. MELZER. I was suggesting that we could say: "It would beappropriate in the context of surrounding circumstances, which couldinclude, for example," and then just list the four and put an "or"there. If they are given as examples it doesn't necessarily implythat there will be just one or all four.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Melzer is merely making a suggestion and providing an example to support his suggestion.


Passage number 648.
MR. BLACK. You could say: "In the context of signs suchas...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Mr. Black seems to be presenting a suggestion or perspective without any opposition.


Passage number 649.
"MR. JOHNSON. You could say: "In the context of many of thesigns" or something like that. Or use a word that is allencompassing: "necessarily" before the "appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The suggestion provided by Mr. Johnson is a possible alternative or clarification but does not indicate any disagreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 650.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Accumulating signs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that signs are being accumulated, without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 651.
MR. JOHNSON. Accumulating signs, or many of the signs, orintensifying, or growing, signs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states different ways in which signs can accumulate, intensify, or grow.


Passage number 652.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The given passage, "MR. BLACK," does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. More context is needed.


Passage number 653.
 I think that "such as--"-60-2/10-11/87MR. HELLER. With the "such as" language the only thing I amnot too happy with is the last statement: "In the context of signssuch as continuing economic expansion." That does not cause us toreduce growth. It would have to be something like unsustainableeconomic expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 654.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 655.
 Well, you could say all these other things "inthe context of continuing economic--"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without repeating the words "in thecontext.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Well, you could say all these other things" indicates a contrasting opinion or viewpoint from the one being discussed "in the context of continuing economic--." The use of the word "could" suggests that the speaker is presenting an alternative perspective or disagreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 656.
"MR. JOHNSON. Oh yes, I'm sorry; that is already there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, is apologizing for a mistake or oversight.


Passage number 657.
MR. MELZER. You could say: "which might include acombination of...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a statement of a suggestion or possibility.


Passage number 658.
"MR. JOHNSON. Or "along with continued economic expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "along with continued economic expansion" is simply providing additional information or context.


Passage number 659.
"MR. HELLER. Or "in the framework.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting an alternative wording for a certain phrase.


Passage number 660.
"MR. ANGELL. I think it is better as it is with the "and.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 661.
"MR. JOHNSON. But I have a big problem, too, with implyingtightening just because the economy is expanding and none of the otherthings are occurring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the passage, MR. JOHNSON expresses concern about implying tightening solely based on economic expansion without considering other factors. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 662.
MR. ANGELL. But "and" answers that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 663.
MR. JOHNSON. No, it is overly reactive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, explicitly states that something is "overly reactive," indicating their agreement or shared perspective with an unidentified individual or group.


Passage number 664.
MR. MORRIS. With price pressures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that there are price pressures.


Passage number 665.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was meant to encompass it, but thisget's [complicated]. Suppose we said: "Much slower monetary growthwill be appropriate in the context of continuing economic expansionaccompanied by...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is providing a hypothetical scenario and not introducing conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 666.
"MR. JOHNSON. Okay. That would do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 667.
MR. KEEHN. Rather than using "continuing"--not to stir thesoup here--how about "strong economic expansion." We could getcontinued economic expansion in a modest proportion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests an alternative phrase without expressing opposition or disagreement with the original suggestion.


Passage number 668.
MR. PARRY. How about "rapid".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting the word "rapid" as a potential option or alternative.


Passage number 669.
MR. JOHNSON. Don't stretch it too far. If all these otherthings were happening, even if the economy weren't growing I wouldn'tmind doing something about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There isn't any contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing a willingness to address issues even if the economy is not growing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 670.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is something the matter here as Isee this; something is garbled. "In that connection the Committeebelieves, particularly in light of the extraordinary expansion ofetc., much slower monetary growth would be appropriate in the contextof continuing economic expansion accompanied by signs of intensifying,strong growth in this aggregate in recent years." That doesn't belongthere. The whole thing is crazy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "That doesn't belong there. The whole thing is crazy" expresses disagreement and disbelief towards the statement being discussed.


Passage number 671.
-61-2/10-11/87MR. BLACK. We're talking about slower M1 growth in the firstline and the broader aggregates in the second line, aren't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply restating and confirming the topic of discussion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 672.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe I have two different pages, becausemine doesn't read right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The author states that they may have two different pages because their version does not read correctly. This suggests that they have encountered a discrepancy or discrepancy in the content they are comparing.


Passage number 673.
MR. ANGELL. No, I think it is okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell states his opinion that he thinks "it is okay," suggesting that he agrees or is not opposed to something.


Passage number 674.
 I think you just havethat clause there in front of the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I've got the wrong first page. That'swhat's wrong. "In that connection, the Committee believes etc. Muchslower monetary growth would be appropriate in the context ofcontinuing economic expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a belief or opinion about monetary growth in the context of economic expansion.


Passage number 675.
"MR. ANGELL. Do you want "accompanied by increased pricepressures" or "signs of".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is asking for clarification or a choice between two options, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 676.
MR. MELZER. You could say "accompanied by some combinationof" and then use the "and" structure, which could mean all or it couldmean one or two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a possible alternative phrase to use, but there is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 677.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, it seems to me that there could be somecircumstance in which the dollar, given strong economic growth--.Frankly, I just don't quite see how the inflation is going to comeabout unless we get a further [decline in the dollar]. It seems to methat the whole inflation scenario is dependent upon the dollar'sposition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It includes a statement by Mr. Angell and his personal perspective on the issue of inflation and the dollar's position.


Passage number 678.
MR. JOHNSON. Then what you are saying is that there may betimes when we want to deal with the psychology, if nothing else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a possibility or consideration.


Passage number 679.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't cover every contingency here, butI can imagine that if the price pressures or some of the other thingswere bad enough we might have to tighten up even if the economicgrowth didn't look very satisfactory. But it is just impossible tocover every combination of circumstances here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that they cannot cover every contingency or combination of circumstances, but offers a hypothetical scenario where tightening measures may need to be implemented regardless of the economic growth.


Passage number 680.
MR. ANGELL. The fact of the matter is that if economicexpansion slows to a negative rate, it does limit you somewhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact about economic expansion potentially limiting certain aspects.


Passage number 681.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it limits you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply states that something limits a person without providing further context or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 682.
MR. STERN. It could be a very slow expansion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the expansion could be slow without any conflicting opinions or views expressed.


Passage number 683.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Say "continuing economic expansion."We've got a choice here. If we just leave it "and" it seems to me weare giving a pretty clear unambiguous signal that we would tightenunder all these circumstances. If we begin saying "such as" or "or,"which is better in some respects, it is also vaguer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It discusses a choice in language usage to convey a specific signal and acknowledges the advantages and disadvantages of different options.


Passage number 684.
MR. ANGELL. But with the "and" there, can't we take the"excessive" out before the "weakness of the dollar".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell is simply making a suggestion or asking a question about removing the word "excessive" before the "weakness of the dollar".


Passage number 685.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I put a "significant" in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 686.
MR. HELLER. But you are putting "continuing economicexpansion" ahead, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of "but" suggests a disagreement or contrasting viewpoint to the statement that "continuing economic expansion" is being prioritized.


Passage number 687.
-62-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that it is perfect now. Itreads: "Much slower monetary growth would be appropriate in thecontext of continuing economic expansion accompanied by signs ofintensifying price pressures, relatively strong growth in the broadmonetary aggregates, and significant weakness of the dollar inexchange markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing a statement without any evidence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 688.
"MR. MELZER. Did you say "or".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply asking for clarification if the person said "or" or something else.


Passage number 689.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I said "and.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 690.
"MR. ANGELL. [Unintelligible] sounds like a bit of weaknessdoesn't bother us. If it doesn't, it's okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Angell, is expressing their opinion by saying that something (the unintelligible part) that sounds like weakness does not bother them and is okay as long as it doesn't bother someone else.


Passage number 691.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Another way of doing it is to say "signsof intensifying price pressures, perhaps related to significantweakness of the dollar in exchange markets and relatively stronggrowth in the broad monetary aggregates."SPEAKER(.). That's how I would like it.SEVERAL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 692.
MR. STERN. That probably [improves it] a little; becauseotherwise it sounded like you'd need all three.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Stern regarding a potential improvement that does not indicate any conflicting views or disagreement between individuals.


Passage number 693.
MR. ANGELL. I like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 694.
MR. HELLER. "Related to".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "related to" indicates a connection or correlation between two things, but it does not imply any specific disagreement or contention.


Passage number 695.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Perhaps related to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: the disagreement between Plato and Aristotle on the concept of justice is their differing views on the role of the individual in society."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 696.
" I didn't want tosay that is the only source of--MR. MORRIS. All of this suggests that the relationship ofnominal GNP to M1 is indeterminate. The stronger the economy thelower the growth rate of M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests disagreement or contention. The speaker initially expresses a reluctance to state something definitively, possibly implying an alternative viewpoint or consideration. Then, Mr. Morris introduces the idea that the relationship between nominal GNP and M1 (a measure of money supply) is indeterminate, suggesting a differing perspective on the matter.


Passage number 697.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think it's fair to say that if youcould stabilize this interest differential that has created such asensitivity and swings you would expect to see it run consistently. Imay be wrong, but under a stable differential I would guess that wouldbe the thing more than anything else probably would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing his opinion or hypothesis regarding the effects of stabilizing the interest differential.


Passage number 698.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody want to focus on any othersentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 699.
MR. PARRY. Yes, just a minor point in the last sentence ofthe first paragraph. Isn't "appropriate changes" a little misleading.Wouldn't it be better just to say "changes".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a discussion where Mr. Parry shares his opinion about the use of the phrase "appropriate changes" in the first paragraph.


Passage number 700.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We could say "the appropriatenessof...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a possibility or suggestion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 701.
"MR. PARRY. That would be better. Or just leave it out. Andif that is the case, it's the same thing in the last sentence of thesecond paragraph where it refers to appropriate growth. It is alittle misleading--we are going to evaluate growth in M1 from time totime as to whether or not it is appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. Mr. Parry states that certain parts should be left out or revised because they are misleading.


Passage number 702.
-63-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is a minor point, but why would youwant "appropriate" in there. Let's have some sense of: we are goingto evaluate whether we are going to have a short-run target for M1,which implies some appropriateness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a minor point and questioning the use of a certain word for clarification purposes.


Passage number 703.
MR. PARRY. No, it says here "appropriate changes in M1during the course of the year will be evaluated in light of" etc. Weare going to be evaluating changes as to whether or not they areappropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry is simply discussing the evaluation process of changes.


Passage number 704.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, so I changed that to "theappropriateness of changes." I made just a couple of errors readingit; it reads a little more smoothly. This is only changing clauses."With respect to M1 the Committee recognized that, based onexperience, the behavior of that aggregate and appropriate growth mustbe judged in the light of other evidence with respect to economicactivity and prices; fluctuations in M1 have become much moresensitive in recent years to changes in interest rates among otherfactors." Put "among other factors" at the end of the sentence. Thenstart the next sentence by saying: "During 1987 the Committeeanticipates that growth in M1 should slow." [Unintelligible] in thenext sentence. We're just trying to avoid repetition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making changes to improve the clarity and flow of the text but does not indicate any disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 705.
MR. MELZER. On the last sentence of the second page: "[TheCommittee] will evaluate appropriate growth in M1 from time to time inthe light of circumstances then prevailing, including the rate ofgrowth of the broader aggregates." That says evaluate; it doesn'tnecessarily imply very explicitly that we might set a target. I amjust wondering if we could add a phase "and under certaincircumstances might establish short-run target ranges." That is veryexplicit about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Melzer is suggesting a clarification to make the statement more explicit, but there is no opposing viewpoint mentioned.


Passage number 706.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That makes it much more explicit. I don'tknow if that is desirable or not since we always miss these short-termtarget ranges. I mean to hint at that, but I don't know what theadvantage is of being absolutely explicit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing uncertainty and questioning the advantage of being explicit, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 707.
 I don't know if there isanything inconsistent with it--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This doesn't tie [together]. Howabout if we said "The Committee during the course of the year willevaluate the appropriate role and growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "This doesn't tie [together]" indicates that there is disagreement or inconsistency in the passage. The speaker doubts if there is anything consistent or cohesive in the statement being discussed.


Passage number 708.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Rule out M1. It has no role any more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author simply states that M1 has no role anymore without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 709.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No. I was thinking of the option.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the author was considering an option.


Passage number 710.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is not the appropriate role of M1; itwould be the appropriate role of M1 in our decision-making.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any sign of contention or disagreement. It simply states two different viewpoints: one stating that it is not the appropriate role of M1, and the other stating that it would be the appropriate role of M1 in decision-making.


Passage number 711.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It already says that: "The Committeehasn't reached any operational decisions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states a fact without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 712.
"MR. STERN. Maybe we can find a somewhat stronger word thanevaluate. But I must say I am at a bit of a loss.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their uncertainty or confusion, but there is no argument or disagreement taking place.


Passage number 713.
MR. MELZER. This sounds like stuff we say all the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Melzer is expressing agreement or familiarity with the topic being discussed, rather than arguing against it.


Passage number 714.
-64-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It does sound like what we been saying; Iguess I put that on the other side of the ledger. There is nodifference in some respect from what we've said before. Well, I amsure this isn't perfect but I am struck with the fact that it iscumbersome enough. That last sentence is certainly repetitious but Idon't know if it hurts anything, with the last sentence in the firstparagraph. We could use another word than evaluate, but I don't knowwhat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their thoughts and observations, but there is no conflict present.


Passage number 715.
MR. ANGELL. Would it be appropriate to have continuingsizable increases in M1 with the continuing weakness in the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking whether it would be appropriate to have increases in M1 despite the weakness in the dollar.


Passage number 716.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the specific passage or context, I am unable to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 717.
]MR. ANGELL. I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement or acknowledgement from Mr. Angell.


Passage number 718.
 I would just like to have it be--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You don't know which way it willwork. What are you trying to guard against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of uncertainty and a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 719.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What he is saying, I guess, is that hedoesn't want all that sizable an increase in M1, if we have somegrowth and the dollar is very weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states someone's interpretation of what someone else is saying, so there is no direct contention or disagreement.


Passage number 720.
MR. ANGELL. That is right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states an agreement or acknowledgment of a statement made.


Passage number 721.
MR. MELZER. What if you replace "will evaluate" with "maytarget".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests a possible replacement of "will evaluate" with "may target," but there is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or disagreement between individuals.


Passage number 722.
 I think you want to stay away from that, but I am just--MR. ANGELL. Now we are on page 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any content or disagreement. It appears to be a transition or continuation in a conversation or discussion.


Passage number 723.
MR. MELZER. The last sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage doesn't contain any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints. It appears to be a statement or comment made by Mr. Melzer without any contention.


Passage number 724.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can say "continuing sizable increasesin M1 could be accommodated in circumstances characterized by sluggishbusiness activity, maintenance of progress toward underlying pricestability, and international stability," or something vague like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not appear to contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a hypothetical situation where continuing increases in M1 could be accommodated, without introducing any conflicting viewpoints or debates.


Passage number 725.
MR. ANGELL. I like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states that the speaker (Mr. Angell) likes something, without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 726.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And "progress toward internationalequilibrium." How about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "progress toward internationalequilibrium" is stated as a suggestion or proposal, without any opposing viewpoint or disagreement.


Passage number 727.
MR. TRUMAN. Fine, if you can define it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, is simply expressing that it is fine if someone can define something.


Passage number 728.
MR. ANGELL. That's pretty wide. But that is all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges the wide range of the topic being discussed but expresses that it is not a problem.


Passage number 729.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That brings in the trade balance as wellas the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing the relationship between the trade balance and the dollar. It does not imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 730.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, I like that better than not having it inthere at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses a preference for including something rather than not including it.


Passage number 731.
MR. JOHNSON. Equilibrium could be a much lower rate ofgrowth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that equilibrium could be a much lower rate of growth.


Passage number 732.
MR. ANGELL. I am afraid that is what it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell simply expresses his concern or fear about the situation.


Passage number 733.
2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am a little worried about therepetitiousness of these two sentences. Maybe it doesn't hurtanything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is expressing their concern about the repetitive nature of two sentences but also suggesting that it may not have a negative impact.


Passage number 734.
 I suppose this implies that the Committee in reachingoperational decisions during the year might target appropriate growthin--MR. MELZER. I think that is the statement that addssomething to what has already been said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement acknowledging that the previous statement adds more information to what has already been said.


Passage number 735.
 Otherwise, you're right thatit doesn't--MR. GUFFEY. That presumes that we'll know what theappropriate growth is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is agreeing with the other person's statement and adding additional information.


Passage number 736.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll only know it in the light of thecircumstances then prevailing. Does that sound better to people.SPEAKER(.). Yes.SPEAKER(.). It does to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers agree that the given statement sounds better to them.


Passage number 737.
MR. JOHNSON. They'll pay attention to the things that causeus to pull it off the shelf.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that people will pay attention to things that cause them to pull something off the shelf.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 738.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe I better read the whole thing whilewe are having our last thoughts here. This would follow the ratherconventional paragraph, to say the least, regarding the 5-1/2 to 8-1/2percent for growth in M2 and M3 and 8 to 11 percent for the debt.Then it goes on to say "With respect to M1 the Committee recognizedthat, based upon experience, the behavior of that aggregate and itsappropriate growth must be judged in the light of other"-- I'm juststumbling here, and I wonder whether we need the behavior of thataggregate and its appropriate growth. Why don't we just say: "Withrespect to M1, the Committee recognized that, based on experience, thebehavior of that aggregate must be judged in the light of otherevidence with respect to economic activity and prices; fluctuations inM1 have become much more sensitive in recent years to changes ininterest rates, among other factors. During 1987 the Committeeanticipates that growth in M1 should slow. However, in the light ofits sensitivity to a variety of influences, the Committee decided notto establish a precise target for its growth over the year as a wholeat this time. Instead, the appropriateness of changes in M1 duringthe course of the year will be evaluated in the light of the behaviorof its velocity, developments in the economy and financial markets,and the nature of emerging price pressures." If I can make aneditorial comment, I wrote this "the nature of emerging pricepressures" rather than "emerging price pressures" because we allconcede that there are likely to be some emerging price pressures thatwe have already taken into account. "In that connection, theCommittee believes that, particularly in the light of theextraordinary expansion of this aggregate in recent years, much slowermonetary growth would be appropriate in the context of continuingeconomic expansion accompanied by signs of intensifying pricepressures, perhaps related to significant weakness of the dollar inexchange markets, and relatively strong growth in the broad monetaryaggregates. Conversely, continuing sizable increases in M1 could beaccommodated in circumstances surrounded by sluggish businessactivity, maintenance of progress toward underlying price stability,and progress toward international equilibrium. As this implies, the-66-2/10-11/87Committee in reaching operational decisions during the year, mighttarget appropriate growth in M1 from time to time in the light ofcircumstances then prevailing, including the rate of growth of thebroader aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows disagreement or contention. The speaker is questioning the need for mentioning "the behavior of that aggregate and its appropriate growth" in relation to M1. They propose an alternative wording and mention that they have made an editorial comment. This suggests that there is disagreement or debate about the wording and approach to discussing M1.


Passage number 739.
"MR. MELZER. That's fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 740.
MR. ANGELL. Good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage is a statement or response that does not involve any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 741.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope you people are satisfied on theother side there. There is no other--we have a consensus on the otherparagraph.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement mentions that there is consensus in the other paragraph, implying agreement among the individuals mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 742.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Could I just raise a quick non-M1point about the long-run part. In terms of what we are saying aboutmonetary policy, I am getting more and more concerned about that debtvariable, even though nobody pays any attention to it. We are sittinghere again this year saying we are going to monitor it, which impliesa kind of quasi-sanction. We monitor a growth in debt up to 11percent with GNP growing [2 or 3] percent. I know we can't do a darnthing about the variable, but for four or five years now running wehave been monitoring it while it's behaving in a way that just doesnot make sense for the long term.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses concern about the debt variable and questions the logic of monitoring it while it behaves in a way that is not conducive to long-term stability.


Passage number 743.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am just thinking out loud--wemight say, as you just noted, that we have had a fairly liberalmonitoring range for this variable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 744.
 It has exceeded the range; thisyear we really expect it to be within this range that we are talkingabout and we would be increasingly disturbed--MR. ANGELL. But what would we do if were disturbed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the expected outcome is for something to be within a certain range, and they would be increasingly disturbed if it does not meet that expectation.


Passage number 745.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess what we would do is tighten up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a plan or strategy.


Passage number 746.
MR. ANGELL. Is anyone suggesting that that is what we shouldhave done during 1986.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if anyone is suggesting that a certain action should have been taken during 1986.


Passage number 747.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I wouldn't suggest that. But I dothink that when you look at the way growth in debt has departed fromthe growth in GNP over a period now of five years or so, there issimply a point where those chickens are going to come home to roost.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing agreement with the idea that there will be negative consequences due to the increasing debt.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 748.
MR. ANGELL. But any time a preference for financial assetsexplodes like it has during this deflation, as well as every deflationin our history, you can't have financial assets expanding without debtexpanding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests that an increase in financial assets during a deflationary period is always accompanied by an increase in debt.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 749.
MR. MORRIS. And the problem with the corporate debt sector,anyway, is that we have had, in large part, no corresponding growth incorporate assets. The offset to the debt has been a decline inequity; so we haven't had an increase in assets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, presents the problem of the corporate debt sector being accompanied by a decline in equity, indicating a lack of corresponding growth in corporate assets. This suggests a disagreement with the assumption or belief that the debt would be offset by an increase in assets.


Passage number 750.
MR. JOHNSON. We have had a run up in the price ofassets--equity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the fact that there has been a rise in the price of assets, specifically equity.


Passage number 751.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Whether it is sustainable or not isthe question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 752.
-67-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at it on the basis of marketvalues it doesn't look bad; if you look at it on the basis of balancesheets it looks pretty awful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting two different perspectives on the same situation. They acknowledge that when evaluated from the perspective of market values, it doesn't appear to be bad, but when evaluated from the perspective of balance sheets, it appears to be awful. There is no conflict or disagreement between these perspectives.


Passage number 753.
MR. JOHNSON. It depends upon how much weight you put onmarket value.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply presenting a perspective on the importance of market value, without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 754.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose nobody is saying that this isgoing to be our single judge, but I think it does lend some weight toour tightening. I would be very happy if we said something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that nobody is claiming the mentioned factor will be the sole judge, but believes it adds support to their argument about tightening. They express a personal desire for a certain statement to be made, indicating agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 755.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The only other choice is to drop itall together as something we in some sense monitor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about the only other choice being to drop something altogether.


Passage number 756.
MR. ANGELL. I understand the monetary aggregates and Iunderstand the validity of monitoring. But once those explode, theother side is going to explode too. The other side's problem is basedupon the quality or the ability to pay. It is a microeconomicjudgment, company by company.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Angell is explaining his understanding of the monetary aggregates and the importance of monitoring them. He also mentions that the problem on the other side (presumably referring to companies) is based on their ability to pay, which is a microeconomic judgment. However, he does not express any disagreement or contention with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 757.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we have exploding monetary aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not mention any specific points of disagreement or contention. It is a simple conditional statement without any conflicting arguments or opinions.


Passage number 758.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's precisely the reason why Ihave this concern--because there is [impairment in] the ability to payat some point. That is why in balance-sheet terms this is dangerousto the economy and I think there is a point where the chickens couldcome home to roost. Then the question for the Federal Reserve isgoing to be: What were you doing here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the potential danger to the economy and posing a question about the actions of the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 759.
MR. ANGELL. But, Jerry, it almost seems to me as if we aresaying we've got a danger out here, so what should we do. Well, weshould tighten. We are afraid people can't pay, and if we tightenthen we guarantee they can't pay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Angell, expressing his perspective on a certain situation.


Passage number 760.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I did not say we should tighten. Isaid that, at the very least, we ought to express some sensitivity tothis. I think there is a danger in just letting that sit out there ina way that at least subtly carries the implication that we areprepared to sanction or underwrite that kind of behavior indefinitely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 761.
MR. HELLER. In my mind at least, debt should be more amongthe categories of things we are monitoring: prices, growth, interestrates, exchange rates. Debt should be in that category rather than asa target variable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Heller, is stating his own opinion and suggesting that debt should be included in the category of things that are monitored (along with prices, growth, interest rates, and exchange rates) rather than being seen as a target variable.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 762.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am not trying to make it a targetvariable. I am just concerned that we have had it in there, ineffect, as a target variable. And it has been behaving in ways that Ithink over the long run raise some very difficult questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges that there may be disagreement or conflict regarding the presence of the target variable. They express concern and believe that its behavior poses challenging questions.


Passage number 763.
MR. ANGELL. I don't know what handle we have. There isn'tany margin requirement handle that would work. I don't know where wewould begin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of uncertainty by Mr. Angell.


Passage number 764.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am suggesting simply that we beprepared in some appropriate words to acknowledge that there is apotential problem here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It is a suggestion to be prepared to acknowledge a potential problem.


Passage number 765.
-68-2/10-11/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is what we are doing anyway, in somesense. It doesn't have any operational significance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states what "we" are doing and implies that it lacks operational significance.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 766.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Look at the nonfinancial corporatesector: since the end of 1984, $230 billion in equity and $480 billionin debt has been retired. Now, some of that is the retiring of short-term debt with long-term debt. I know all the circumstances. But youjust can't have that kind of thing indefinitely, in my judgment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But you just can't have that kind of thing indefinitely, in my judgment" suggests that the speaker disagrees with the idea of retiring debt and replacing it with long-term debt indefinitely.


Passage number 767.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only contains the name "MR. ANGELL" and does not provide any additional information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 768.
 Well, our tax law changes help because in thepast it paid to not pay dividends, and to pay it out in the form ofleveraging out and--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement describing past tax law changes and their effects. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 769.
 That should mean that debt growthshould be--MR. ANGELL. It should be less. I think the tax law willreduce debt growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 770.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But not by that much; the basic incentiveis still there. It is now less than it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement acknowledges that the incentive is still present but it has decreased compared to what it was before. There is no disagreement or contention expressed in this passage.


Passage number 771.
MR. ANGELL. And people who have learned to benefit from theother one will continue to behave that way as long as an economicincentive is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that individuals will continue to act in a certain way as long as there is an economic incentive for doing so.


Passage number 772.
MR. JOHNSON. I'd be happy for us to carry on a campaign toallow [tax] credits for the dividends.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Johnson's opinion about tax credits for dividends.


Passage number 773.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but you can't use that. I have beencarrying on that campaign in a not very effective way for some time.But I suppose your concern about it is more the corporate debt; thatis one area. You have made your point. I don't know how operationalit is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they have been carrying on a campaign in an ineffective way and acknowledges the listener's concern about corporate debt. They also agree with the listener's point without expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 774.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It is not. I feel better havingmade it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges feeling better after accomplishing something, indicating a positive personal experience.


Passage number 775.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other points to be raised,I guess we can vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any trace of contention or disagreement. The speaker is suggesting that if there are no additional points to be discussed, they can proceed with a vote.


Passage number 776.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


