Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 31, 1987A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 31, 1987 at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Volcker, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHellerJohnsonKeehnSegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,respectivelyMr.Mr.MrsMr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserBernard, Assistant SecretaryLoney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryBradfield, General CounselKichline, EconomistTruman, Economist (International)Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum,Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account3/31/87Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office ofStaff Director for Monetary and Financial Policy,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Hendricks and Powell, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and San Francisco,respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Burger, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell,Messrs. Scadding and Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofRichmond, St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston,San Francisco, New York, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. R.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing a list of people who were present at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.


Passage number 2.
 Davis, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal ReserveBank of New York- 2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 31, 1987CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to elect officers first of all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned in this passage. It simply states that the election of officers is the first matter to be addressed.


Passage number 3.
MR. JOHNSON. I would like to start this by nominatingChairman Volcker to be Chairman and President Corrigan to be ViceChairman.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is nominating Chairman Volcker to be Chairman and President Corrigan to be Vice Chairman, and the speaker is seconding the nomination.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a second. Do we have anyobjections. If not, I won't commit any time. We have a list [ofproposed officers]. I guess you want the names on the list. Willsomebody read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation and seeking assistance in reading a list.


Passage number 5.
MR. BERNARD.Secretary and Staff Adviser, Donald KohnAssistant Secretary, Normand BernardDeputy Assistant Secretary, Rosemary LoneyGeneral Counsel, Michael BradfieldDeputy General Counsel, James OltmanEconomist, James KichlineEconomist, International, Edwin TrumanAssociate Economists from the Board: David Lindsey,Michael Prell, Charles Siegman, and Thomas Simpson.Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:Peter Fousek, New York; Richard Lang, Philadelphia;Arthur Rolnick, Minneapolis; Harvey Rosenblum,Dallas; and Karl Scheld, Chicago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a list of names and positions.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I have a motion to vote.SPEAKER(.). I so move.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 7.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I have objections. We have thequestion of the New York Bank as agent. Nomination or objection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It presents a question and then presents two options, nomination or objection.


Passage number 8.
MR. JOHNSON. I move the New York Bank as agent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 9.
MR. ANGELL. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It simply states the speaker is Mr. Angell and does not provide any additional context to determine if there is disagreement or contention.


Passage number 10.
MS. SEGER. Is there a choice on any of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 11.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you would like to suggest it, yes. Youwill take the burden of suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if someone would like to suggest something, they are welcome to do so. They also mention that the burden of suggestion will be on the person making the suggestion, but this does not imply any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 12.
MS. SEGER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: To accurately determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage, the passage itself needs to be provided. Please provide the passage in question so that an answer can be given.


Passage number 13.
 What if I recommend Kansas City, from theheartland--MR. GUFFEY. Wonderful thought, Martha.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both parties seem to agree that recommending Kansas City is a wonderful thought.


Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have two Managers, both of whom I thinkare so able bodied and sitting here. Do we have a nomination.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 15.
3/31/87VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am not sure you can back that up.SPEAKER(.). I so move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses uncertainty about whether something can be backed up, but it doesn't necessarily imply disagreement with anyone else. The phrase "I so move" also does not inherently suggest disagreement, as it could simply be a statement of action.


Passage number 16.
MR. JOHNSON. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Johnson speaking, but does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objection. The Authorization forDomestic Open Market Operations has been distributed to you. Do weneed to formally readopt this. Do I have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a series of questions asking for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 18.
MR. ANGELL. I move it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating an intention or proposition without any opposition or debate.


Passage number 19.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "second" does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing a sequential order or position.


Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any objection. Next are theForeign Currency Authorization, Foreign Currency Directive andProcedural Instructions. Do you have a problem with these, Mr. Cross,or what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply inquiring if there are any objections to the mentioned documents.


Passage number 21.
MR. CROSS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I do wish to recommend thatthe Committee consider a change. In the authorized balances, we havean informal limit and a formal limit. The informal limit on marks ispresently $6 billion worth of marks. We are now at $5.8 billion worthof marks and the simple accrual of interest earnings, if nothing elsehappens over the rest of this year, would put us over that $6 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Cross is simply making a recommendation for the committee to consider a change in the authorized balances.


Passage number 22.
The other--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't appear anyplace in this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 23.
MR. CROSS. That is an informal limit which does not appearin the published record. However, the authorized balances which[unintelligible] was $10 billion, including informal balances of theDM at $6 billion, the yen at $3 billion, and other currencies at $1billion. The System's overall open position, which is $10 billion, isa matter of record. My proposal to increase the allowance for markbalances from $6 billion to $7 billion would go along with a proposalto increase the total from $10 billion to $11 billion for theauthorized balances of all currencies and the total System openposition.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and making a proposal.


Passage number 24.
MR. ANGELL. While we are making increases, why would we notwant to allow more room than that. What reason is there to keep thelimits that close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell is simply expressing a question or suggestion, seeking to understand the reason behind keeping the limits close.


Passage number 25.
MR. CROSS. I have no objection to increasing it beyond that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states that they have no objection to increasing something beyond a certain point. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement alone.


Passage number 26.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if I understand it correctly, theonly formal limit is that $10 billion limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding of a formal limit of $10 billion without expressing any disagreement or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 27.
MR. CROSS. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Cross agrees or confirms something, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 28.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] enough yen so that we aregoing to be comfortable within it, but I don't know about one-way[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about a certain topic, but there is no clear disagreement or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 29.
 We were up to $9 billion, but now--MR. CROSS. On yen balances, we have more room than we hadbecause we have been spending yen recently. The reason to change it,since it does get published and it does draw some attention, is that3/31/87now is the time to change it. And I think the $1 billion increasewould give us room for what we do not anticipate, assuming we followthe same practices that we have followed in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation for why they believe it is necessary to change the given situation. They mention that they have more room because they have been spending yen recently and propose a $1 billion increase to allow for unforeseen circumstances in the future.


Passage number 30.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I myself don't see any problem if we wantto raise them further, say, to $12 billion, and consider thatinformal. We don't vote on it, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any statement or indication of disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing the writer's personal opinion about raising an amount of money informally.


Passage number 31.
MR. CROSS. I would certainly be very pleased with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply expresses their agreement and satisfaction.


Passage number 32.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $7 billion is what you are saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is not expressing any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a value of $7 billion.


Passage number 33.
MR. CROSS. I am proposing to raise the mark limit from $6billion to $7 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Cross, is simply proposing a raise in the mark limit from $6 billion to $7 billion.


Passage number 34.
 If we raised it further we could--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The issue we formally have to vote on isthe overall limit, for which you are suggesting $11 billion. GovernorAngell, I guess, is suggesting $12 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents different suggested amounts for the overall limit.


Passage number 35.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Angell agrees with something.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Assumed under that would be anunderstanding that marks could go at least to $8 billion, if I mayreword it that way, under that $12 billion. Do you want to go to $12billion. Does somebody want to make a motion to go to $12 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 37.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement as it only includes one person expressing agreement or affirmation with a brief response.


Passage number 38.
MS. SEGER. And I will second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no objections to that, wewill change the overall limit to $12 billion, with the informalunderstanding that mark balances could go to $8 billion. What's theinformal understanding on yen now. I realize that you are going inthe other direction on yen now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not express disagreement or contention. It is discussing potential changes to the overall limit and mark balances, and there is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 40.
MR. CROSS. We have $3 billion on yen as the informalunderstanding. The present $10 billion breaks down to $6 billion inmarks, $3 billion in yen, and $1 billion for other currencies. If wego to $12 billion, we could propose to divide that into $8 billion, $3billion, and $1 billion [respectively].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a breakdown of currency amounts.


Passage number 41.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" is just stating a title or position without any indication of disagreement.


Passage number 42.
 Okay, returning to the agenda--MR. BERNARD. It brings us to the regular minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply moving on to a new topic.


Passage number 43.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to approve the minutes. Can Ihave a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they need to approve the minutes and then asks for a motion.


Passage number 44.
MR. JOHNSON. I move we adopt the minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that Mr. Johnson is moving to adopt the minutes, indicating agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 45.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections. Mr. Cross' report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any objections or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Cross' report and asks if there are any objections.


Passage number 46.
MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.] Thank you, Mr.Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Cross is expressing gratitude to the chairman, indicating agreement or support.


Passage number 47.
MR. BLACK. Sam, to what extent have the market participantsbeen able to figure out how much we have done in exchange market3/31/87intervention for our account and for the Treasury's account. Is therea pretty good idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a question from one person to another, asking about the extent to which market participants have been able to figure out the amount of intervention in the exchange market. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 48.
MR. CROSS. Well, on a number of these occasions we have beenoperating in a way to make it quite open and quite obvious that wewere there. We have dealt with a lot of banks. We have dealt withthem directly and we have done it quite visibly. It's very difficultto be absolutely precise about the amount of our intervention, butcertainly market participants know that we have been in there in avery substantial way. And I don't think these numbers would shockthem. Certainly, some people are expecting that these numbers are theamounts that we can go in. They have seen a lot. We have not madeany statements and the Japanese have not made any statements about theprecise amounts, but they know we have been in there very heavily.SPEAKER(.). Are we sharing this intervention with theTreasury on a 50/50 basis or has that changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that they have been operating visibly in the market and that market participants are aware of their intervention. There is no mention of any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 49.
MR. CROSS. We are sharing it with the Treasury on a 50/50basis with one minor exception. Generally, we are doing it on a 50/50basis.SPEAKER(.). Where is the yen/dollar relationship thismorning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Cross states that they are sharing it with the Treasury on a 50/50 basis, with one minor exception. He then mentions that generally, they are doing it on a 50/50 basis. The Speaker's question about the yen/dollar relationship does not indicate any disagreement or contention either.


Passage number 50.
MR. CROSS. The yen is just over 146. The Japanese have hadsome interest in trying to hold it around the 146 level and so theyclosed yesterday at just over 146; we closed yesterday at just over146, although it declined in the course of the day and it declinedagain in the course of the day in Tokyo last night. They did anotheror so of intervention, but it closed again at 146. Thedollar against the mark is at 1.80-1/2. The dollar did weakensomewhat against the mark yesterday in the course of the trading dayand got down to about 1.79-1/2, but then it moved back up and is nowat about 1.80-1/2.SPEAKER(.). Do you attribute much significance to theJapanese fiscal year ending today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the current exchange rates for the yen and the dollar against the mark. There is no disagreement or debate present.


Passage number 51.
MR. CROSS, It certainly has been a factor.SPEAKER(.). Will it help us, then, as we get past that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems like the speaker and Mr. Cross are in agreement about the idea that it has been a factor and asking if it will help them in the future.


Passage number 52.
MR. CROSS. Well, that remains to be seen. It has been afactor; firms have had dollars to deal with because of their need tostraighten out their books at the end of the fiscal year. This hasbeen a factor over the past several weeks.SPEAKER(.). Sam, what's the tone in the market. Is theresome growing concern that we really could run into a significant[unintelligible] or is there some feeling that the intervention wouldprevent that from occurring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and additional information about the current market situation.


Passage number 53.
MR. CROSS. Well, it's hard to say. You pay your money andtake a choice. It's hard to be too certain. I am sure there is arange of ideas involving a lot of people. Obviously, given thismassive amount of Japanese investments, much of it unhedged, there isconcern that a real loss of confidence in the dollar could lead to3/31/87very [unintelligible]. That's obviously hanging over the market. Butto what extent that view is held, it's pretty difficult to say. We doknow that a fair amountof the dollar sales that they assumed in Tokyo in the past week or tendays has been in the form of investment firms like insurancecompanies, pension funds, and so forth, doing a certain amount ofhedging. So that's certainly a big [unintelligible] supply and demandequation there.SPEAKER(.). When the Japanese sell dollar-denominatedassets, where then do they go with those funds. In what currency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various ideas and opinions about the impact of Japanese investments and the potential loss of confidence in the dollar. They mention that there may be a range of ideas held by different people, but do not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 54.
MR. CROSS. I wasn't suggesting that they were selling on andoff although what they have been doing recently is diversifying theirpurchases much more. They have been buying a lot more Canadiansecurities, Australian securities, and European securities; and theyhave also broadened out from government-bond types of investmentstoward more diversification. But there is also a certain amount ofhedging, without selling the assets--hedging against these in order toprotect oneself. And that is fairly important to do.SPEAKER(.). What kinds of techniques are they using to hedgethemselves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and explaining the actions of the subject in question.


Passage number 55.
MR. CROSS. I imagine they use [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only includes a statement by Mr. Cross without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 56.
MR. HELLER. Sam, are they all sterilized here and abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Heller is asking a question to clarify if all individuals are sterilized both domestically and internationally.


Passage number 57.
MR. CROSS. They are certainly sterilized here. I think,generally speaking, they are sterilized abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is stating that they are sterilized both domestically and internationally, without any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 58.
MS. SEGER. When you said that the Desk intervened when thedollar got to 1.87 marks, was your next comment sort of a suggestionthat maybe we should [not] have done that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Seger questions the speaker's suggestion of not intervening when the dollar reached 1.87 marks, implying a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 59.
MR. CROSS. No, it wasn't that at all. It was that once ithad gone up and we intervened in a very light way--we didn't go inwith guns blazing by any means--and once the market realized that wewere in there intervening at those levels with all of the attention tothe Paris understanding and talk about [unintelligible] and all, itdidn't take too much to say, well, now that we have established this[unintelligible], it is likely to be resisted. Now we can see whereit is going to go on the other side. So it reduced the expectationsof the possibility of a continued rise in the dollar. Fundamentally,I think the position was kind of bearish anyhow. Everybody lookingahead not just a matter of days but a substantial period [knows] westill have the big deficits and the Japanese have their big surpluses.That sort of gives you a fundamental position toward the dollar. Andonce this had been hit on the up side they began to look toward thedown side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their perspective on why the market reacted as it did and why they believe the position towards the dollar is bearish. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it's almost like [unintelligible] amistake.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "And it's almost like [unintelligible] a mistake" appears to be a continuation of a thought but lacks clarity due to being unintelligible.


Passage number 61.
MR. PARRY. Sam, with the appreciation of sterling and themark, are pressures developing in the United States.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, is simply stating a fact about the appreciation of sterling and the mark and the pressures developing in the United States.


Passage number 62.
3/31/87MR. CROSS. No really, it has been relatively peaceful attimes. There has been [unintelligible] had the ability to destructitself, as it were, after the last [unintelligible] and to get backsome of the reflows that had gone out in anticipation of it. Some ofthe interest rates have come down in some of the countries that hadmoved them up. So there has been a little return to normalcy on the[unintelligible] side.SPEAKER(.). What kinds of actions other than exchange rateintervention might be helpful in this kind of a situation either hereor abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the current state of affairs and possible actions that could be taken.


Passage number 63.
MR. CROSS. Are you addressing that to me.SPEAKER(.). I asked a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Cross is simply asking for clarification and the Speaker is responding politely with a question.


Passage number 64.
MR. CROSS. I think there is certainly going to be continuedwatching as to whether any of these policy commitments that weretalked about in Paris are actually carried out via fiscal policy ormonetary policy. The German economy is very soft; they haven't reallytaken anything new. They, of course, have been [unintelligible] atthe time that they reconstitute their government. But their economyhas been very weak, and people have seen that they have done nothingon monetary policy and don't show much prospect of doing anything infiscal policy except in a framework of next year and the year afternext. The Japanese economy is equally well below what it typicallyruns at, and nothing has been happening there. The problem is thatthey have to get through this fiscal year and get their budget passedbefore they can start with a new budget, they say. Nonetheless,nobody has seen anything.SPEAKER(.). They haven't taken the opportunity to leave someof this intervention unsterilized to give a boost to monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about the state of the German and Japanese economies and their lack of action in monetary and fiscal policies. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 65.
MR. CROSS. I think they sterilized it. They feel with theirdiscount rate now at 2-1/2 percent that they have gone pretty far.Also, people don't see anything on the U.S. side. We make commentsabout the budget deficit and one thing or another, and there is notmuch evidence there. Still, the main issue that's in the newspapersis the dispute over trade matters and that raises in people's mindsthe possibility that the way to deal with the trade--if you really getinto a trade war--is to pound down the currency in order to deal withthe situation in that way. That has been the main issue in thenewspapers, so the trade disputes have been a very negative factor.Also, in the present circumstances, a neutral statement by U.S.officials seems to be taken by the market as a kind of a negative.It's a lack of a positive firm commitment--I guess that's the way toput it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply sharing their observations and opinions about the current economic situation and how it is being perceived by the market.


Passage number 66.
MR. HELLER. You put a lot of emphasis on these statements,but there was an awful lot of hot news that was very bad too. All ofthe trade numbers that came in were very bad. The current accountnumbers were very bad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that there was also negative news in addition to the emphasized statements.


Passage number 67.
 I think that was the real substance that--MR. CROSS. Absolutely. I thought I had a sentence somewherein there [in my statement]. We haven't seen any compelling evidence.We know that our exports are looking better, and so forth and so on;but looking at the trade deficits and things like that, all we get is3/31/87the very bad nominal trade deficits and surpluses with little, if any,evidence of any reversal.SPEAKER(.). But I presume, Sam, that the firm commitmentimplies, among other things, some unsterilized intervention orsomething else that would back up whatever statements are made.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speakers are simply providing their opinions and agreeing with each other.


Passage number 68.
MR. CROSS. Well, I am not sure it would imply unsterilizedintervention but I think that it's [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses uncertainty about whether something implies unsterilized intervention, but there is no explicit or implicit disagreement with any other individual or viewpoint.


Passage number 69.
MR. TRUMAN. Fiscal policy area; we are not in monetarypolicy.SPEAKER(.). Sam, would you care to speculate at what levelof the yen you would think Japanese investors might begin to sell offdollar assets--143, 142.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 70.
MR. CROSS. I don't really have any confidence in people'sattempts to make estimates of that sort, because I am not sure thereis a number out there. I think it depends upon people's attitudes andthose are changing all of the time. I think we could have aconfluence of circumstances that could lead them to sell. But whatmight go into it to require that. I am not sure about a specificnumber, but I think we are obviously in a very dangerous area whereproblems of that sort could build up very quickly and cause greatdamage.SPEAKER(.). You could also have it go so low that investorsthink the bottom has been hit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Both speakers are expressing uncertainty and acknowledging various factors that could affect investor attitudes and stock prices.


Passage number 71.
MR. CROSS. Well, that's right--if one were convinced ofthat. But, again, I don't think we live in the kind of world wherethere is a magic number that when you hit it, then everybody knows it,and says: Okay, now we buy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion about the world and the concept of a "magic number."


Passage number 72.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, our current published [foreigncurrency] directive limits our operations to countering disorderlymarket conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of a limit on operations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
 This last episode seems to me maybe not to fallinto that category; rather it seems that we are getting awfully closeto a managed float situation which--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not very well managed float.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Not very well managed float" suggests that the author disagrees with the idea of a managed float situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 74.
MR. GUFFEY. To be sure. But the point is either that thedirective should be changed if we are going to go the route that wehave been on the last couple of weeks or, in the alternative, that weshouldn't be doing what we have been doing--other than the commitmentthat was made in Paris. That speaks to changing the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting two alternative options and implying that the current directive should be changed or that the actions being taken should not continue. This implies a disagreement with the current approach.


Passage number 75.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we just approved the directive and Iam a little hesitant to raise it, but I guess we can. It has been awhile since I looked at this, but I take comfort in that it says"shall be generally directed at countering disorderly monetaryconditions." It talks about behavior consistent with Article IV.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is hesitant to raise a certain topic but ultimately agrees that they can discuss it. They also find comfort in a specific aspect of the directive, indicating agreement with its content.


Passage number 76.
MR. GUFFEY. Article IV, as I read it, is not a constraint ortype of directive, so I go back to the simple phrase counteringdisorderly markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply presents a statement by Mr. Guffey and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 77.
3/31/87MR. TRUMAN. The reason for that reference, President Guffey,was based on a little history; it was to guard against circumstancesin which there was so-called manipulation of exchange rates. That waswhy we might be more aggressive. The other point, of course, is thatthis [directive] has been in existence since 1976 and has coveredperiods in the past similar to the one we had in the last few days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a historical reference and the existence of a directive since 1976.


Passage number 78.
MR. CROSS. I think it has been interpreted broadly enough todeal with all of the situations since then. It's similar to theundertakings which the United States has with the IMF as to what itsexchange rate policy will be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Cross is stating his opinion that the policy has been interpreted broadly enough to address various situations, and he compares it to the undertakings of the United States with the IMF.


Passage number 79.
 So it's part of a broader--MR. GUFFEY. Well, I understand the term counteringdisorderly markets can be interpreted [differently] and I guess that'sthe prerogative of the Chairman's subcommittee or the Committee. Inmy mind, what we have been engaging in does not fall within thatcategory.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging that the interpretation of the term "countering disorderly markets" may vary, but is stating their own personal belief that their actions do not fall within that category.


Passage number 80.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it does or itdoesn't. I guess we are going to be hard pressed to make up otherlanguage. Maybe somebody can look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and questioning whether it is possible to create a new language. They mention that someone else may be able to provide insight or assistance in the matter.


Passage number 81.
MR. GUFFEY. Maybe somebody should look at it, at least.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that someone should look at something, but there is no opposition or conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we can do it sitting aroundthis table right now. I designate Mr. Cross to look at this and seeif he comes up with any better ideas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and then designating someone else to explore other possibilities. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 83.
MR. CROSS. Yes, we will look at it in light of what we aredoing now and see if it looks like there is something we shouldchange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will review the situation and determine if any changes are necessary based on their current actions.


Passage number 84.
MR. HELLER. Sam, has any consideration been given to forwardpurchases and sales rather than spot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it is a question by Mr. Heller asking if consideration has been given to forward purchases and sales.


Passage number 85.
MR. CROSS. That is one of those endless debates that goeson. We haven't really [unintelligible]. We pretty well had our handsfull [unintelligible] spot. I am not sure I am convinced[unintelligible] but it's something we have been watching.SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and uncertainty about a certain topic, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 86.
 How many more bullets do we have in our belt asfar as--MR. CROSS. Well, with the yen we have in our pocket about$700 million, but these are at a valuation that was set at the timethey were acquired; they are now worth a third or so more than that.The Treasury has substantially more. They have $2.1 billion, again atthe acquisition cost. And then, of course, we have a swap arrangementwith the Bank of Japan of $5 billion dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is presenting information about the amount of bullets/bullets (money) available.


Passage number 87.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We still have about a billion dollars incurrent market value.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the current market value.


Passage number 88.
MR. CROSS. Yes, a little over $1 billion. The Treasury hasaround $3 billion at present market value.SPEAKER(.). And we have spent how much, again, in the lastweek or ten days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification on the amount of money that has been spent in the last week or ten days.


Passage number 89.
3/31/87MR. CROSS. A little over $2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a fact about the amount of money, a little over $2 billion.


Passage number 90.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "We together" without providing any conflicting opinions or ideas.


Passage number 91.
MR. CROSS. We--the Treasury and the Federal Reserve and theJapanese--have spent overSPEAKER(.). So we have spent about half of our holdings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about how much money has been spent.


Passage number 92.
MR. CROSS. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 93.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage as it is marked as unintelligible.


Passage number 94.
]VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right. Silver lining behinda cloud.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states a positive statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 95.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in the given passage. The passage only provides the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without any context or additional information. Thus, there is no information to suggest or imply any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 96.
 Well, if there is no other discussion, wewill turn to--MR. CROSS. We need the approval, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple acknowledgment that they need approval.


Passage number 97.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to approve the operations. [Movedand approved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The passage simply states that the operations need to be approved.


Passage number 98.
]MR. CROSS. I am glad we had the election before my report.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that the speaker is glad the election happened before their report.


Passage number 99.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 100.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement from Mr. Sternlight without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 101.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 102.
MR. JOHNSON. Peter, you have advocated buying coupons in thepast. You said there was a possibility for an add need.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is simply stating a fact about Peter advocating buying coupons in the past.


Passage number 103.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that's part of the add need ahead.It makes very good sense to buy coupons for some portion of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement expressing agreement or support for the idea of buying coupons.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 104.
MR. JOHNSON. There has been some controversy over that issuein the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is controversy over the issue discussed.


Passage number 105.
 I just wondered if--MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 106.
 Well, we have been talking about it and Ithink as we work out this need, which runs to several billions ofdollars, there is room for bills and coupons as part of the--MS. SEGER. At what point would you let the rising federalfunds rate override your concern about a weakening dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about discussing a need and considering the use of bills and coupons.


Passage number 107.
 If it gotto 8 percent, would you--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, if it got to 8 percent as a long-standing matter that would obviously be a concern; even 7 percent, Ithink, would cause one to sit up and take some considerable notice.We are getting a high rate today just because it's the quarter-end.The very early report I saw had today's funds rate opening at 6-3/4percent. That was a surprise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses concern about the interest rate reaching 8 percent and states that even 7 percent would be noteworthy. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 108.
 To see it getting up to 7 percent orhigher on this day--MS. SEGER. I am not talking about a one-day shot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It simply states a fact or observation about a specific day.


Passage number 109.
3/31/87MR. STERNLIGHT. On a lasting basis, I'd feel concern aboutrates that were considerably over 6 percent, given the current set ofexpectations and the current kind of borrowing need that we have inour reserve paths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing concern about interest rates exceeding 6 percent given the current expectations and borrowing needs.


Passage number 110.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Clearly, though, if the bottom fellout in the context of the conversation that was taking place earlierbetween Mr. Cross and--I forget who it was--Si Keehn, maybe, themarkets would do [unintelligible] in a very decisive way no matterwhat we did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is expressing a hypothetical situation and stating that regardless of the action taken, the markets would face significant consequences. There is no contention or disagreement present in this statement.


Passage number 111.
MR. JOHNSON. Like yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without more context


Passage number 112.
MR. MORRIS. I wouldn't go on to admit that the more[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is incomplete, making it difficult to determine the context or any potential disagreement.


Passage number 113.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's what got kicked so hard yesterday.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about what happened to Mr. Johnson.


Passage number 114.
MS. SEGER. I was reacting to Peter Sternlight's comment thatour own estimate showed a need to add reserves, but that apparently itwasn't done to the full extent because of the concern about what wasgoing on. I just wondered where those trade-offs come.SPEAKER(.). In relation to the borrowing target, generallyover the intermeeting period you have at least [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. It is simply a conversation about the allocation of reserves and the decision-making process surrounding it.


Passage number 115.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Borrowings came in just close to the $300million, and in this current reserve period they're running around$250 million, which is consistent with the recent period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states the borrowing amounts over a period of time, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 116.
MR. JOHNSON. What's coming up, Peter, in terms of reserveneeds. Do we have a seasonal draining or adding period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple inquiry about upcoming reserve needs.


Passage number 117.
MR. STERNLIGHT. There is a big seasonal add need, mostlyfrom currency and partly from required [reserves]. We are adding toit somewhat by the foreign exchange intervention that [has occurred]--several hundred million a day at the recent pace. But for thiscurrent reserve period, at least on the numbers we were looking atyesterday, there is roughly a $3 billion need to meet in the remainderof this period, and we are just about halfway through; and then thereis about a $5 or $6 billion need in the subsequent reserve period andslightly more than that in the period beyond that. These estimatesare cumulative; there are some additional needs beyond the $3 billion,which accumulate to about $5 or $6 billion in the next period and to$6 or $7 billion in the period beyond that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about the need for currency and reserves and the estimates for future periods.


Passage number 118.
MS. SEGER. So we don't have a contingency plan, then--thatif all hell broke loose even more than it has so far--as to exactlywhat we would do when.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is no contingency plan in place.


Passage number 119.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, our basic stance has been to meet theneeds, following the directive to the extent that there is some day-to-day discretion about the pattern of reserve needs as they unfold.We try to implement in a cautious manner, [and be aware of] anythingthat could be helpful or avoid exacerbating the internationalsituation. I don't think it makes a tremendous difference; it's moreat the margin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their basic approach and the factors they consider in their decision-making process.


Passage number 120.
-10-3/31/87MR. GUFFEY. I have been on the call the last several weeks,Martha, and I think they have been very skillful at that, in terms ofattempting to do what needs to be done domestically but dealing withthis international situation that is overhanging the market. And Ithink they have handled it well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a positive opinion about the handling of a situation by a group or individual.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without actually providing the passage. Please provide the passage to analyze and I will be able to give a more accurate answer.


Passage number 122.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 123.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I forgot to ask you to ratify the domesticoperations. Would you like to ratify those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 124.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I move it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "I move it" does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states an action or intention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 125.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there's no objection, we can discussthe business outlook.SPEAKER(.). Jim, I have a question. Inventory investment isclearly an important component of your forecast, especially in thefirst quarter of this year. One thing that struck me in terms of yourforecast is the forecast of negative changes in farming inventoriesover a 9-quarter period which is clearly unprecedented in the postwarperiod. I wonder what you had in mind in assuming decumulation in thefarm sector over that length of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker questions Jim's assumption of negative changes in farming inventories over a 9-quarter period, which the speaker believes is unprecedented. This implies a disagreement or objection to Jim's forecast.


Passage number 126.
MR. KICHLINE. Part of what is going on there is ourassumption that more crops are going to be placed in CCC programs. Iam not an expert in the agricultural area but, given the change insome of the farm programs, apparently farmers have been induced totransfer more of their ownership to the government--essentially to CCCstocks, which are rising--and it's coming out of the farm inventories.SPEAKER(.). So that should show up in terms of more[unintelligible] purchases and federal nondefense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Kichline is providing a statement about his assumption and lack of expertise in the agricultural area, while the speaker's response does not challenge or disagree with this statement.


Passage number 127.
MR. KICHLINE. Correct.SPEAKER(.). A little weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 128.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's weak in part because of otherthings happening in the federal sector. Given the deficit-reducingactions taken last year, we think that real nondefense outlays will benegative this year and next year.SPEAKER(.). In spite of that CCC development.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker's response is cut off, so it is unclear if there is any disagreement, but based on the given excerpt, there is no apparent contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 129.
MR. GUFFEY. Jim, for the fourth quarter of 1987, yourprojection in this Greenbook shows personal consumption expendituresdown about 1-1/2 percentage points from last Greenbook to roughly ahalf percent. What are the factors.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from Mr. Guffey's statement about the projection for personal consumption expenditures being down about 1-1/2 percentage points, indicating a difference from the previous Greenbook projection.


Passage number 130.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, you are looking at an auto story. Wedecided to put in what has happened over the last two years[unintelligible]. In the third quarter we have personal consumptionrising only 1-1/2 percentage points at an annual rate. Part of that,we think, is because of the increase in purchases of autos, withmanufacturers once again trying to clean up their stocks in the third-11-3/31/87quarter. The offset is a weaker consumption growth picture in thefourth quarter. I just might note that, on average in this forecast,we are drifting into a range of very low personal consumption figures.A one percent [growth rate over the two quarters] is historically verylow.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information and observations regarding the auto industry and personal consumption growth.


Passage number 131.
MR. BOYKIN. Do you figure in very much of a kick from thehome equity loans, from the standpoint of consumption. Do you seethat helping very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question being asked.


Passage number 132.
MR. KICHLINE. We haven't done much there explicitly. Ourassumption has been that a good deal of that is substituting forconsumer credit and other second mortgage loans rather than leading toa substantial increase in consumer spending. That's an open issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Kichline is discussing an open issue and stating that there hasn't been much explicit action in that area, while expressing an assumption.


Passage number 133.
MR. BOYKIN. The banks seem to be trying to push them prettyhard. I wondered whether or not that would be successful and what itwould lead to.SPEAKER(.). Jim, how about some of the price indices thatyou follow in a more current sense--commodities indices and so forth.What are they showing in terms of recent behavior.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange between two individuals discussing the behavior of banks and price indices.


Passage number 134.
MR. KICHLINE. I think some of the commodity prices recentlyhave calmed down; the big run-up was from August through early thisyear when there was a substantial increase. Since then, there hasbeen some bouncing about, particularly in terms of industrialmaterials prices, but they have been relatively flat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their observation about commodity prices without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 135.
MR. GUFFEY. Just to continue on with a question aboutconsumption. If you look at services, particularly beginning in thesecond quarter of 1987, growth rates spend most of their time,actually, at less than 1-1/2 percent. Is there any time that we haveever experienced that other than in a recession. Secularly, growth ofservice expenditures is probably more in the range of 3 percent plus.I think on a cyclical basis we have seen it for a couple of quarters,but nothing like this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Guffey, raises a question about consumption growth rates in services. He argues that historically, such growth rates have rarely been less than 1-1/2 percent unless during a recession, suggesting disagreement with the current low growth rates. However, he also acknowledges that on a cyclical basis, there have been a few quarters with similarly low growth rates, though not as severe as the current situation. This suggests a contention or disagreement in interpreting the current consumption growth rates in services.


Passage number 136.
MR. KICHLINE. I was hinting in our personal consumptionstory, President Guffey, that basically I think a one percent growth,when we have 3 percent growth in real GNP, is a very [unintelligible]number. In putting this together, we have really looked at the incomeside as well. In forecasting, as you well know, one can view thesaving rate as somewhat of a constraint. I didn't want to see savingrates without the first digit being at least 3 percent; and if that isthe case, we really get [unintelligible]. We don't have much in theway of real disposable income growth. We think wealth is explainingthe lower saving rate, in part. We are getting some increasedspending [unintelligible] wealth positions. But basically, what comesout--if we view the saving rate as having some implicit strength--isthat we are going to be forced into slow rates of increase in realPCE. But it is, as you point out, quite unusual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is a statement and explanation of the speaker's views and analysis.


Passage number 137.
MR. GUFFEY. This goes back to the old story. You aredepending greatly upon the turnaround in net exports to make this apalatable forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about depending on the turnaround in net exports for a forecast.


Passage number 138.
3/31/87MR. PRELL. If the circumstances that we presume will bringthat about didn't occur, real disposable income would be a bitstronger and there would be at least some offsets. So we have to lookat it simultaneously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the need to consider multiple factors simultaneously.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the automatic offset.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking a factual question about the "automatic offset" and does not include any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 140.
MR. PRELL. For example, if we didn't get the greatimprovement because import prices didn't rise substantially, thenconsumer inflation would be less and, in the first instance, realdisposable income would be higher so that consumption wouldn't beaffected as much. Basically, our weak consumption is part of anoverall adjustment process that is shifting resources away fromdomestic consumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation for why weak consumption is occurring as part of an overall adjustment process.


Passage number 141.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that. But suppose theexternal side did not improve because business was so weak abroad.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges understanding the initial statement and then presents a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 142.
MR. PRELL. Well, interest rate [unintelligible] and a wholeassortment of different variables.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Prell about interest rates and various variables.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 143.
MR. JOHNSON. That raises a point that I was asking aboutyesterday; I still haven't cleared it up quite in my head. I got ananswer, but I can't repeat it. The staff's forecast for growth abroadwas revised down by a significant amount, yet our GNP numbers haven'treally changed. I need a review of how we would make that up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, raises a point about a discrepancy between the staff's forecast for growth abroad and the GNP numbers that haven't changed. He admits to not understanding how this difference can be reconciled, indicating a disagreement or confusion about the situation.


Passage number 144.
MR. TRUMAN. We make it up, I think, in the short run in twoareas. When we do the forecast we take a look at some of the factorsthat go into it. Although the effect of the lower growth abroad wouldbe less growth in nonagricultural exports, we also look at prices ofthose exports. Those we had moving up a bit more than we thought wascomfortable and, as a result, we tended to offset the price effect onthe volume. [Unintelligible] lower. Looking back over the last 6months or so, since last July, there has been a substantial decline in[the outlook for] industrial countries; we have 3/4 percent lowerlevel of real GNP at the end of this year than we had last July.There you see it more clearly; essentially, the growth effect is quitepronounced. There you get another offset because the dollar has beenmuch lower. Looking at it from their side, those two [factors] alsogo together. The dollar was about 6 or 8 percent lower than we werethinking it would be last July. It's projected to be 6 or 8 percentlower at the end of this forecast period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining factors that contribute to the forecast and discussing the effects of lower growth abroad and the value of the dollar.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 145.
 We have gotten a lot of themovement actually [earlier] in the period, so that has had a slightoffsetting effect on--MR. JOHNSON. But is that helping us on the trade side anymore.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage indicates disagreement between two individuals. Mr. Johnson is questioning whether the movement mentioned is still beneficial for trade.


Passage number 146.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think it's part of the same [story].Part of the answer to your question about the reasons why growth isweaker abroad is that the dollar has been lower. The direct effect ofthat in the first approximation is neutral. [Unintelligible] meansweaker net exports, if you want to put it that way. The secondaryeffects, where you get into the big discussion you were just havingwith Mike but view it from the other side of the pond, [depend on]whether you have the kind of offsetting automatic stabilizers thatcome along with higher real [income] on the one hand, or on the other-13-3/31/87hand the negative impact on investment intentions and that kind ofactivity and [economic] activity in general. If you have nominaltargets for your fiscal policy, for example, and inflation comes inlower, then in fact you might find that [government spending] wouldget better. There could be an offset. That tends not to be the case.It tends to be a taking of those benefits into the [fiscal] positionand lower prices in the fiscal situation give you less of an automatic[stabilizer effect]. The third factor, looking back to last July, isthat we were cautious about a forecast too strong in terms of exports.The models were saying exports were going to be very [strong], so wetended to judgmentally adjust that down because we didn't at thatpoint see much evidence. Now, in the second half of the year, theevidence was that U.S. net exports were doing quite well; so, althoughwe still have damped down our [projected] rate of increase in exportvolume relative to what standing historical relationships mightproduce, we have damped it somewhat less than we had done before.Again, that's one of the factors that is viewed from the side of thetrade [balance] as shown on the lower growth [abroad].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining different factors that contribute to weaker growth abroad.


Passage number 147.
MR. JOHNSON. It's the speed of the depreciation that made abig difference in your mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Johnson.


Passage number 148.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, these factors net essentially. This[unintelligible] but my sense is that clearly it does seem to bestrongly negative in both Germany and Japan. The investment [isnegative], which is one reason why things are being marked out. Theother factor is that in [Japan and] Germany they both were looking forgrowth in [exports] this year, and it doesn't look like it's going tobe there. Maybe it shouldn't even have been there, but they werelooking for it. The other problem, basically, is the extent to whichpolicy is used to [cushion these effects]. We talked about this someearlier: [whether] these countries tend to push [policy] given thechange in the exchange rates or to respond in terms of supporting theadjustment process, if you want to put it that way. The adjustmentprocess coming on the external side may be going along faster thanotherwise [anticipated] and that's [negative]. In neither Germany norJapan do you have a sense that policy is out ahead of the adjustmentprocess; it's being forced by the exchange rate [change]. Sam Crossnoted that in Germany monetary policy is [unchanged] although there isa small [chance of] adjustment in the latter part of the year; fiscalpolicy adjustment is going to come in January 1988. And in Japan[policy] is paralyzed. What little they might be prepared to do, theyhave essentially been paralyzed by the [political] process. And as aresult, any fiscal [policy action] or lack thereof that is likely tocome along in Japan is not going to be here for another 3 monthslonger, later than one might have thought it was going to come lastDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is purely descriptive and does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement.


Passage number 149.
MR. JOHNSON. [Unintelligible] the last comment. I wonder ifyou have attempted to factor in this latest trade retaliatory measurethat has been taken. Is that going to have any effect, or do you haveto make some assumptions about retaliation for--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Johnson is asking a question about a potential trade retaliatory measure and its potential effects.


Passage number 150.
MR. TRUMAN. We didn't really have it in hand in time to putit into the forecast. Even with it in hand, we would have to [factorin prospects for] retaliation. The other issue is how long it wouldlast even [unintelligible]. We did not want to let them have a strongpricing effect, because essentially they are saying ["x"] equals a-14-3/31/87certain amount of supply of imports that are just not going to bethere anymore. Essentially, it's a question of what the price[response is]; it's going to be [unintelligible] but it's not 100percent higher; it's [a function of] whatever you think is the[elasticity of the] supply curve absent Japanese suppliers and that'sprobably not terribly steep.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing various factors and considerations related to a certain issue, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 151.
MR. JOHNSON. But you would expect some upward pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "but" suggests a contrast or disagreement between the speaker (Mr. Johnson) and another party.


Passage number 152.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, there would be some upward pressure, butnot [too large], assuming that the measures are taken and they arepermanent and there is no retaliation. I think the big risk, whichseems to be what the financial markets were reacting to yesterday, isthat this could get out of hand. There is certainly some risk that itcould get out of hand.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Truman is explaining a potential risk without disputing or contradicting any previous statements or opinions.


Passage number 153.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What products are we putting these tariffson, presumably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply poses a question about which products the tariffs are being imposed on, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 154.
MR. TRUMAN. The list of products is $900 million worth ofpotential tariffs--various consumer electronic products and thosetypes of things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states the list of potential tariffs on consumer electronic products.


Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [I didn't] see the list; it sounded like alot more than the $300 million they talk about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions that they did not see the list and believes the amount of money being mentioned is larger than $300 million.


Passage number 156.
MR. TRUMAN. There is $900 million on the list; $300 millionwill be chosen and they might choose this side [of that figure].There are two pieces of it: $135 million of third market effects and$165 million of Japanese market effects. They could choose to do oneand not the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement evident in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the allocation of funds and the different effects on the third market and the Japanese market.


Passage number 157.
MR. JOHNSON. I love this rationale, which is we [don't] wantto put a tariff on the chips themselves because U.S. producers buythose. We will put it on the electronic equipment that's processedfrom those chips and [not] import it. It's just unbelievableanalysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Johnson's appreciation for a certain rationale and describes the analysis as "unbelievable."


Passage number 158.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only provides information about Mr. Truman, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 159.
 [Unintelligible] was called with the agriculturaltrade--MS. SEGER. Maybe I misread it, but I thought that one of themajor objectives was to use this playing tough to get the Japanese toknock down some of the barriers that are keeping our products out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any specific statements or arguments that can be classified as contention or disagreement.


Passage number 160.
MR. TRUMAN. That's absolutely the motivation. The questionis whether, rather than knocking down the barriers, they respond bypushing them higher. Then we have [unintelligible]. If I had toguess, I would think it's going to move in the direction of the[unintelligible] may not come down $300 million but they might comedown [unintelligible] worth and you won't get the retaliation. Butthere is certainly some risk that things will go the other way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement between different viewpoints or arguments. The speaker is discussing a potential scenario and the different directions it could move in.


Passage number 161.
MS. SEGER. What would happen if either Germany or Japanslipped into a recession. I am hearing about the weakening of theireconomies and their disappointments with their performance and thedownward revisions [unintelligible] of their own governments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the potential consequences of Germany or Japan slipping into a recession and the concerns about their economies' weakening. There is no argument or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 162.
-15-3/31/87MR. TRUMAN. Both of those economies are large relative to[their neighbors]--Germany with respect to Europe and Japan withrespect to the Far East. In fact, in terms of the world economy, theFar East has been one of the brighter spots in terms of overallperformance. I would think that the issue of negative numbers is notso important. The point basically is [not] whether growth is above orbelow zero; the point is that growth in these countries, which is[unintelligible] at this stage [is slowing], partly because[unintelligible] lagging behind. Two percent growth in thesecountries at a time when non-U.S. [growth rates] are very modest andone was hoping for something like 3 percent--that is 1/3 of the way tozero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply discussing the economies of Germany and Japan and their growth rates. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 163.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without discussing any opinions, disagreements, or controversies.


Passage number 164.
 Two percent for Germany when you have--MR. TRUMAN. We have 1 percent [fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter] for Germany; we have 2 percent for the G-10 countries as awhole.SPEAKER(.). Ted, I recently saw a chart that I think youproduced that showed a comparison of the growth of real GNP anddomestic demand in Japan. It was surprising to me, and also verydramatic, that their domestic demand was growing at a rate twice thatof GNP, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is simply stating some statistics and observations about Germany and Japan. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 165.
MR. TRUMAN. All of these countries have had quite goodgrowth in domestic demand. The problem and the puzzle is--and welooked at this before the February chart show because I was puzzled asto when [unintelligible]--we didn't seem to see corresponding things.I would say as professionally as we could [figure out] the numbers asto basically what happened in 1986, there seemed to be a counterpartwith the developing countries--the oil and non-oil producingdeveloping countries--in 1986 rather than the United States. OPECpumped a lot more oil last year and the price went down. We allbought it. Their price went down and they cut back on their[imports]. Of course, then the terms of trade were going againstother developing countries, [not] like Japan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral observation about the growth in domestic demand in various countries and the puzzle of why there was not a corresponding effect in the United States.


Passage number 166.
 So domestic demand has[generally] been holding up reasonably well, but the overall levelalso has been on a downtrend and that's--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Domestic demand doesn't look so badcompared to the GNP. You couldn't call that great in absolute terms,considering what their potential is. Are there other comments on thebusiness scene here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an analysis of domestic demand and expressing that it is not great compared to the GNP. They also mention their potential, indicating a comparison but not any disagreement with other comments on the business scene.


Passage number 167.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Do you mean of a more generalnature.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply asks for clarification.


Passage number 168.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of a more general nature.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "Of a more general nature" is a neutral statement that does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 169.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me make a couple of more generalcomments. I don't feel that there is any fundamental difference inthe economic outlook today as compared to what we have been talkingabout for the past couple of months. As I said before, I tend to gohot and cold on this trade improvement situation and right now I guessI am cold, partly for the reason that has just been talked about andthat the performance in some of the industrialized countries lookspretty sour. But even beyond that, I still am a little skeptical-16-3/31/87about the extent to which there have been broad-based opportunities onthe import or the export side to see the kind of breakthroughs thatwould seem to be implied in the current forecast. Although one can besurprised, I am a little more skeptical on that front.I can't quite shake a question in my mind, too, about theinventory situation, even though I understand the auto part, and theCCC part, and all the rest of it. I sense, when I look at theproduction side of the economy against the backdrop of the inventorysituation, that one of two things should be true that aren't showingup in the numbers. One would be that export growth is stronger thanthe numbers suggest. The other is that there is some demand in theeconomy someplace that isn't showing through. Again, I don't thinkthere is anything decisive there, but it does continue to raise a bitof a question in my mind on the inventory side. In the context of theexternal situation--this point has already been made--the escalationof the tensions on the trade side is a new and troubling developmentwhich, in my mind's eye, simply reinforces the view that the greatestrisk by far at this point lies with the dollar. Any material furtherdepreciation in the dollar is going to exacerbate the situation incountries like Japan by extending the J-curve. It seems to me thatyou can make an argument that in relative terms Japan is already in arecession, although not in the statistical sense that we definerecessions. But on top of that risk on the dollar side, the otherrisk that I think is closer at hand than we would like it to be isthat a further dollar depreciation will trigger at least a mini chainreaction on the financial side that could be very, very destabilizingin the short run. So the net is probably a somewhat higher level ofapprehension about the economy, which is Kentucky windage in nature.But I have a significantly heightened concern about the dollarsituation in the immediate circumstances that we face right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their personal skepticism and concern about the economic outlook and the potential effects of a further depreciation of the dollar.


Passage number 170.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is Kentucky windage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is asking for an explanation of the term "Kentucky windage" and does not express any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 171.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Kentucky windage means I don't haveany numbers to back up those hunches, just a bit of a feel in the air.You throw a piece of grass up and you see which way it blows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply explaining the concept of "Kentucky windage" and how it is based on intuition rather than concrete data. There is no mention or indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 172.
MR. BLACK. It's the allowance you make for the errors in theaccuracy of your rifle.SPEAKER(.). Did you learn that in Manhattan, Jerry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage as both speakers are simply exchanging information and there is no conflict in their statements.


Passage number 173.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage alone does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 174.
 You could associate it a little ifyou thought--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's all a very precise science; now Iam really confused. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any statement or indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 175.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have been getting anecdotalevidence from our New England manufacturers that their exports weredoing pretty well. But when I looked at their employment numbers, thelast four or five months of 1986 showed pretty quiet employment inmanufacturing. The non-manufacturing economy is doing well; theunemployment rate had drifted below 4 percent, and now it's runningabout 3-1/2 percent. So I asked our manufacturers: If you are doingso well in exports why isn't this showing up in manufacturingemployment. The answer was that domestic capital goods demand is so-17-3/31/87weak that it has been offsetting the strength in the exports sector.In January we had an uptick in manufacturing employment at a 7 percentannual rate. Now, one month in these numbers is not enough to give asignal, but at least it supports the proposition that maybe theimprovement in exports is going to try to [unintelligible] the firsttime on the employment side. My Boston airport indicator is stilllooking pretty good. In the three months ending in January, airfreight exports in pounds were up by 16 percent over the year-earliernumbers, and air freight imports declined for the first time on ayear-to-year basis. It was down one point, so the numbers are stillconfirming the anecdotal evidence. The employment numbers stillhaven't shown through to any great extent, but we may be at a turningpoint in manufacturing employment, depending on the export side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents evidence and observations about the state of manufacturing employment and exports. There is no clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 176.
MS. SEGER. Do any of the exports go by ship or is it all airfrom Boston.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply a question asking for information about exports from Boston.


Passage number 177.
MR. MORRIS. I am told that about 90 percent of the high-techexports go by air freight, because their value-to-weight ratio ishigh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about high-tech exports and their transportation method. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 178.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 179.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, discussions with our directors andothers in business in the Twelfth District indicate that businessconditions are improving to some extent. There clearly areexceptions, and the two that I would note would be Alaska and thecentral valley of California. However, California's total employmenthas been quite strong. California's employment represents 60 percentof the District and it surged in February, pushing the District'sunemployment rate below the national average. Some fragmentary datathat we have on retail sales for the beginning of the year indicatethat the fall-off that was so pronounced at the national level inJanuary was not shared by the Twelfth District. Also, data that wehave on trade from the Pacific Coast ports provide some evidence ofimprovement in our net export position, as the trade deficit hasnarrowed significantly in the past 12 months.Turning to the national economy, our forecast indicates asomewhat worse trade-off between growth in output and inflation thanis incorporated in the Greenbook. We have slightly less growth in1987 and 1988 and inflation--at least in our forecast for 1987--is 1/2percentage point higher. We have a similar inflation outlook for 1988because we agree with the Greenbook that we are likely to see upwardinflationary pressures arising from import prices persisting throughall of next year. However, in contrast to the Greenbook, we expectthese inflationary pressures to emerge as early as the second half ofthis year. Thus, we see a period of upward pressure on nominal short-term interest rates beginning soon and probably extending into thesecond half of 1988. In my view, it will be necessary to allownominal interest rates to rise; if we don't, short-term real rates maybe pushed too low. We also are looking for somewhat stronger growthtoward year-end 1987 than the Board staff, as we have slightly higherconsumption and, of course, the trade account begins to improve atthat point. Thus, we believe that it may be appropriate to allow realinterest rates to nudge up toward year-end. In our view, it would bea bit too risky to allow the pickup in demand pressures to the pointwhere the temporary price shocks become a factor in longer-term-18-3/31/87inflationary expectations. In our view, the gap between actual andpotential [GNP] is really pretty small. Some estimates that we ransuggest it's on the order of one percentage point. Therefore,available slack in the economy is also small, and we think thatinflationary risks at the present time are fairly significant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is contention or disagreement regarding the outlook for inflation and interest rates. The speaker believes that inflationary pressures will emerge earlier than the Greenbook suggests, and that nominal interest rates should be allowed to rise in response. The speaker also believes that the potential for inflationary risks at the present time is fairly significant.


Passage number 180.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 181.
MR. KEEHN. While the conditions in our District are largelyunchanged from previous periods, at least in the fundamental sense, Ido have a feeling that there is a better tone out there. It isentirely possible that this has been affected by the winter. Wereally have had exceptionally mild weather this winter and, as aconsequence, anything that would normally be adversely affected by theweather is doing very well. Construction is the very obvious example.Home building is strong. Jim Kichline has commented on that, but inthe Midwest in January and February home starts were up something like40 percent over the previous year--obviously very heavily weather-affected. Commercial office building continues to be, I think,astoundingly active. There are a number of new buildings that areplanned; despite a creeping up in the vacancy rate there are morebuildings going up. As a consequence of all this, all the buildingmaterials people--cement, masonry, and the like--are doing reallyexceptionally well. There do continue to be plant closings, but Ithink they are slowing down a bit and there is some offsetting goodnews. Last week, or maybe earlier this week, Youngstown and Nipponannounced a very sizable joint venture--a $400 million coal powerplant. That is the first significant development in the steelindustry like that for quite some while. Employment in the Districtis also a bit on the positive side. In January our employmentincreased by the national average; that is the first time we have hadthat in some while.Even the farm sector looks a little better or, at least,maybe not worse. Farm earnings are probably going to increase thisyear; that does not really reflect a fundamental change but rather thehuge government subsidies. I will say, though, that the livestockbusiness has been and continues to be pretty good. There is someimprovement or expectation of improvement with regard to corn exports,offset a bit by lower soybean exports. We think land values are--we've been saying this for a while but we have a growing confidence--in a zone of stability that ought to be helpful to the banks. If thatdoes occur, we have a hope that the whole farm sector may be at a zoneof stability, if you will, albeit at a very low level, as it has beenfor quite some while. There is renewed concern out there about theFarm Credit System; but despite that concern there is, I think, theabsolute expectation that at the end of the day the Government isgoing to be there and provide support for that. But certainly, thathas put an air of uncertainty into it all.On the trade picture, we would have somewhat of adisagreement with the staff forecast. We have commented already onit, perhaps, but the people I talked to are not experiencing theimprovements in exports that the Greenbook would suggest. They areconcerned about weak conditions in foreign markets and, therefore, theopportunity for their products. But on the import side, there isvery, very broad agreement that we've got some improvement. Thecompanies that are manufacturing products for the domestic markets are-19-3/31/87finding a better receptivity there, a little less out-sourcing, and anincrease in domestic production. And that is certainly animprovement. With regard to the exchange rates, just a specificcomment: told us that the increase in thedeutschemark has basically priced German equipment that is used in thepaper industry out of the market for the first time in quite somewhile, noted that in the machine tool industry, U.S.labor rates are now lower than is the case in Japan. That is also avery significant change for that industry.On inflation, I think the picture is a bit mixed. The laborsituation continues to be good. The people I talked to aboutcontracts are continuing to get what they think are very favorabledeals--some as low as 1 or 1-1/3 percent. Generally, most of themwere under 3 percent with pretty good work rule changes resulting inproductivity improvements. Pricing on other commodities andmaterials, everybody says, is fiercely competitive--that they can'traise prices, etc., etc. But I am hearing of more instances of the 3to 4 percent increase and occasionally the 5 percent, so I think thereis a bit of an upward movement on that. In a specific industry, thepaper industry,a broad upward trend in [theprices of] the commodities that they use, and most specificallypolystyrene resin. I think there is a special reason for this, butthey have had a price increase on that of about 30 percent in the lastyear.In some ways we certainly are in very close agreement withthe staff forecast; we see no recession or a strong break-out on theup side either. We are a little apprehensive that the export side maynot be quite as strong as we expect. On the inflation side we seenothing yet to be alarmed about but are beginning to sense some upwardpressure out there. It is not pervasive yet but I think it is thearea that we want to watch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some disagreement or contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that they have a disagreement with the staff forecast regarding exports, stating that the people they talked to are not experiencing the improvements in exports that the forecast suggests. This suggests a difference of opinion or perspective on the current state of exports.


Passage number 182.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage as it only provides a name, "Mr. Boehne," without any further clarification or context.


Passage number 183.
MR. BOEHNE. I don't think I can contribute much to what hasbeen noted on the national level or the international level. In ourDistrict things seem to be going along really very well. I amimpressed with the drop in the unemployment rate that we haveexperienced. A year ago it was about 6-1/2 percent in our Districtand now it is about 5 percent and probably will slide under 5 percent.In places like New Jersey, where it was 5-1/2 percent a year ago, itis now under 4 percent; in Delaware it was a little under 5 percentand now is approaching 3 percent; and we have areas in our Districtwhere the unemployment rate is under 3 percent. So, we areexperiencing a tightening in wage costs in the area. As in the wholeNortheast, wages seem to be rising faster than they are elsewhere inthe country. A good bit of it is in construction, especiallyresidential construction; retailing is stronger than expected; andloan growth is running 1-1/2 to 2 times the national rate. We aregetting the same kind of experience that Frank Morris has had inmanufacturing. Growth in that sector has been about flat and yet theyseem to have some positive things to say about export growth. But Ithink that has been offset by the capital goods area. So, in theNortheast and the middle Atlantic, especially in the eastern part of-20-3/31/87the District, things are going along really very well and for someareas I would call them boom kind of conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the positive economic conditions in their district.


Passage number 184.
MS. SEGER. Does this include the steel towns that I readabout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question about whether the mentioned topic includes certain towns.


Passage number 185.
MR. BOEHNE. No. If you take a look at our District, forexample, areas like Lancaster and York and Harrisburg haveunemployment rates of right around 3 percent. If you drive 100 mileswest of that, in areas like Johnstown, you have rates of 8-1/2 to 9percent. In Wilmington you have about 3 percent unemployment; you cango across the Delaware Bay into some sections of South Jersey and youwill find 7 percent unemployment. You wonder about the mobility andthe skills of the people. But overall, the general tenor in theDistrict--especially in the Eastern part of New Jersey, in Delaware,and in the southeast quadrant of Pennsylvania--is that they are doingvery well. Even in places like Johnstown and Altoona, and Scranton tosome extent, people will say that conditions are not as good as insome other parts but they are better than they were a year ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about different unemployment rates in different areas.


Passage number 186.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Forrestal, but there is no statement or indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 187.
MR. FORRESTAL. The same general report can be given for theSixth District as the one that Ed Boehne just gave. The reports thatwe're getting, both in terms of the data and anecdotal information,seem better to me than what I have heard for quite a long time. Weare getting quite good reports on the service industry generally.Retail sales have been much better than most retailers had expected,and to a certain extent I suppose that is not very surprising. Butwhat is heartening, I think, is that we are hearing increasinglyoptimistic reports from the manufacturing sector for the first time ina number of important industries. These include industries such aspaper and chemicals and especially textiles and apparel. Thepetrochemical companies mention very strong orders, as do the apparelmanufacturers, and some of this is export-related. We see the samething Frank Morris mentioned in terms of manufacturing, where theorders are increasing due partly to export-related activity andemployment is not moving up very much, if at all. But the explanationwe get, and I think it is valid, is that there has been so muchautomation put in and productivity is so much higher--particularly inthe textile industry--that you are not going to see a very rapidincrease in the number of employed people. So, generally throughoutthe District it looks pretty good and confidence is very high. Evenin the construction industry, where we had expected some downturn as aresult of the tax act, I am hearing from people like architects, realestate people, and construction developers that their firms have neverbeen busier in the month of February. This, of course, is basicallyin the large metropolitan areas like Atlanta and Nashville, and tosome extent Miami, which are experiencing some boom. To be sure, wecontinue to have difficult areas. Agriculture may have reached thebottom; we're beginning to see that land values are coming back alittle. And Louisiana continues to be in a depressed state. Eventhere, with the recent firmness in the price of oil and strongtourism, I think they feel a little better about their situation and,of course, they are putting a lot of hope and a lot of expectation inthe visits of both the Republicans and the Pope.-21-3/31/87Looking at the national economy, our forecast is very muchthe same as the Greenbook. The outlook and expectations we have overthe rest of the year have changed very little since the last meetingof the Committee. We differ a bit with the Greenbook with respect toinflation: we think the deflator will turn out to be more toward 3-1/2percent rather than the 2.7, 2.8 percent that the staff has; and asopposed to the constant rate of increase in each quarter that thestaff seems to be expecting, we anticipate that an upward trend willset in during the latter half of the year. Wage contracts andsettlements continue to be on the modest side, although I am not surewhat is going to develop at the end of the year with the UAW andothers coming on stream. But I think the more important thing is thatthe second-stage impact of rising import prices could be a bitstronger than reflected in the staff forecast. And given the lesserdeceleration in service sector inflation, I am a little concerned thatin some sense we still have an underlying rate of inflation in theeconomy that is closer to the 5 percent area than it is to 3 or 4percent. That is more a gut feeling than anything that I have interms of statistics.I think there is a very serious downside risk to thisoutlook, if we agree that a significant portion of the year's forecastgrowth is attributable to a turnaround in the foreign trade balance;we keep revising downward our estimates of growth in other nations,particularly Germany and Japan, as someone else has just indicated.Obviously, that partly reflects a fall-off in U.S. imports from them;but with weaker growth abroad, I think that we could get weaker exportexpansion also. So it seems to me that there is very little reason toexpect more improvement in the trade balance in 1987 than we did sixweeks ago and, perhaps marginally, there may be some concern that itwon't be as good as we had expected. But, as someone also hasmentioned, the real threat is the dollar and the increasing likelihoodof protectionist legislation of some sort that will bring retaliationby our trading partners. I am not sure that we have any particularway to solve this at the moment except through monetary policy,perhaps, and its effect on the dollar. But I think that this is avery, very important issue and one that I am very concerned about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 188.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions "Mr. Melzer" without providing any context or information that would suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 189.
MR. MELZER. On this point about manufacturing, Frank, we notonly saw a big pickup in January--8.1 percent at an annual rate--butan annual growth rate for the last three months of 3.2 percent. So wehave been seeing the strength in manufacturing for some time now andit is reflected in non-agricultural employment more broadly. Retailsales are reported with a considerable lag, but I think that retailersgenerally feel pretty good about the way things are going. Someonemade the comment before that economic conditions are a little betterthan they might have thought. I think retailers generally feel goodabout things on that side. A lot of these sectors could have beenaffected by weather, as residential construction was, but I thinkthere is a sentiment that there is some fundamental underlyingstrength as well. The one area of weakness that has shown up morerecently is nonresidential construction. Yet inone of the local businessmen who is in the commercial glass business,or quasi-commercial or whatever you call that, indicated that latelast year and early this year they have put through two 5 percentprice increases both of which stuck, after a long history of trying to-22-3/31/87put them through and they just wouldn't stick. And they are lookingat maybe another 5 percent increase down the road this year. On abroader front, I personally am somewhat skeptical as to whether theeffects of the lower dollar, which I think will filter through in manyways over a long period of time, can really be handled as a one-timelevel adjustment, as perhaps energy prices would be viewed, in termsof inflation. I would be somewhat concerned about the ability tocontain, as Bob Forrestal mentioned, the secondary effects arising outof higher import prices.Finally, on another note, we had a group of institutionalinvestors in for lunch last week--this is perhaps somewhat irrelevantat this point in that it has already happened--but I was struck by thelevel of anxiety about market valuation. Generally, people felt thatthe U.S. stock market on a valuation basis was overpriced but incomparison to other world markets it looked like a great buy rightnow. So in the cases where investors maybe had taken some U.S. fundsoffshore, where they have enjoyed tremendous gains both in thecurrency and those market movements, they now look at the relativevaluations and say maybe the U.S. market isn't a bad buy. But therewas this general anxiety that a rising tide lifts all ships and thatthat is not a very good fundamental underpinning for the level ofmarkets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It mainly consists of the speaker providing information and expressing his personal opinions.


Passage number 190.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Tide capsizes all the ships.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this phrase. It is a factual statement about the power of the tide to capsize ships.


Passage number 191.
MR. MELZER. Yes, I think. Again, I was struck--and maybe itwas just because this was at our Reserve Bank and they were sayingwhat they thought they ought to in the central bank--that, generallyspeaking, they felt that the liquidity that had been provided wasn'thaving a lot of impact on the real side of the economy. It was allgoing into the financial markets and it was blowing up this balloonand creating anxiety about what might happen should that balloonburst.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's perception or observation about the impact of liquidity on the real side of the economy and the financial markets.


Passage number 192.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 193.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to thestaff's forecast of the economy we have no great quarrel. I will justsay that we are a touch stronger on personal consumption and lessoptimistic about the turnaround in net exports to the extent of about$5 billion or so. Where we would differ is on the projection forprices. On the deflator, for example, we are roughly a halfpercentage point or more higher than the staff. I think this has beenmentioned two or three times around the table up to this point and wewould be consistent with those comments.With respect to the District, I am delighted to tell you thatover the past couple of weeks, in meetings with boards of directors,businessmen, bankers and others, there is a decided turn in theoutlook. More optimism has been expressed over the past two weeks toa month, I think, than I have seen in our part of the country forthree, or maybe even four, years. There isn't a great deal of goodhard evidence that there has been a turnaround. It may be part of theoptimism that comes in the Midwest when the sap begins to rise--people's outlooks become a bit more optimistic. I was accused of thatby Governor Angell when I mentioned it to him earlier. But the factof the matter is that there is some evidence of a turnaround. For-23-3/31/87example, in Oklahoma, there has been some leasing activity in the oiland gas area with leases on a three-year basis of $35 to $50 an acre.That is not a great amount compared with what they got two or threeyears ago, but it does provide a cash flow that eases some of thestrains for the lenders, particularly those small banks located in thepetroleum-producing areas.Also, as has been mentioned earlier, there seems to be somestabilization in the price of agricultural real estate. There arereports that some sales have taken place in remote areas such aswestern Nebraska in which fairly good prices were established; andsome sales are actually moving property. There's an interestingdevelopment that's occurring with the Farm Credit System. It startedwith the St. Paul Farm Credit Bank, and perhaps Gary Stern can expandon it, but they are adopting a new program in which they are going toaccelerate the sale of the agricultural real estate that they now haveby using a program of incentives based upon term, price, andparticularly interest rates. For example, they will go as low as 4.9percent for 3, 5, or 7 years, and after that time the interest raterises to a market interest rate for the 25- to 30-year amortizationperiod of the loan. It is obvious that the price of the property thatis being sold is not the true price because of the incentives beinggranted. But it is something that has received some rather positivecomments. And if you are concerned about the amount of land thatmight be dumped on the market through this by the Farm Credit Systemor other lenders, let me just tell you that there are about 4-1/4million acres now in the hands of lenders and that represents onlyabout 5 percent of the agricultural real estate that is normally soldin any given year. So it is not a big amount but it may mask a bitthe problems in the Midwest because much of it is centered there.There is an optimistic tone that hasn't been present in the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is providing their own perspective and opinions, but there is no direct disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 195.
MR. STERN. I have been impressed for some time at theongoing employment gains at the national level. It seems to me thatrather healthy employment gains have been underway for roughly sixmonths or so now, going back to September. I must say that that kindof improvement seems to be evident, at least anecdotally, in many ofthe comments I hear around the District extending over roughly thesame period of time. But it is not mirrored in many of the othernational statistics that I look at, although maybe if one lookscarefully at some of the consumer spending data, excluding autos, orsome of the construction data, one can see some of it in there. Iconclude from that divergence between what I am hearing anecdotally inthe District on the employment gains versus some of the otherstatistics that the recovery remains uneven and unbalanced. But Ialso wonder if it isn't a fact that a lot of our statistics don'tfocus on services and trade, and finance, insurance, and real estate,and so forth, where a lot of this activity, in fact, lies.On the inflation side, I have been expecting, of course, thatwe would see some deterioration this year in any event, and I haven'tchanged my views about that. I would report that in talking to somepeople in the District, in two very different kinds of businesses--pulp paper, lumber, etc. and in health care which is a small butstubborn component in the CPI--prices, at least in general, have beenrising more rapidly once again. There seem to be growing indications-24-3/31/87of some rebuilding of price pressures, at least in those two sectorsout our way. Despite what I would consider my basic satisfaction withthe immediate economic outlook and conditions in the District, I mustsay that, if anything, I am less optimistic about the longer term. Itseems to me that some people have touched on this. Many of the thingsthat we have talked about over the last several years that might gowrong seem to be in the process of going wrong at the moment, as Iview it. The dollar has been touched on: what that means for Germanyand Japan and what that means for domestic inflation. All thosethings are not looking good. Protectionism adds to those concerns.The LDC situation looks to me to be worse. Probably I could add tothat litany if I really tried. But I guess my message is that as Ilook at that and what it might imply for economic performance here andabroad I am, if anything, more concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the national statistics and suggests that the recovery remains uneven and unbalanced. They also express concern about several economic factors, such as inflation, the strength of the dollar, protectionism, and the LDC situation.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will hasten to Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 197.
MR. BOYKIN. I did look real hard for something positive: Iwas able to leave the District for a few days. Mention has been madeon the manufacturing side of exports and the effect of the dollar.That is, or appears to be, a positive factor in the Eleventh District--lumber, paper, and chemicals seem to be responding. Attitudes,which I think really are important, have not changed all that much. Iwould say that some people are not quite as pessimistic although Icertainly would not consider people optimistic at this point. Lookingat some of the negatives that remain in the Eleventh District,construction, which I've reported on, is a big thing, of course. Wedon't see much possibility for a turnaround in that. In commercialconstruction Houston had a negative absorption. Dallas does have ahigher vacancy rate than Houston but our absorption is doing better.The thinking was that we probably were two or three years away from amajor announcement on a new building. Now that has been extended toprobably three or four years, indirectly, because we have had a majorannouncement of 900,000 square feet coming on the market in downtownDallas with the InterFirst-Republic Bank combination; they are goingto free up that much space--their prime or best space--through thatconsolidation. The rig count is off slightly after growing steadilyfor about six months. Retail sales are weak. I can confirm what yousay, Roger, about leasing. In Oklahoma we just leased a littlemineral interest that the Bank has there and we got $105 an acre butwe went out for five years and I think it amounted to about $3,000.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is mainly descriptive and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 198.
MR. BLACK. The Bank has.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 199.
MS. SEGER. Are you speculating in oil.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 200.
MR. BOYKIN. No, this goes back to the '20s and '30s. Wewere given quitclaim deeds and we haven't been able to get rid ofthis. We should have given it to you when you took Oklahoma, Roger.The employment numbers have been a surprise for us in Texas because wehave been reporting eight consecutive months of growth in employment.Those numbers have now been revised and, as a matter of fact, we havehad eight consecutive months of decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing some historical context and sharing information about employment numbers.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 202.
MR. BLACK. At the time of our February meeting we hadslightly higher projections on real GNP and inflation than the Board-25-3/31/87staff had. The staff has not changed its overall projection, althoughit has changed the shape or the profile, and we left ours pretty muchthe same--partly out of conviction and also probably because we knewif we made another forecast that we would have two errors rather thanone. The main point of difference that we have with the staff is inthe area of residential construction. We think, given the sharp dropthat we have had in mortgage rates, that it ought to be a littlestronger than 1.3 percent. Even more important than that, the staff'sdownward revision in construction and personal consumptionexpenditures, to which several people have alluded, is prettysignificant. It has come down from 4 percent in 1986 to 1 percent in1987 and we have not had that low a rate of growth since 1981, whichwas a recession year. In view of the proliferation of home equitymortgage loans--which I would think would make a difference--and alsothe wealth effect of the stock market, we think that that's apt to bea little stronger. We come out about the same on the net exports ofgoods and services, although I think that is probably the mostvulnerable part of all of our forecasts. Things don't look all thatgood abroad now but we would stick with about what the Board's staffhas said.As I mentioned, in the area of inflation we are a littlehigher than the Board staff. Although we are still predicting afairly moderate inflation in the implicit price deflator for nextyear, I think this price level bears some closer monitoring. There isa lot of money and liquidity out there and that is going to be felt atsome time. We have had a substantial depreciation of the dollar andthere has been an increase in capacity utilization, and all thesethings ought to work to put some upward pressure on the dollar at somepoint. It may come a little sooner than most people seem to think.Some of the pickup in industrial prices, as shown in the Greenbook andalso reported in several of the District surveys contained in theBeige book, suggest that there may be a little more there than meetsthe eye. I hope not, but it is something that I think bears somewatching for the time being.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black disagrees with the staff's projections on residential construction, construction and personal consumption expenditures, and inflation.


Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Hendricks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I cannot answer that question accurately without the passage you are referring to. Please provide the passage or more details for me to assist you.


Passage number 204.
MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economicsituation in the Fourth District is broadly consistent with what thestaff has forecasted. Most sectors of our economy, believe it or not,are expanding begrudgingly and fitfully. Metal producers, of course,continue to suffer from excessive worldwide supply. Housing, on theother hand, seems to be holding its own and, in fact, is movingforward at a rapid pace. Some others have commented on housing startsin the Midwest and we are no different. The directors and others withwhom we speak admit to feeling that the worst is now behind them interms of the foreign trade front. You can twist their arms a littleand they will admit it. Domestic producers say that it is easier tocompete now against imports but that competition is still veryintense; yet they seem to feel as though they are back in the ballgame. Our staff feels that we still are a long way from being secureabout the economic fundamentals governing the current account. Theimprovement could take longer and may require a lower dollar than wethink today. Our people don't see as much strength, perhaps, inexports as is indicated by the Greenbook forecast. One interestingthing our staff did was to take a look at capacity in the varioussectors, and there are spotty areas where capacity utilization is-26-3/31/87beginning to approach the highs reached back in 1978 and 1980.Several of the industries are at their long-term 20-year average.Somebody mentioned some pressure on prices in textiles; they'reshowing up to and beyond their 1978-to-1980 highs. So just as ageneral comment, there may be some spotty places in the economy wherecapacity [constraints] are beginning to show up. As I said at theoutset of my comments, the staff's outlook in the Greenbook is veryconsistent with the conditions we see in the Fourth District.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Hendricks, is providing an overview of the economic situation in the Fourth District and is noting areas of expansion and possible concerns. However, he does not express any disagreement or contention with the staff's forecast or the conditions in the Fourth District.


Passage number 205.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The phrase "Governor Heller" only states the name of a person without any clear indication of conflicting ideas or opposing views.


Passage number 206.
MR. HELLER. I agree with the growth and inflation forecastsof the staff. I was happy to see that the first quarter was revisedupward: I always thought that the tax would have an overall beneficialeffect. Let me focus mainly on the external side. As many speakershave pointed out, our main problem is the high and persistent tradedeficit. Sooner or later we will have to correct it. But at thegoing exchange rates that trade deficit will continue to persist, asthe staff's projections have shown for the exchange rates and foreigngrowth, I should hasten to add. The staff projections in theGreenbook, I think, already have incorporated the decline in the valueof the dollar. Obviously, if foreigners were willing to expand theireconomies that would help on the trade side. But as we have alsolearned they are unwilling to do so. So the question that will bebefore us here is whether it will be advisable for us to delay theadjustment in the exchange rate by letting interest rates driftupward. I think that that would lower the growth projections we havefor the U.S. economy which are only running slightly above 2-1/2percent. That wouldn't help the world economy; the LDCs would be hurtby higher interest rates and clearly their export markets would behurt by having lower growth in the United States as well. I amwilling to let interest rates drift up if it would be necessary inorder to help on the price front. But in spite of the few hiccupsthat we have seen, overall the projections still show that inflationis essentially flat in the profile for the year as a whole, and I amcomfortable with that projection. So I think that the debate we arereally going to focus on in our later deliberation is whether we wantto focus monetary policy on domestic or international projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the staff's growth and inflation forecasts and acknowledges the problem of the trade deficit. They also discuss the possibility of adjusting the exchange rate and interest rates, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 207.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 208.
MR. ANGELL. There does seem to be a growing consensus aboutthe world economy, so I don't think I need to elaborate much more onlow world economic growth rates. That's certainly not good news, asall of us know, in regard to the LDC's debt and to many other thingsthat are very important to us. Unfortunately, in the news on the U.S.economy it is hard to see any bright spots, because if we do get anyrebound--and if it is rather significant--in view of the world economythat may very well overwhelm the exchange rate effects. So we wouldend up having a bad world even if we meet U.S. growth projections. Sothat is somewhat of a negative.I tend to be sympathetic with the staff's view on theinflation rate because I think a global perspective is very, verysignificant. I noted here today that I haven't yet heard a presidentof a Reserve Bank who has come in with an inflation rate that is lowerthan staff's. I hear a lot that are higher. I am about up to thestaff's level now on inflation because there has been a development in-27-3/31/87regard to the spring storms that might have an adverse effect on foodprices. That is, this blizzard in the Midwest occurred at a ratherunfortunate time with regard to calving and there is a lot oflivestock damage--anecdotal at this point. We don't know what thenumbers are but the situation could be somewhat severe. I guess thereis some benefit in that we have moved a lot of that cow/calf operationto Florida and that works pretty well for reasons I have not quiteunderstood. You feed cattle, or start them off, on a very poor grassdiet--I am not trying to draw aspersions to Florida--but then youtransfer them to the good blue foothills grass and you get marvelouskinds of changes. So we don't have as much of the cattle exposed aswe did before, but that undoubtedly would have an adverse impact.I would second what has been mentioned about agriculture. Weare now beginning to see farmers who are having prosperity andranchers who are having prosperity come forward. For quite a whilefarmers who were making any money tended to be very quiet about it inthis kind of environment, but they're beginning to come forward. Itdoes appear that most of the land purchases are being made by farmers,not by out-of-farming interests. It may very well be that ouragricultural banks are going to get through this year to a periodwhere in 1988 we may have some better news. I wish we could say thesame thing about banks with LDC debt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the staff's view on inflation rates but disagrees on the impact of the blizzard in the Midwest on food prices. They believe it could have a severe adverse effect, while the staff may have a different perspective.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage because it only mentions Governor Johnson without providing any further information or context to analyze.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 210.
MR. JOHNSON. I think just about everything has been covered.For my own benefit, I'll summarize my thoughts a bit. I have heardfrom a lot of the Districts that things look better. Production ispicking up and employment looks a little better in the trade-relatedarea and in some manufacturing. I think the aggregate statisticsreflect some of that and that is encouraging. What concerns me alittle is how much of this production that we are seeing is going intoinventories. How much of it is really meeting domestic consumption.There seems to be some circumstantial evidence of some involuntaryinventory buildup. It is more in the automobile area than anywhereelse, but there are at least some signs of inventory pressure even inthe non-auto area. That may be just the rebuilding of stocks to morenormal levels but given the low forecast that we have for domesticdemand--which a lot of comments reflected around the room--you justwonder if all that production and greater optimism we are seeing aregoing to be permanent or if there will be a flash into inventories.If so, there is some risk and a little concern as to whether thisproduction activity is going to be continuing. That bothers me alittle, especially when we are marking down growth abroad and thepotential for our export markets. So, we may not be seeing thestrength in the future from the export side that we had been expectingearlier.That is somewhat of a problem which brings me to the dilemmathat I keep worrying about. I think we all agree that the dollar isat levels where we wouldn't like to see it go particularly lower.Having it go lower would make it counterproductive on the trade sideas well as the inflation side at this point. But I think the concernis: should we get dragged down by trying to stabilize the dollaragainst some countries who are experiencing economic decline. I worrya bit about the overall macroeconomic effects of trying to stabilizethe dollar against some weakening economy. At the same time I am at a3/31/87loss for knowing what to do about it simply because I think there is arisk to our financial market stability, especially in the short run--and maybe even for inflation in the long run--if we don't try and dosomething about the dollar. It is a real predicament that we have todeal with and the protectionist sentiment that we are seeing surfaceis part of that problem now. I just hope we don't have to get into asituation where we are defending the dollar because of a confidenceproblem associated with destabilizing exchange rates againstcurrencies whose countries are showing continued decline. That is areal risk; in my mind that seems to be the major problem and I justdon't know exactly how we should deal with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson expresses concern about the production activity and optimism potentially being temporary and leading to involuntary inventory buildup. He also raises a dilemma about whether to stabilize the dollar against weakening economies or risk the macroeconomic effects of trying to do so. The mention of protectionist sentiment and the need to defend the dollar suggest differing viewpoints on how to address these issues.


Passage number 211.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 212.
MS. SEGER. My own forecast is a little below the staff'sforecast, at least in terms of the overall growth for the economy. Ingoing back to the time when the staff first presented its forecast for1987, I have had this concern--which I have heard here at least seventimes already today--about the ability of the trade picture to improveenough to make the contribution to our overall growth situation thatwe seem to have expected and we continue to expect. Also, I must saythat I am still not convinced, even with exchange rate adjustments andeven with more American businessmen interested in exporting, that wein fact can do a lot more exporting--because of not necessarily havingthe kinds of products, or enough of the kinds of products, that arewanted in other parts of the world. I have been lectured on thismatter by some Germans over the last couple of weeks or months, so Ihope they haven't unduly colored my view. But I think there is someof that going on. Also, I am not convinced that all the markets inthe world are really open to our products; I think the events of thelast few days have suggested that some other people have wondered, atleast, whether the Japanese markets were open to our products. So,that concerns me.On the domestic side my nagging concern continues to be theauto industry. They already have very substantial supplies of newcars sitting in various dealer lots and showrooms. There have beensome cuts in production and there have been some downward revisions ofproduction schedules. But my woman's intuition suggests that maybescheduling changes have not gone far enough and that we will see moreof them. Therefore, I hope that the staff's forecast does prove to beright because I do want a good healthy economy, and I like fastergrowth rates rather than slower growth rates. But I really think weare putting a lot of our eggs in one or two baskets and I just hope wedon't stub our toes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The speaker expresses disagreement with the staff's forecast for the overall growth of the economy and raises concerns about the ability of the trade picture to improve and the potential for increased exporting. The speaker also expresses concern about the auto industry and suggests that production schedules may need to be further revised. These points of disagreement and concern indicate contention in the passage.


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kohn, can you be fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage.


Passage number 214.
MR. KOHN. Okay. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply an acknowledgment or agreement to the statement made.


Passage number 215.
][Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can proceed and decide what todo. I don't think this is the simplest situation we have ever beenin. The course of action in one way seems pretty obvious. Butwhether that is really satisfactory to the situation, the answer isprobably no. Things are not under our control. I'd say our decisionis easy in one sense: It is a little hard for me to see, in listening-29-3/31/87to what everybody has said, that we would want to move importantly inone direction or another from where we have been just in terms of thebusiness outlook and ordinary domestic criteria. I guess the questionis: Under what conditions would we want to move at all significantly.The aggregates are coming in low, which can't upset me after a year or18 months of coming in high. I don't see that as a strong reason foreasing, for a fair amount of time anyway. That leaves us with thequestion of the dollar and the international situation and all thoserelated concerns that have been discussed, which are very difficultissues. Obviously, they are by their nature a multilateral concern aswell as our concern. I would just note in that connection that theG-10 meets next week. [Unintelligible] for all those numbers we oughtto extract great wisdom out of the meetings next week. I wouldn'tcount on that but there is an opportunity for a closer discussion withour major trading partners next week. [We could provide] some senseof what we might think is useful in terms of entering into thosediscussions. Who wants to say something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 216.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I will if no one wants to. As Ilook at the situation now, in my judgment, we would have to beprepared to let interest rates go up a little for a little while inorder to avoid a situation where they had to go up a lot for a longwhile. In the context of the alternatives in the Bluebook, followingthem in a conventional sense, that would lean me toward thealternative C side of things. But I don't think the alternatives inthe Bluebook are really the best way to think about the situation atthe moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of the author's personal judgment and perspective.


Passage number 217.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am beginning to worry about that when Ilook at this, too. Let me just interject a comment. As I said, Idon't see any reasons to change strongly. I am thinking about it interms of borrowings right at the moment. It was implicit in what Isaid that if the aggregates continue to come in below 6 percent--or6.9 percent, or whatever the staff has here--I wouldn't see that as astrong signal for easing at this point. I don't know whether thoseaggregates are too high or whether the staff always judges themabsolutely correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and considerations without contradicting or challenging anyone else's ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 218.
MR. JOHNSON. I think they are too high if interest ratespick up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Johnson, expresses the opinion that interest rates are too high if they pick up. This implies that there may be others who hold a different perspective on interest rates, suggesting contention or disagreement.


Passage number 219.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who knows what they are. But Idon't think that is the crucial variable for this period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about something but is not expressing a conflicting viewpoint or engaging in an argument.


Passage number 220.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's partly what I was just tryingto say. I don't think it is very easy to think about policy in termsof conventional alternatives A, B, or C. The way I would state it isthat I would be prepared, in the face of continued weakness in theexchange market, to see the borrowings level go up--in the extrememaybe even as high as $500 million, say--in the hope and theexpectation that that would be temporary. The idea is to avoid havingto permanently increase interest rates. But I do worry; I am not atall sure that we have seen the real test in this exchange market. Ifwe were to see the kinds of pressures, or even more pressures than wehave seen in the last few days, materialize in the very near term Idon't think we could head that off just through intervention. And inthose circumstances, I think we would have to be prepared to show ourhand a little in the hope that that could get us over the hump.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own perspective and concerns, but there is no mention of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 221.
-30-3/31/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just for purposes of clarification: If Iunderstand you correctly, you are saying do nothing now but beprepared to raise borrowing if the exchange market comes under stillmore pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 222.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And I would be prepared to go up toat least $500 million in those circumstances.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 223.
MR. JOHNSON. Can I just comment on that. I think Jerry hasa good point. My only concern about it is that I think we might needdiscretion for something like that. I would hate to see us make thefundamental move on monetary policy when I think [the move] even moreclearly lies with the surplus countries. So, I would only want to dothat if we saw some tendency for them to let money market rates driftdown so that we would get that interest rate differential we need. Tosee the fundamentals change in the right way over there would seem tobe the desirable feature.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson agrees with Jerry's point and expresses his concern about making a fundamental move on monetary policy without discretion. He suggests that the move should only be made if there is a tendency for surplus countries to let money market rates drift down, which would create the desired interest rate differential.


Passage number 224.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Oh, the best of all possible worldswould be that. As I have tried to describe this, I would not viewthis as a fundamental change in policy; I would view it as almost atactical change that says we are prepared [to move] at least for atransitory period. To some extent we have been finessing that alittle, as someone said earlier, just in terms of the way we have beenconducting our open market operations from day-to-day. All I amsaying is that I would be prepared to go a little further than simplyfinessing open market operations from day-to-day in the face ofrenewed downward pressure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the speaker's willingness to go further in implementing certain policies.


Passage number 225.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying do nothing today, if Iunderstand you correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply seeks clarification on the suggested action of doing nothing.


Passage number 226.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Depending upon what's going on inthe market. I think it means do nothing today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing the speaker's belief or opinion regarding what action should be taken in response to market conditions.


Passage number 227.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean today; I mean on borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they are referring to borrowing at a different time, indicating no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 228.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has knowledge about something.


Passage number 229.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot agree with the proposed budget cuts for the education department. Instead, he argues for increasing funding to ensure quality education for all students.


Passage number 230.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, this seems to me too like a goodtime to hold our policy steady. I would opt for "B" and I wouldmaintain that tilt toward restraint in the language of the directive.There's a good case for making this language symmetrical, which iswhat I generally favor, particularly now with the aggregates slowingdown. That case can be made; but I think over the last couple ofyears we assumed that at some point the rapid growth in the aggregateswas going to be followed by a slowing in those growth rates as theyadjusted to the downward drift in interest rates. That is what we maybe seeing now. And, like you, I would be very reluctant to doanything in the way of ease if the aggregates continue weak for awhile because, if anything, the economy looks a little stronger to menow than it did. So, that would not be any signal to me that we oughtto act in that direction in the immediate future. I would not favorputting a greater weight in the written directive on the foreignexchange side, although I think we would necessarily emphasize that.We already have language in the directive now, and if we use the kind-31-3/31/87of language suggested in the Bluebook I would have some concern as tohow the markets might interpret that. Although I certainly don'tknow, I fear that the markets might think that means more of a[unintelligible] than probably we have in mind. I wouldn't want togive that kind of signal. I would just ride with the reference thatwe already have in the directive about giving due attention to foreignexchange matters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and preferences on maintaining policy, language in the directive, and foreign exchange matters. They mention their concerns and considerations, but there is no indication of disagreement or argument with other participants in the conversation.


Passage number 231.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only provides a name, "Mr. Melzer," without providing any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 232.
MR. MELZER. I come out in essentially the same place. Letme just mention a couple of things. While it is implicit, I think, inthe discussion, maybe one thing that ought to be mentioned explicitlyis that the problem with the dollar is not the level but the rate ofdecline that we have experienced--more than 7 percent between theDecember and February meetings. I am not sure what the decline isthrough yesterday, but it's probably on the order of 5 percent on atrade-weighted basis. So, one thing that is important in thinkingabout the dollar is that we are not necessarily saying that this isthe right level but that some stability is desirable. Picking up onGovernor Johnson's earlier point--it seems to me that the messagebeing sent to us there is really quite a negative one if our realgrowth outlook is considerably more attractive than that of our majortrading partners and yet our currency is weak. I think that is sayingsomething about what people think about the inflationary prospectshere. I recognize that there are a lot of risks on the table withrespect to the economic outlook, but going back to what Jerry Corrigansaid earlier, the most destabilizing risk would be that of losingcontrol of the dollar on the downside after the very rapid declinesthat we've had. So, in my mind that alone takes away any thought ofeasing. In fact, it seems to me that the dynamics we've beenwitnessing here, with a weaker dollar and how that spills right backinto the bond and stock markets, are what will unleash the liquiditythat's in the economy that we've been talking about for some time.It's going to lead people to tend to want to liquidate financialassets and, I would guess, be much more inclined to spend. That couldreally add to the momentum in the economy, particularly on the priceside, which is where my concern would be. It really comes down in mymind to a question of whether we tighten now or wait. I guess we canall take some comfort in the slowdown in the growth of reserves andmoney but, on a quarterly basis, we're really talking about M1 slowingdown to 11 percent in the fourth quarter; for the average throughMarch the projection is around 9 percent. Reserve growth also hasslowed down from very extraordinary rates toward the end of the year.But we're still talking about historically high rates. In my mind,there's no reason to be at all concerned about slow money growth.Eventually, although it's not a very happy choice, it seems to me thatwe will likely be put in a position of having to tighten policy. Idon't know whether it's now or later. It seems to me that thearguments against any move now are these international discussionsthat you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, and also the trade negotiations withthe Japanese right now. While I don't necessarily agree with it, Icould see that at this point--as a negotiating tactic, really--thedollar bashing is the club we have in trying to reach some agreementin a very short-term sense.So, all things considered, I'd be in favor of maintaining theexisting degree of reserve restraint now. But if we can't hold the-32-3/31/87dollar at about this level, then I think we have to be prepared tomove to a firmer policy much more quickly. Or if, at the presentdegree of reserve restraint, we see a pickup in the rate of growth ofmoney in relation to what's projected here--let's say we have 9percent on the table for the period ahead--I think we're going to haveto pay more attention to that. I say that for all these otherreasons: inflationary expectations are quite high now, and I don'tthink we have the latitude as a central bank to ignore extremely rapidmoney growth. The slowdown from the rapid rates of last year, from 13percent down to 9 percent, is okay. But if we see either a pickup inmonetary growth--and when I say pickup I mean in relation to this9 percent projection for the quarter--or a weak dollar, those would bethe things I'd be looking at as short-term indicators of the need torespond in the direction of further tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement of the speaker's opinion and analysis of the current economic situation.


Passage number 233.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For what it's worth, just to bring you upto date, Mr. Kohn tells me that the March figure is likely to be alittle lower than what's been indicated to you--by more than apercent, I guess, for M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 234.
MR. KOHN. About 4-1/4 percent for March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement of a fact or statistic without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Parry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Parry or any topic that could potentially lead to contention or disagreement.


Passage number 236.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative B and,like President Black, I would favor language that tilts towardfirmness. As I indicated previously, I believe that inflationarypressures will require some interest rate increases in the second halfof the year; and if inflationary pressures surface sooner, policy mayhave to respond earlier as well. With regard to the aggregates, Ithink it's quite likely that we will run into a period where they aregrowing toward the low end, or even below the low end, if we seeinterest rates rising. If that's the case, we're likely to toleratethat. I would think that we would have to change the wording of thedirective because the way the directive is worded today any changefrom the existing reserve restraint depends primarily on the behaviorof the aggregates, taking into account business conditions, etc. Ithink we almost want to reverse that and have as the primarydeterminants what we really are focusing on, which is businessconditions and progress against inflation, and so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Parry shares his preference for alternative B and expresses agreement with President Black's stance on the language. He also discusses his opinions on inflationary pressures and the aggregates, but there is no disagreement mentioned in his statements.


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions Mr. Guffey without providing any additional context or information.


Passage number 238.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think Jerry Corrigancaptured my feelings very well. That is, I would favor no immediatechange in policy but I would be prepared to move to a higher borrowinglevel. Having that in mind, and trying to capture that within theframework of the way we talk about these things, that is somewhere inthe "B-C" area. I'm not sure that I would be prepared to go to $500million. On the other hand, I feel that there may be some advantageto showing some modestly higher interest rates earlier rather thanlater--that is, to permit the market to understand that somewhathigher interest rates effected by the Federal Reserve, as opposed tojust the technical factors, would be acceptable in the near term.However, the point is--and I think Jerry made this point very well--that this does not mean a change in Federal Reserve policy but ratherthe management of Federal Reserve policy at or about the level that wepresently operate. The other thing that I would just mention is that,3/31/87contrary to some other comments that have been made, I would move thereference on the dollar in the directive to a more prominent level; Iwould move it up in that sentence as proposed in the directivelanguage and as mentioned by Don Kohn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and opinions but does not explicitly disagree with anyone else's statements.


Passage number 239.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Forrestal" without providing any details or context about him. Without further information, it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 240.
MR. FORRESTAL. As I look at the domestic economy, Mr.Chairman, I don't see any case at all for doing anything with respectto policy at the present time. We have had reports around the tablethis morning that reflect perhaps somewhat better economic conditionsthan we had last time. The forecast isn't all that bad, althoughinflation looks like it's going to be ticking up toward the end of theyear. But I think all of this is premature with respect to policy.For purely domestic reasons I would prefer to stay where we are. Theonly reason that I would favor a move in interest rates or a move inthe borrowing is because of the dollar. Again, I think perhaps we arein a position where we can afford to wait a little longer to see whathappens with the dollar. It's possible that this Japan bashing that'sgoing on with respect to the semi-conductor situation may resolveitself. When we get past this quarter some of the window dressingthat the Japanese are engaged in may sort itself out and we may have alittle easing of the pressure on the dollar. If that doesn't happen Iwould certainly want to be in a position to move rapidly to counterany further significant drop in the dollar. With respect to GovernorJohnson's point, I think it certainly would be wonderful if we couldget the interest rate differentials to contract a little. But even ifour trading partners don't make those moves, if the dollar were tofall somewhat more I'd be prepared to go ahead unilaterally on ourown.With respect to the directive, I too would favor giving amore prominent place in that directive to the foreign exchangesituation. One other point that I would make is that I'm not so surethat the word "instability" that is in the directive is the right one.The phrase "in light of the recent instability" strikes me as being abit on the strong side. I would prefer language that would suggestrecent weakness of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Forrestal, is expressing his own views and preferences regarding economic policy, but he does not explicitly disagree with anyone or present conflicting opinions.


Passage number 241.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Angell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context or information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement in regards to Governor Angell.


Passage number 242.
MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that no change, or alternative B,is the right place to start because we have so much uncertainty inregard to the direction our economy is going. We just don't have thefacts out there that tell us exactly which move we ought to make. Andthe last thing we ought to do is to make a move in one direction andhave it turn out to be the wrong move. I think we need stability whenwe don't seem to get too much stability from other Executive branchesof this government. We need to stabilize here; we need not dosomething dramatic. The only certain thing I can see is the dollar'sdownward momentum; it just doesn't seem to me that that's apt to turnaround. At some point in time, we're going to have to be willing togive that high priority or top priority. In fact, at some point intime, we're probably going to have to be willing to make it thedominant priority in order to change this momentum that exists. I dobelieve it would be very important for us to get West Germany andJapan and other G-10 countries also to recognize that this is acritical juncture and that at some point here we are going to have to-34-3/31/87be willing to [unintelligible] monetary policy. It would be mostimportant that we have them prepared to make steps at the same time wemight make a step. So, we really ought to be sure that any upwardpressure on interest rates in the United States in this environmentcalls for downward pressure on rates abroad. I think the worldeconomy dictates that. It seems to me that the transition for usought to be to look at the monetary aggregates. I don't think weought to announce anything different about the monetary aggregatesnow, but I do think we ought to look carefully at the M2 and M1 growthpaths. If they are within this 3 to 7 percent range and conditionsremain as they are and the dollar continues to move downward for sometime, that might be acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, there is no evident contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Angell, is expressing his opinion and suggesting a cautious approach to the economy. He emphasizes the need for stability and suggests looking at the monetary aggregates. There is no engagement with a conflicting viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 243.
 But at some point--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3 to 7 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply provides a range of numbers.


Passage number 244.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about MR. ANGELL, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 245.
 Well, there's no number like that in theBluebook but it seems to me that a 3 to 7 range gives the path for thedollar--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. You just made that up, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that there is no number like that in the Bluebook, suggesting that the previous statement is incorrect or unsupported. They further express doubt by saying "Okay. You just made that up, I guess." This indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the accuracy or validity of the previous statement.


Passage number 246.
MR. ANGELL. I just made that up, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply acknowledging that the speaker made something up.


Passage number 247.
 Given the path ofthe dollar, we want monetary restraint more than we otherwise wouldhave wanted; but we don't want to have an abrupt movement there, andwe want to negotiate with our--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3 to 7 percent is what you're thinking offor M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is discussing the desire for monetary restraint and the consideration of not having an abrupt movement, as well as the specific range (3 to 7 percent) for M2 and M3.


Passage number 248.
MR. ANGELL. Well, M2 and M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions M2 and M1 without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 249.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 and M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage provides a list of two things, M2 and M1, without any contrasting or conflicting statements.


Passage number 250.
MR. ANGELL. That is in this current environment of dollarweakness.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the current environment of the dollar being weak.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Heller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is because the phrase "Governor Heller" is simply stating the title or position of an individual and does not indicate any specific disagreement or contention.


Passage number 252.
MR. HELLER. Like most speakers before me, I favoralternative B. I think it's important to keep U.S. economic growthgoing and also to maintain inflation at a subdued pace. I was veryhappy to see that the Ms have been slowing, and I think we should notdo something that pushes them very sharply from their current paths.I'd like to note that short-term interest rates are already very highin real terms. With federal funds trading today between 6 and 7percent, if you take the GNP deflator of 3 percent you're talkingabout a short-term [real] interest rate of between 3 and 4 percent. Icertainly wouldn't want to follow Germany and Japan into theirslowdown just for the sake of holding the dollar exchange rate againstthose two currencies at the present time, as has been noted many timesbefore. The dollar has not depreciated very much against the broaderbasket of currencies. As is implied by the staff projection, if weprevent the dollar from falling we will get lower growth rates thanare actually indicated here. So we're risking the chance of asubstantial slowdown, if not a recession, in the United States. Thatcertainly wouldn't help the world economy, as such. We've mentionedbefore that we should intervene in disorderly markets and I agree withthat. With all that taken into account, I favor symmetric language in-35-3/31/87the policy directive and would not move the dollar to a more prominentplace in the directive itself.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their support for alternative B and explains why they believe it is important to maintain economic growth and subdued inflation. They also express concern about the potential negative impact of a slowdown or recession and argue against prioritizing the dollar exchange rate against other currencies.


Passage number 253.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 254.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think the economy is strongenough that there's certainly no case for pursuing an easier policyeven if the aggregates should come in for the next month or so belowthe projections indicated. I'd like to call your attention, though,to the fact that we've already had some tightening in the last fewdays. We've had the long-term government bond yield go up about 30basis points. If that should stick, we should expect to see a similarrise in corporate bond and mortgage rates. As far as moving to ahigher borrowing level and a tighter policy, I think that depends alot on the nature of the overall circumstances. I'm inclined to takethe same position that Governor Heller did: that with the worldeconomy growing so slowly, if we're going to stay on a path ofimproving our balance of payments position we've got to be able toincrease our market share in a world that's not growing very fast.And I'm not sure we can do that at the present level of the exchangerate. I don't know where the equilibrium rate is but I suspect thedollar has to come down somewhat further before we get enough momentumgoing to begin to restore our balance of payments position. So itseems to me that if we're going to raise the borrowing level we oughtto have a conference call so that the members of the Committee reallycan appraise the situation in the light of what's going ondomestically as well as what's going on in the foreign exchangemarket. If we're getting a modest, gradual, downward drift in thedollar I don't think we ought to be concerned about that. If we get asustained number of days [of weakness], as we've had recently, ofcourse, that's another matter. It depends on the conditions, and Ithink they're kind of hard to describe in advance. That's why Isuggest that we should have a conference call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Morris is advocating for a tighter policy and a lower exchange rate, while acknowledging that there has been some tightening already. He suggests having a conference call to discuss the situation further. This differs from the viewpoint of other Committee members who may not agree with his perspective.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Stern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of any disagreement or contention in the given passage "Mr. Stern". It appears to be a straightforward statement or introduction of someone named Mr. Stern.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
MR. STERN. Given all the current and prospective problems weface, I favor alternative B in terms of a borrowing target, at leastas the starting point. I think we should not roil things here anyfurther unnecessarily. I would maintain the kind of asymmetry that'sin the directive and I would be in favor of greater emphasis onforeign exchange market considerations. As Jerry Corrigan mentionedearlier, in the period ahead we may be in a situation whereintervention alone doesn't do it; we may have to be prepared to backthat up with something more meaningful. Beyond that, I would add thatI don't know what the right level for the dollar is, but I amconcerned that a lower dollar as a consequence of accommodativemonetary policy at this point will not solve our trade problem in anysustained or any satisfactory way. It seems to me that in the longerrun that's going to produce either higher inflation or weaker domesticinvestment than we would like to see, or some combination of both overtime. I'm quite concerned about that; that is a longer-term matter.I think we have to be very careful with the dollar here and I don'tknow that having it go lower at this juncture, as a consequence ofmonetary policy, is a helpful development at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is contention or disagreement. This can be seen in Mr. Stern's statement that he is concerned that lowering the dollar as a consequence of accommodative monetary policy will not solve the trade problem in a sustained or satisfactory way. This contradicts the idea that lowering the dollar would be a helpful development.


Passage number 257.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because there is no significant information or statement provided.


Passage number 258.
-36-3/31/87MR. BOYKIN. I would also favor alternative B for the reasonsthat have been given--the uncertainties. I do like Jerry's approachof starting with $300 million borrowing but being prepared to movefairly rapidly a little higher. It seems to me that what is reallyimportant right now in this very current environment is what'shappening to the exchange rate, and that can move awfully fast. Interms of the response and implementation of policy, I differ a littlewith Frank Morris simply because of the logistics of taking whateveraction might be required. I would be willing to go along with anunderstanding of being prepared to move and to move very quicklytoward a little more restraint. Likewise, then, I would make theexchange rate a little more prominent in the directive because that'skind of what's guiding the policy decision right now, at least in mymind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their support for alternative B and discussing their agreement with Jerry's approach. They also mention a slight difference with Frank Morris but still express their willingness to go along with the understanding of being prepared to move quickly. There is no clear disagreement or contention between the different viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 259.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 260.
MR. KEEHN. For the reasons stated it does seem to me thatthis is an appropriate time to maintain our current level of reserverestraint. That suggests a borrowing level of, say, $300 million.But depending on developments in the exchange market as they mayevolve, if we were going to err I'd be in favor of erring a bit on thehigh side rather than the low side. And I think the wording of thedirective ought to be phrased to reflect at least that level ofrestraint. Translating that to the federal funds rate, if the ratewere to continue at the present level X--what's going on today, whichI think is an aberration--or even trend a little higher I wouldn'tnecessarily fight that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Keehn is expressing his opinion and suggesting a borrowing level, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has moved down, I guess. So, beforeyou make your case, the federal funds rate has come down since thismorning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the federal funds rate decreasing.


Passage number 262.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It came down to the 6-1/4 percent area afterhaving been as high as 6-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about the interest rate, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 263.
 So it wasn't working out--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Still, I didn't know what you werereferring to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that something is not working out without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 264.
MR. KEEHN. 6-1/4 percent was exactly what I had in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Keehn states that 6-1/4 percent is exactly what he had in mind, suggesting agreement or satisfaction.


Passage number 265.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The provided phrase, "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER," does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 266.
 Okay, I just wanted to make sure that youwere--MR. KEEHN. It seems to me that that level is one that weought not to necessarily fight. [From the discussion] around thetable earlier, I think it's clear that our principal focus is on theinternational side, particularly the exchange markets. Therefore, Ido think that the directive ought to reflect that. I think it's anhonest statement that would not in any way be surprising to themarkets. The kind of wording that Don Kohn has in the Bluebookrelating to that is an appropriate statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing agreement with a statement made earlier and suggesting that the directive should reflect a focus on the international side, particularly the exchange markets.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided does not include any content for analysis. Please provide a complete passage or provide more context for a more accurate assessment.


Passage number 268.
MR. BOEHNE. I think we have some breathing room on thedomestic economy and our focus is on the international situation. Ithink it needs special emphasis both in the directive and in the-37-3/31/87conduct of policy. I find it hard to imagine a situation in which wewould ease policy over the next six weeks. So I come out with theview that we ought to stay where we are for now, with a directiveweighted on the side of restraint. Whether we have to exercise thatrestraint depends on how developments, particularly internationaldevelopments, unfold.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, expresses his opinion that the focus should be on the international situation and that policy should remain where it is for now. He also mentions the possibility of exercising restraint depending on how international developments unfold. However, there is no indication of disagreement or contention within the passage.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the provided information "Governor Johnson."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
MR. JOHNSON. I agree with the statements that where theeconomy is headed is a little uncertain now. So I don't think that wewant to make any clear-cut moves in monetary policy. That's why Isupport something like alternative B. But I am concerned about someof the potential destabilizing activities that are going on in thefinancial markets. So, even though I really wouldn't want a change inpolicy, I think that it may be necessary to at least reserve somepotential discretion--or maybe the answer is to have the potential fora conference call--to deal with a situation that might require someuptick in the borrowing level. I would reemphasize what I saidbefore: that my preference would be not to do anything like that, orat least to make our best effort to convince our trading partners whohave these large surpluses to be less reluctant on their own domesticpolicy. That's where I think the real problem lies more than it lieshere. I'd hate to see us dragged into their scenario by trying todefend the dollar when it's sinking against those currencies. Andthat is a real risk. But I think we have to deal with thedestabilizing market activity. There is a real threat of inflationaryexpectations surfacing if we let it get out of hand. So there mightbe room for some discretion. I'm not sure whether having thediscretion to run the borrowings up to a certain level is the rightapproach. We recently had some trouble figuring out what therelationship between borrowings and the interest rate spread is. So,if we were to say something like a $500 million borrowing target, I'mnot sure what funds rate would be necessary to produce that. We mightwant to think more in terms of just adjusting the funds rate a littlerather than trying to hit some borrowing level when we're not surewhat funds rate it requires. I don't know what that means exactly--maybe a conference call or some sort of consultation. The problem isthat the developments that surface require quick action and I'm notsure there's always the time to sit around and have a conference callabout it. Maybe there's some room for some discretionary allowancethere. I think we ought to at least give this upcoming G-10 meeting achance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, expresses agreement with the need for cautious monetary policy (alternative B) but also expresses concern about potential destabilizing activities in the financial markets. He mentions the need for potential discretion or a conference call to deal with a situation that might require increased borrowing. Additionally, Mr. Johnson emphasizes the importance of convincing trading partners to address their own domestic policies rather than relying on defending the sinking dollar. He also raises concerns about inflationary expectations and the difficulty in determining the relationship between borrowings and interest rate spread. Overall, there is disagreement and uncertainty about the best approach to address the current economic situation.


Passage number 271.
 I hope we've got that much time without something happeningin the exchange market to give us more of a problem, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So far it's getting weaker by the minute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 272.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes. Hopefully we can maintain the currentapproach until after that meeting. Anyway, that's the dilemma.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is expressing hope for maintaining the current approach until a future meeting and states that it is a dilemma. However, he does not indicate any disagreement or opposition to a specific viewpoint.


Passage number 273.
MR. MELZER. There used to be a range in the directive forborrowings, which may be appropriate here. We could maybe skew it alittle in the direction of the sentiment that has been expressed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a possible adjustment to a directive based on the sentiment that has been expressed.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the exchange rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply asks a question and does not involve any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 275.
MR. CROSS. The yen is down to 145-1/2, which is down another1/2 a yen in the course of today and below the levels where it has-38-3/31/87been for the past couple of days in Tokyo and New York. It is underpretty heavy speculative pressure right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of fact about the value of the yen and its current market conditions. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just a little longer and we can get itdown to 145.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing the idea that if a little more time passes, the number can be reduced to 145.


Passage number 277.
MR. HELLER. Then you get a different directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that there is a different directive given after receiving something else. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Hendricks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 279.
MR. BLACK. Just delay the vote awhile.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply making a suggestion to delay the vote.


Passage number 280.
MR. CROSS. It may be there now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage provided is incomplete, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement based on this limited context.


Passage number 281.
MR. HENDRICKS. Although the business statistics haveimproved in the last couple of months, they don't seem to beimpressive enough to suggest a significant step-up in the pace ofexpansion. We're concerned about some price developments that we seeon the horizon and the pressure on the dollar in foreign exchangemarkets. With respect to the prominence of the exchange rate in thedirective we would favor not changing it. And, of course, thealternative that we support is the "B" path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply expresses concern about certain factors and states their preferred alternative.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have exhausted my list. Ms. Seger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement that the list has been fully exhausted.


Passage number 283.
MS. SEGER. Is it possible to vote with a question. How muchconfidence do we have that getting interest rates still higher would,in fact, stop the decline of the dollar. I hear that come through inthese comments and in the votes, but could someone just lay someprobability numbers on the table for me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for more information and requesting specific probability numbers related to the effect of increasing interest rates on the decline of the dollar.


Passage number 284.
MR. ANGELL. We can reduce the supply of reserves enough toget the dollar to be stabilized but we don't know what rate ofinterest that might entail.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement made by Mr. Angell that does not express disagreement or contention. It simply acknowledges a lack of knowledge regarding the potential interest rates required for stabilizing the dollar.


Passage number 285.
MR. PARRY. Isn't the important answer that term interestrates would [unintelligible] less of a problem now. With higherinterest rates, the chances of success are greater than with constantinterest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Parry is making a statement and presenting his opinion about interest rates, but there is no opposing view or argument mentioned.


Passage number 286.
MR. JOHNSON. As long as we don't spread the impression ofseriously weakening the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Johnson's opinion about avoiding the spread of an impression that could weaken the economy.


Passage number 287.
MS. SEGER. Yes, and that is exactly my point. I would hateto be chasing the dollar with higher interest rates and take down aneconomy that in my judgment is performing okay, but not terrifically.Certainly, there's some unevenness about the performance. Theexpansion is getting old by historical standards, and not knowing whatthat exact relationship is I just get a little nervous. As Waynekeeps telling me, what odds do you play. Because I do find theuncertainties overwhelming, both currently and prospectively, I wouldvote for just staying put. I would hate also to give the impressionthat just international considerations are driving what we do. If youlisten around the table, obviously, that's a major factor. But whenthe directive is made public I would hate to give the impression thatwe've thrown everything else out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily expressing the opinion of the speaker about the state of the economy and their preference for staying put in terms of interest rates.


Passage number 288.
-39-3/31/87MR. JOHNSON. I think the international situation only comesin to the extent that we see it affecting the domestic financialmarkets and inflationary pressures here. That's where the feedbackcomes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their perspective on how the international situation may impact domestic financial markets and inflationary pressures.


Passage number 289.
MR. ANGELL. It may become so destabilizing that theinternational situation may come to the front no matter what we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that the international situation may become destabilizing regardless of any actions taken.


Passage number 290.
It just seems to me that we must be prepared for rather decisiveactions at some point; we may have to draw the line and say it,because once markets become destabilized--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It [unintelligible] for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 291.
MR. JOHNSON. Jerry makes a good point there; I'd ratherbuild with some gradual changes in interest rates than have to forcethis with a big bang at some point.SPEAKER(.). I think it's axiomatic that there is some levelof interest rates that would stabilize the exchange rate. The problemis: What level is it and what is the cost that goes with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It consists of two individuals expressing their opinions and concerns about the potential impact of interest rates on the exchange rate. They are discussing different approaches, but there is no direct contradiction or argument between them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 292.
MS. SEGER. You'd have to pay along the way, too. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker suggests that paying along the way is necessary, which implies there might be a disagreement or contention about whether or not payment is required.


Passage number 293.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I certainly agree, Bob, with whatyou are saying: Heaven knows what the "right exchange rate" is vis-a-vis the yen or anything else. I don't know that either. But we're ina period now where, as best I can judge, the market risks are veryasymmetric. Because they're asymmetric and because of theinterdependencies, at least as I see them, between the exchangemarket, the domestic bond market, the stock market, and so forth,strategically we're in a position right now where a stitch in time cansave nine. That's all I'm trying to say. If I had to take my chancesin terms of snugging or [unintelligible] or whatever word we want touse to try to provide some protection against having to draw the linethe hard way--to use your term--I'd rather take that chance. I'drather err in that direction now in the hopes that it could forestallwhat I could easily conceive of as a much more difficult situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with Bob's statement about uncertain exchange rates, but also stating their belief that there are asymmetric market risks and interdependencies that may require taking preventative action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 294.
MR. HELLER. Let me speak against that a bit. If we start totighten up now and are unsuccessful at holding the dollar where it isat the present time, I think we will not see any improvement in thetrade and current account balances, especially in view of thesituation abroad. Then as the bad data continue to come in on thetrade front, the markets will say: Well, the current level is clearlyinappropriate for the exchange rate. They will test us, and we willnot be able to sustain the current exchange rate. So I think it isprobably more prudent to let the exchange rate drift down a littleuntil it is at a level where we can see an improvement in the currentaccount and the trade account. Then if you spend your ammunition youhave a chance to convince the markets that you will hold it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Heller is arguing against a previous statement and suggesting a different course of action.


Passage number 295.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Mr. Angell without providing any additional information or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
 But, Bob, the time--MR. PARRY. Bob, but the question is: What's going to takeyou there. The question is whether or not you're going to needsomewhat higher interest rates to get that smooth movement. I thinkthe interest rates that Jerry and others are talking about do notinvolve doing something to preserve the rate as it exists today-40-3/31/87necessarily, but to provide a more orderly movement. And I think thatlinkage is key.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Bob and Mr. Parry have different views on whether higher interest rates are necessary for a smoother movement. Bob believes higher interest rates are needed, while Mr. Parry believes they are not necessarily needed but would provide a more orderly movement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 297.
MR. HELLER. Well, okay. But take, for instance, the onesuggested sentence in the operational paragraph that says "In light ofthe recent instability of the dollar in foreign exchange markets,particular emphasis will be placed on conditions in these markets inoperational decisions." That [conveys the] feeling that we should beholding the going exchange rate with monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is disagreement or contention in the passage regarding the suggested sentence. Mr. Heller is expressing his opinion by saying "That [conveys the] feeling..." which implies he does not agree with or support the suggestion.


Passage number 298.
MR. PARRY. I'll be honest with you: I have a littledifficulty understanding what that means. When I first read that Ithought what it was telling the market is don't get confused by oursterilization actions, the fact that we'll be putting in reserves tosterilize our foreign exchange [intervention]. I'm not sure Iunderstand what that sentence means. I think something probably oughtto be in there, but I'm not sure this is it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Parry, admits to having difficulty understanding a sentence and offers their interpretation while acknowledging that they may not fully grasp the meaning.


Passage number 299.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me raise a few questions aboutthe directive. I don't think we'll solve all these problems by thedirective. I'm not sure the traditional type of directive at allmeets the current circumstances, but let me assume it does. By saying"maintain the existing degree," that "maintain" may be for a verybrief period of time in some people's views. Suppose we really didsomething radical--I'm just thinking out loud here. We write thatfirst sentence, and then forget about this sentence that's stuck inthere about foreign exchange markets, and go down to the sentence thatsays "somewhat" or "slightly" and "might" or "would", whatever itsays. I'll get radical here: Suppose we make it totally asymmetricaland say "might be acceptable depending upon developments in foreignexchange markets"--put that first--then "and taking into account thestrength of the business expansion, progress against inflation," andso forth. Then go back and say "This action is expected to beconsistent with growth in the aggregates" and so forth and so on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 300.
MR. PARRY. I think moving the aggregates away from thatposition is good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Parry, expresses a positive opinion about moving the aggregates away from their current position. There is no sign of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 301.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me repeat it and see whether we've gota basis for something here. Maybe it ought to be tightened a bitbecause it's going to take a lot of changing. "In the implementationof policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintainthe existing degree of pressure on reserve positions." Then we saysomewhat or slightly or whatever--let me come back to that. "Somewhat(or slightly) greater reserve restraint would (or might) be acceptabledepending upon developments in foreign exchange markets and takinginto account the strength in the business expansion, progress againstinflation, and conditions in domestic and international creditmarkets." That doesn't say anything about the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the wording be tightened or clarified, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 302.
 We justsay--MR. PARRY. Just add a phrase "and the behavior of theaggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. It is a statement or suggestion being made by someone (possibly Mr. Parry) to add a phrase to something.


Passage number 303.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just leave that in there: "taking intoaccount the behavior of the aggregates and the strength of thebusiness expansion...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not explicitly mention any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the factors of "taking into account the behavior of the aggregates and the strength of the business expansion."


Passage number 304.
"-41-3/31/87MR. ANGELL. But does the behavior of the aggregates at thispoint imply the ranges we've already announced.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any ranges or imply any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 305.
 I don't think we--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's leave out the aggregates then and goback to the other sentence. We can say "This action is expected to beconsistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from March throughJune at annual rates of ___ and ___ percent." Do we want to sayanything about M1. "M1 is expected to remain substantially below itspace in 1986." Okay. So, just reverse those and leave the wording.Somebody get that typed and we can talk about substance. I don'tthink there's any doubt, obviously, that if we move we would be muchbetter off if the others moved also. In fact, we might be better offif the others moved without our moving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a proposed action and suggesting potential wording for a statement. There is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 306.
MR. ANGELL. At this point in time, that's the bestalternative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 307.
MR. JOHNSON. That's probably about the best.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson's statement is neutral and does not express disagreement or contention.


Passage number 308.
MR. MORRIS. If we move we reduce their incentive to takeaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario where a potential action could affect the incentives of others.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as they see it, they don't have muchroom to move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the perspective of others without expressing their own disagreement or argument.


Passage number 310.
MR. ANGELL. But since the world economy would not beadversely affected by some increase in U.S.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Angell.


Passage number 311.
 interest rates if we hadan offsetting decline in rates [abroad]--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's assume all that. It can takea lot of convincing; whether that's possible or not is another thing.[The problem with] fooling around with the level of borrowings isthat, essentially, that's a very loose steering wheel. We could pushfor a higher level of borrowing for two weeks and before you know itthe exchange market would be out there and not have any understandingthat that was going on and the funds rate wouldn't move at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 312.
MR. ANGELL. Maybe this is the time to think about publishingour minutes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have other vehicles that are lessprecedent-setting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating that there are other vehicles that are less precedent-setting.


Passage number 314.
MS. SEGER. Was that a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply refers to a person named Ms. Seger making a motion.


Passage number 315.
MR. ANGELL. No, it wasn't a motion. I don't think there areenough votes to make a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell simply states his opinion that there are not enough votes to make a motion.


Passage number 316.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can always raise the discount rate--just to put another option on the table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that another option is to raise the discount rate without any disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 317.
MR. ANGELL. That might be appropriate at some point in time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something might be appropriate at some point in time.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can more deliberately, as somebodysuggested, try to push the federal funds rate a bit without worryingabout precisely what level of borrowings it takes. It might take verylittle if we did it in a certain way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply considering a suggestion and considering the possibility of pushing the federal funds rate.


Passage number 319.
-42-3/31/87MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage appears to be a date and possibly a name with no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 320.
 Yes, we might say $300 to $500 million,consistent with a federal funds rate and--MR. PARRY. Aren't there some operational advantages toperhaps running with a little higher borrowing level. We think of$300 million as being almost the low point that one can reach, andthere might be some greater flexibility if we were working with aslightly higher borrowing target in our operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: There is disagreement in this passage between the speaker who suggests a borrowing level of $300-$500 million and Mr. Parry who argues for a slightly higher borrowing target for operational advantages and flexibility.


Passage number 321.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be true, but it conflicts with nomovement if that's what we want to do in terms of our present stance.The in-between course, which we've been doing to a very small degree,is trying to avoid actions that might inadvertently ease the market inthe sense that where the federal funds rate is on particular days whenthe dollar is declining [unintelligible] but we have not beenanticipating reserve needs. Somebody said--Mr. Keehn, I think--thatwhat we ought to be doing is erring on the high side. If we keep the$300 million borrowing target that may capture what we ought to bedoing at the moment. I don't know how we reduce this to a formula.So far as this consultation issue is concerned, I think if we weremaking a big step we would consult or if we were changing the discountrate a consultation would come about. But I don't know if we want toconsult every time we nudge slightly here or there, if we know whatdirection we are nudging in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 322.
MR. MELZER. Put a range in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MR. MELZER's statement simply asks for a range, indicating a request for information without expressing any disagreement.


Passage number 323.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, just for our own information I don'tthink we need a range in the directive. Certainly, nobody is talkingabout moving above $500 million without a reconsideration of thedecision. We'd probably consult before we got there anyway, but as adeliberate matter, one never can tell where a particular week iscoming in. I have no problem at all if you really want to changethat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and suggesting that a certain directive does not need a specific range. They also mention consulting and being open to change. However, there is no interaction or conflicting viewpoints present.


Passage number 324.
MR. JOHNSON. How about something like this: We would stickto the $300 million borrowing, but if conditions got disorderly wewould let slide our reserve adding and that might spill over into ahigher borrowings level. We don't really know what that might be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a hypothetical scenario and expressing uncertainty about the potential outcome.


Passage number 325.
 Wewould try to hit our $300 million on borrowing, but if we had topostpone--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be very cautious about how we doit. The way I would interpret it is erring a bit on the high side. Idon't know what else we can say. I can describe it. We'll basicallycontinue at the moment aiming at $300 million on borrowing. I hear alot of sensitivity about the exchange rate. I hear very littlesensitivity about coming in low on the aggregates side. If anybody isvery sensitive to that they better say so; I didn't hear anybody beingvery sensitive on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is sharing their interpretation and perspective but does not mention any disagreement or conflicting views.


Passage number 326.
MR. HELLER. I would like the funds rate where it is, but Iwouldn't want to push it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Heller, expresses his personal preference for keeping the funds rate where it currently is, without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 327.
MR. JOHNSON. It all depends on how the economy looks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Johnson is a neutral statement that does not prompt any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 328.
MR. HELLER. I think they want to flatten it out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their opinion about what they believe the other party wants, but there is no explicit disagreement or argument present.


Passage number 329.
-43-3/31/87MR. ANGELL. We don't have any guarantee at this point thatthese negative velocities will not return. That's why I want to goslowly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that there is no guarantee that the negative velocities will not return and expresses the desire to proceed slowly.


Passage number 330.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not talking about forever,obviously. When are we meeting again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is simply an inquiry about when the next meeting will take place.


Passage number 331.
MR. FORRESTAL. The middle of May--the 19th.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement about the date, May 19th.


Passage number 332.
MR. ANGELL. Right. Economic conditions could make what Ithink is now [unintelligible] at the lower end of the range--to be at5-1/2 percent--seem wonderful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion on the economic conditions.


Passage number 333.
 If the economy were to deteriorate--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's no question that if theeconomy were going down the tank we would want it a little higher. Wewould begin getting more sensitive to these aggregate figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that if the economy were to deteriorate, they would want certain figures to be higher. There is no conflict or contradiction between these statements.


Passage number 334.
MR. JOHNSON. If interest rates drift up we can expect to seethose aggregates slow even more from what we're predicting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothesis or prediction about the potential impact of interest rates on certain aggregates.


Passage number 335.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not predicting anything all thatslow as I would read it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that the prediction is not slow, but the speaker is reading it slowly. There is no disagreement or contention present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 336.
MR. JOHNSON. I mean from what we've been seeing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "I mean from what we've been seeing," which suggests that Mr. Johnson's statement may differ from what others have observed or believe.


Passage number 337.
MR. ANGELL. It's pretty slow final demand isn't it. Isn'tU.S. final demand almost zero, fourth quarter to fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact or making an observation about the state of final demand in the U.S. economy.


Passage number 338.
MR. PRELL. Domestic final sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states "Domestic final sales" without providing any context or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 339.
MR. JOHNSON. You are talking about final sales, which runabout 1 percent in the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only provides a statement by Mr. Johnson about final sales, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 340.
MR. ANGELL. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes a statement made by someone named Mr. Angell without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 341.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the year as a whole, domestic finalsales are what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a general fact about domestic final sales for the entire year without indicating any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 342.
MR. KOHN. 0.7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is a simple statement without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 343.
MR. PRELL. That's private domestic final sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a phrase. There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 344.
MR. ANGELL. 0.7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Mr. Angell is simply stating the number 0.7, without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 345.
MR. PRELL. Private domestic final sales, consumption andinvestment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The term "Private domestic final sales, consumption, and investment" is a factual statement and does not imply any contention or disagreement. It is a neutral description of a specific category of economic activity.


Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Private domestic final sales. You haven'tgot government up much do you. There's probably not much differencefor domestic final sales.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any specific claim or argument that could generate contention or disagreement. It simply mentions private domestic final sales and implies that government involvement may not significantly impact those sales. However, it does not state any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 347.
MR. ANGELL. But you have state and local, which is a littlehigher than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell simply states that state and local figures are slightly higher than the previous mentioned data without arguing or disagreeing with anyone.


Passage number 348.
MR. PRELL. Well, government purchases are down 0.3, soadding them in would make the number a little lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact and provides an explanation for its impact on the number mentioned.


Passage number 349.
MR. ANGELL. Adding them in would make what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement or question from Mr. Angell without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 350.
-44-3/31/87MR. JOHNSON. Make it lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 351.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A little lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "A little lower" as it does not present any conflicting or contradictory information.


Passage number 352.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Angell.


Passage number 353.
 That's not a very--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not a very good forecast.[Unintelligible] that's precisely what you would like to see happen ifwe do not get the expansion from the foreign side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their opinion about a forecast and expressing that it aligns with what they would like to happen.


Passage number 354.
MR. ANGELL. That's right. That's exactly what we'd like tohave happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with someone else's statement.


Passage number 355.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think what we're talking about isstarting at something like $300 million, pursued cautiously so long asthe exchange rate is so sensitive. If the exchange rate really gotweak we would contemplate moving up certainly to $400 million or so.Much above that, we'd want to have a conference, anyway. That wouldbe the sense of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely stating their opinion and suggesting a plan of action based on the sensitivity of the exchange rate.


Passage number 356.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I'd rather say more like $400 million,because of this problem with borrowings and the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion or perspective on the matter.


Passage number 357.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, we would prefer to see theothers come down; I'd prefer to see any distinct moves made in thatdirection. We can talk about other moves if different situationsarose but not decide that here. We are putting a lot of weight onconcern about the dollar--if it got too unstable--and we are somewhatless worried about the aggregates. So, let's read this. The firstthing we have to do is decide, generally, this "somewhat" and"slightly" business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 358.
MR. ANGELL. I think "somewhat" is a little more decisive inthis environment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is simply stating his opinion about the word "somewhat" being more decisive in a particular environment.


Passage number 359.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be inclined to say "might"--notbecause I think it's a weaker word, but because we are really talkingabout a conditional thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal inclination and explaining their reasoning behind it.


Passage number 360.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, "might" is the word.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply confirming that "might" is the word.


Passage number 361.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, but you need "somewhat" for reserverestraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Yes, but you need 'somewhat' for reserve restraint" suggests agreement or qualification rather than contention.


Passage number 362.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat greater reserve restraint mightbe acceptable depending on foreign exchange market developments,taking into account the strength of the business expansion. Thisaction is expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over theperiod from March through June at annual rates"--. Now, we had thisone suggestion on the table that we stick in a rather wide range.That would be unusual but maybe it's what the doctor orders here interms of capturing what people are talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is discussing different options or suggestions without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 363.
MR. ANGELL. 3 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a range of percentages without any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 364.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3 to 7 percent. The upper part of thatrange, actually, goes a bit above what the staff has on alternative Bbut, obviously, the midpoint is below it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a range of values and acknowledges that the midpoint falls below the higher end of the range.


Passage number 365.
-45-3/31/87MR. ANGELL. But whether we want the upper or lower woulddepend upon developing conditions and portfolio preferences and thedollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is discussing possible preferences and considerations regarding the upper or lower options, rather than arguing or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we put in something like that, themeaning is, if I understand it correctly, that we would get concernedif growth got below 3 percent. That would become a factor saying weshould ease regardless of what the rest of this says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the meaning of a statement and the potential consequences of a certain situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 367.
MR. MELZER. Couldn't you finesse that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The use of the word "finesse" suggests that there is a disagreement or difference in opinion between Mr. Melzer and another person, as they discuss how to handle a certain situation or problem.


Passage number 368.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We would] move in that direction andvice-versa if it's above 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that a move would be made in a certain direction if a certain condition is met.


Passage number 369.
MR. MELZER. Could we not deal with that in a less explicitway by just putting the behavior of the aggregates phrase in thesecond sentence and keeping the third sentence what it usually hasbeen, which is really our best guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a possible alternative approach to dealing with a certain issue.


Passage number 370.
MR. PARRY. I think the way to do that, which would capturewhat we have said, is to say "Somewhat greater reserve restraint mightbe acceptable depending on developments in foreign exchange markets,the strength of the business expansion, progress against inflation andconditions in domestic and international credit markets, taking intoaccount the behavior of the aggregates." We've got it all there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a way to summarize what has been discussed, without expressing any opposition or disagreement with the ideas being discussed.


Passage number 371.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since the passage only includes the name "MR. ANGELL," it does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 372.
 But the trouble with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do that, but it puts less emphasison the foreign exchange markets than I thought people wanted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply highlights the speaker's perception that there may be less emphasis on the foreign exchange markets than what they initially believed people desired.


Passage number 373.
MR. PARRY. Well, it's there and it's first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Parry is simply stating a fact or his opinion without arguing against someone else's perspective.


Passage number 374.
MR. ANGELL. Bob, the problem is that if we don't specifysomeone might assume that growth of M2 and M3 below the present targetpath would be unacceptable. Right now we have a target path that wehave announced. What I am suggesting is that in light of theconditions in the international foreign exchange markets we need alower band.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is simply explaining the problem of not specifying the growth of M2 and M3 and suggesting a potential solution.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 375.
 That would give us some options between--MR. PARRY. I don't think we have reached an agreement onthat, have we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I don't think we have reached an agreement on that, have we?" indicates that MR. PARRY believes there is disagreement or lack of consensus on a certain issue.


Passage number 376.
MR. HELLER. I like what Bob Parry said. We don't want tolook just at foreign exchange markets, and say everything else issecondary, which is what this phrasing says as it is written. I don'tthink we want to do that either. So what Bob is suggesting--takingout the first phrase--gets us there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Heller agrees with Bob Parry's suggestion and supports removing the first phrase.


Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon how much weight you wantto put in here. I would have read the Committee members as sayingthey want to put special weight on the dollar.SPEAKER(.). I think that's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both individuals express agreement and understanding of the situation.


Passage number 378.
MR. HELLER. A lot more than on the domestic conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a lot more happening regarding domestic conditions. There is no contradictory or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 379.
-46-3/31/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have to distinguish here. It'snot necessarily saying more in any fundamental sense. It's sayingthat looking at the next seven weeks--or however long before we meethere again--we think the most likely factor that would make us betighter is the dollar, not all these other things.SEVERAL. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply clarifying their perspective and stating that the most likely factor that would make them "tighter" is the dollar, rather than the other mentioned factors. The use of "SEVERAL" and "That's right" suggests agreement with the speaker's statement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not saying we would tighten. It justsays that we think the dollar is the critical or the most importantvariable for these seven weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or perspective on the importance of the dollar as a variable.


Passage number 381.
MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that to the extent that my concernabout the dollar is its effect on the domestic economy. I certainlywouldn't worry about it so much if I thought it was going to have aneutral effect on domestic inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson simply states his agreement and expands on one aspect of the topic being discussed.


Passage number 382.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's not going to be anissue in six to seven weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a straightforward prediction about the future, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 383.
MR. JOHNSON. No, I am just saying that in the long run it'sgot to have some feedback on the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Rather, it seems to present a statement or opinion without any opposing views being mentioned.


Passage number 384.
MR. BOYKIN. Couldn't the M2 and M3 growth be handled, inview of what goes before it, by saying that the action is expected tobe consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period at annual rates"around 6 percent". Just say "around" that. We don't really know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we traditionally say.Governor Angell's formulation, I think, does add something. With thatwide a range, it's quite unlike what we usually say. To go over thatprevious sentence again: It says that the Committee is puttingparticular weight on the foreign exchange markets during thisparticular period of time. In effect, it is saying that's the onlyreason why we are likely to tighten during this period. It doesn'texpect the business expansion and all of that other stuff to lead tosome tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own opinion and reflecting on Governor Angell's formulation, without expressing any disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 386.
 It doesn't absolutely say it that way but it leansin that direction: that this is the one factor that--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But by the same token, it doesn'tsay that if the economy just died next week--although to me that ishighly unlikely--that we wouldn't ease either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a hypothetical situation and expressing their opinion, but there is no disagreement present.


Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't say that we would tighten, butit doesn't say that we would ease. I think we would have to changethe directive if we were to ease. Obviously, that can be done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is stating a neutral observation and suggesting a potential course of action.


Passage number 388.
 Ifthe economy took a nose dive next week we would have a littleconsultation and say in light of the economy taking a nose dive wedecide--MR. GUFFEY. I have the impression from the discussion aroundthe table that the only tightening that would take place would be tomanage the dollar to some lower level in an orderly fashion ratherthan that we would tighten policy for any other reason. That is tosay, I think the original intent was not to tighten policy except tomanage the dollar down to a lower level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, is providing his impression from the discussion and stating that the original intent was not to tighten policy unless it is to manage the dollar down to a lower level.


Passage number 389.
-47-3/31/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way this is written, I would read itin terms of likelihoods: that by all odds that's the most likelything. It doesn't exclude [the possibility] that we would tighten ifthe aggregates got much higher, or if the business expansion werestronger, or if inflation rose. They are all mentioned here. But theway it is written suggests that what we are really worried about isthe dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply explaining the factors that could potentially lead to a change in monetary policy, without stating any conflicting opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 390.
MR. ANGELL. But I would suggest that if the dollar were tobe under increasing downward pressure, long bond rates would move upon us anyway. We would have the worst of all worlds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Angell is expressing his suggestion or opinion regarding the possible consequences of the dollar's downward pressure on long bond rates. There is no indication of a conflicting viewpoint or argument in the passage.


Passage number 391.
MR. STERN. The anxieties in the markets are such that that'scorrect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about the anxieties in the markets, so there is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 392.
MR. ANGELL. We have to show that we have control over what'shappening--that we are not sitting here without acting when action isneeded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing the necessity of taking action and asserting that they need to demonstrate control over the situation.


Passage number 393.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the choices are pretty simple. It'sjust a matter of emphasis. We can write a whole separate sentenceabout the dollar; Mr. Kohn has one example. We can do this in-betweencourse. Or we can take out the "taking into account," which is asmall change from what we had before--so small that I think it'salmost invisible. But we are left with [unintelligible] directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting different choices or options without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 394.
MR. BOEHNE. I like it the way it is. I have just onetechnical question. We say conditions in domestic and internationalcredit markets. Do we mean that international credit markets areseparate in our minds from the developments in foreign exchangemarkets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing his liking for the current state of something. He then asks a technical question to seek clarification.


Passage number 395.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know if I do. We can sayconditions in the credit markets to avoid that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or lack of knowledge about the conditions in the credit markets.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 396.
MR. MELZER. The way this is worded right now, though, itseems to me that we are not looking at the aggregates at all, which Iam not sure is right. I wasn't advocating putting them up there inthe "depending on" phrase but I would put them in the "taking intoaccount" litany of things that we look at. Otherwise, we're justsaying we don't take them into account at all and we are just making aprediction of where we think they are going to come in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: There is disagreement in the passage regarding whether or not the aggregates should be taken into account. Mr. Melzer believes that they should be included in the considerations, while others may not agree.


Passage number 397.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's because that's the way wetraditionally do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It simply states a fact about the way something is traditionally done.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 398.
 If you have any better wording--MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't read it that way. It seems to methat we are saying that we expect all of the above to be consistentwith M2 and M3 at whatever rates of growth we decide on. And if M2and M3 aren't consistent with that we would probably want to takeanother look at the situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, disagrees with the wording and interpretation presented. He suggests an alternative understanding and expresses the need for reassessment if M2 and M3 do not align with the expected consistency.


Passage number 399.
MR. GUFFEY. During the 7-week intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without further information.


Passage number 400.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to put that sentence backwhere it ordinarily is as the second sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence simply asks whether the recipient wants to move a sentence back to its original position.


Passage number 401.
3/31/87MR. MELZER. I wasn't suggesting that. I was suggesting justputting in this phrase that was dropped out when this was retyped.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Melzer is simply clarifying his suggestion about adding a specific phrase that was omitted during the process of retyping.


Passage number 402.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only provides a name, "MR. ANGELL," without any further context or information. Therefore, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 403.
 I thought there was some feeling that the dollarshould move up to the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer would put it in after thetaking into account, if I understand him right: "would be acceptabledepending on developments in foreign exchange markets, taking intoaccount the behavior of the aggregates, the strength of the businessexpansion, progress..." That's easy to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing someone's thoughts and interpretation of another person's statement without expressing any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 404.
MR. ANGELL. But how do we deal with the growth of M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for a solution to deal with the growth of M2 and M3.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 405.
Suppose M2 and M3 continue on the 4 percent path and then go belowthe--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We still have that sentence in here and wehave to put something in there. We have at least two proposals on thetable. We have Mr. Angell's, which was 3 to 7 percent. We havesomebody else's, which was "around 6 percent." There is a substantivedifference between those two.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage mentions two different proposals for the path of M2 and M3, one by Mr. Angell (3 to 7 percent) and another by someone else ("around 6 percent"). The statement "There is a substantive difference between those two" suggests that there is contention or disagreement regarding the proposed paths.


Passage number 406.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 6 percent or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage "6 percent or less" because it is stating a specific percentage and does not provide any conflicting or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 407.
MR. KEEHN. Just a thought: Does putting in a range now of,say, 3 to 7 percent, which is lower than the annual range of 5-1/2 to8-1/2 percent, condition it with regard to time. Might that suggestto somebody that we're easing up on policy here. Would putting in alower range than we have established for the year suggest that we aresneaking up on a policy change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage shows contention or disagreement. Mr. Keehn is suggesting that putting in a lower range than the established range for the year might suggest a change in policy, indicating a potential disagreement or concern about the decision.


Passage number 408.
MR. ANGELL. It just means that we are rebasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Angell, is simply making a statement about rebasing without any opposition or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 409.
MR. KEEHN. It's a different set of numbers than aregenerally out there and understood by the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that the numbers being referenced are different from the ones that are typically known and understood by the market. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 410.
MR. MELZER. If we say "about 6 percent," it's pretty clear topeople that we are shooting for the lower end of the cone, andeverybody knows the uncertainty associated with that. I think we'vealready sent the message if we say "about 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact and expressing their opinion about the clarity of the message being conveyed.


Passage number 411.
"MR. KEEHN. It may be true that in the past we have notalways hit the trajectory exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 412.
MR. HELLER. Bob, it is better than missing our cone.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Heller expresses that the situation is better than missing their cone.


Passage number 413.
MR. ANGELL. But they are not precise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a statement made by Mr. Angell.


Passage number 414.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we go up to eight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence suggests a suggestion or proposal without any indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 415.
MR. HELLER. I prefer six.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses a personal preference, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting statement presented.


Passage number 416.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is not too big a deal here. I ratherlike the 3 to 7 percent because I think it reflects the flavor of whatwas said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their preference for a certain percentage without contradicting or arguing against any opposing views.


Passage number 417.
 But whether or not 3 to 7 percent is precisely the rightrange---49-3/31/87MR. HELLER. I would think the 3 to 7 percent conveys that weare tightening. After all, the midpoint of 3 to 7 percent is 5percent. Five percent is really alternative C, and there were notmany people who were speaking in favor of alternative C. So,implicitly, we're changing the thrust of what people around the tablehave said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 418.
MR. ANGELL. But it's not really tightening. It justindicates that we may be going to tighten. It sets the parameters outfor tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is simply providing an explanation and clarifying that the mentioned measures are not a definite tightening but rather a possibility or indication.


Passage number 419.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon what you think of astightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It depends upon what you think of astightening" suggests that the author acknowledges differing viewpoints or interpretations, but does not engage in any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 420.
MR. HELLER. Then you should be wanting to vote foralternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Heller is suggesting that the person he is speaking to should vote for alternative C, which implies that he believes alternative C is the best choice.


Passage number 421.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you are talking about the aggregatespure and simple, it's tightening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is making a statement about the topic of discussion, there is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 422.
 If you are talking about borrowingas the measure [unintelligible]--MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. It appears to be an incomplete sentence, making it difficult to determine any specific argument or disagreement.


Passage number 423.
 If you argue for "C" then I think 3 to 7 percentwould be appropriate; but if you don't argue for "C"--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Alternative C says $500 million borrowing,which is not what people are focusing on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents two different scenarios or conditions but does not involve contention or disagreement.


Passage number 424.
MR. HELLER. Well, for growth rates of the Ms it says 5 and5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage simply states a fact about the growth rates of the "Ms" without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 425.
MR. STERN. I don't see that at all. I think all we aresaying is that we wouldn't be too concerned, other things equal, ifthe aggregates came in on the low side over the intermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 426.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not include any information or context about Vice Chairman Corrigan that would indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 427.
 We could say growth of M2 and M3 ofaround 6 percent, but the Committee would--MR. HELLER. I am not concerned with that either; but I amconcerned with our taking policy actions to get it down there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their lack of concern with the growth of M2 and M3 and their focus on taking policy actions to bring it down.


Passage number 428.
MR. STERN. I don't think that's contemplated.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 429.
MR. JOHNSON. I think we need to make it clear though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Instead, it suggests that Mr. Johnson is expressing his viewpoint or opinion.


Passage number 430.
MR. HELLER. I think we need to make that clear in thelanguage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement expressing the opinion of Mr. Heller.


Passage number 431.
MR. JOHNSON. We don't give that impression because we do saythat a growth rate similar to that is consistent with alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Johnson is stating that they do not give the impression that a growth rate similar to alternative C is not possible.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 432.
MR. ANGELL. Then there is a substantial difference ofopinion here, because in the environment of a weakening dollar and thecommodity price effects that are associated with such a weakeningdollar, I really do not want to go above, say, 7 percent. I reallywould want to tighten in that environment. So I think there is somepolicy difference that's cropping up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the given passage. This can be seen from the phrases "substantial difference of opinion" and "some policy difference that's cropping up." The speaker expresses a disagreement with the idea of going above 7 percent in the context of a weakening dollar and commodity price effects.


Passage number 433.
-50-3/31/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look at what the first two sentences inthe operational paragraph say. First, there is no change at present.The second sentence says there might be a tightening. And the thirdsentence says we expect that all to be consistent with somethingbetween "B" and "C." That's right because that's what the operationallanguage says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statements in the operational paragraph are presented as facts without contradiction or conflicting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 434.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Why couldn't the sentence on the Mssay that the Committee expects growth in M2 and M3 in the period fromMarch to June at rates of about 6 percent and then add some languageto say that we would be tolerant of slower growth rates than that,given the circumstances of the very rapid earlier growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement or contention in the passage.

Explanation: The disagreement or contention is expressed in the phrase "we would be tolerant of slower growth rates than that." This suggests that there is a difference in opinion regarding the level of tolerance for slower growth rates among the participants mentioned in the passage. Some may argue for being more tolerant, while others may disagree and prefer stricter growth rates.


Passage number 435.
MR. JOHNSON. What might clarify the M2/M3 issue is to saywhat we would normally expect for M2 and M3, assuming no change inreserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that providing clarification on the M2/M3 issue could be achieved by explaining what is typically expected for M2 and M3 in the absence of any changes in reserves.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 436.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is technically correct, but itattaches such precision to these estimates that are never that good.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage implies that there is contention or disagreement regarding the precision and accuracy of the estimates mentioned. The phrase "technically correct, but" suggests a disagreement or disagreement with the level of precision attached to the estimates. Additionally, the statement "that are never that good" implies a skeptical or critical view of the estimates.


Passage number 437.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Boehne or any context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 438.
 I think what Jerry is saying--MR. JOHNSON. Otherwise we may be assuming a change inreserve restraint. If we put a number other than what we say isconsistent with no change in reserve restraint we are assuming achange in reserve restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage shows agreement and a shared understanding between the speaker and Mr. Johnson. The phrase "I think what Jerry is saying" indicates that the speaker is expressing their interpretation of Jerry's statement, and Mr. Johnson's response shows that he agrees and adds clarification to ensure there is no misunderstanding.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 439.
MR. ANGELL. The only reason I don't want reserve restraintright now is because it seems to me that we've got a very low moneygrowth path right now. I don't know whether that's going to continueor not, but in light of a very low growth path to put restraint onright now runs a risk I am not willing to take.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Angell, is expressing his reluctance to implement reserve restraint at the moment due to the current low money growth path. This implies that there may be others who disagree with him and believe that reserve restraint should be implemented regardless of the low growth path.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 440.
 But if this growthpath proceeds along the bottom edge of our target--MR. JOHNSON. But that's not what the staff is projecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "But that's not what the staff is projecting" indicates disagreement or contention with the previous statement.


Passage number 441.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody support 4 to 7 percent, forwhich the average is 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 442.
MR. JOHNSON. We have a projection here for M2 and M3 undercertain assumptions. Assuming no change in reserve restraint, it's acertain amount; assuming differently it's a different amount. Andthat's building in what already has happened to the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating different assumptions and the corresponding outcomes without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 443.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a half of a point difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical difference.


Passage number 444.
MR. JOHNSON. I am just saying I would be comfortable withchanging those numbers if we said "might" or something--if we qualifyit to say, assuming no change in reserve restraint, we would expect M2and M3 to be 3 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, is simply stating his comfort with changing certain numbers if a certain qualification is added. There is no opposing opinion or conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 445.
MR. ANGELL. Assuming that the dollar continues on itspresent path and assuming that the growth rate of M2 were to return toa 9 percent rate or an 8-1/2 percent rate, would you want anyrestraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a hypothetical statement followed by a question.


Passage number 446.
MR. JOHNSON. All I am saying is that there is a projectionconsistent with a certain set of assumptions. If you change those-51-3/31/87assumptions you get different paths. There is no doubt about it; ifcertain conditions arose I'd want to change the conditions affectingthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson simply states that different paths can result from changing assumptions.


Passage number 447.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me talk you into 4 to 7 percent. Wejust change these numbers. You're putting too much weight on thestaff's numbers. What we say is that we want to be where we are nowor maybe tighter under certain conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a change in numbers and expressing their preference to be at the current level or tighter depending on certain conditions.


Passage number 448.
MR. JOHNSON. Under certain conditions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Johnson will do something under certain conditions. It does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 449.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we say we expect that approach--Iwould say "approach" instead of "action"--to be consistent with arange using two numbers that allow for our normal one percentage pointuncertainty around the projection plus another one percentage pointdown on the low side in case we do tighten. Now, that ought to makeit beautifully consistent with what the staff technically estimates.We often put in something like a 5 to 7 percent range that isconsistent with the 6 percent [expected].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is explaining a specific approach and discussing the consistency between projections and estimates.


Passage number 450.
MR. JOHNSON. That's sort of extracting the midpoints.That's a range of midpoints.SPEAKER(.). But we often do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is simply providing an explanation of extracting the midpoints, and the speaker acknowledges this explanation without any disagreement.


Passage number 451.
MR. BOYKIN. In trying to be consistent, we are becominginconsistent simply because we are saying that we don't want anythingto change. But then we are saying if we have to change, the M2 and M3growth rates relate to no change. We don't know what the monetaryaggregates would do when we respond because we don't know what theresponse would have to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes a situation where there is inconsistency in the argument being presented, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement between multiple parties.


Passage number 452.
MR. ANGELL. I believe that a continuation of M2 along a 5percent path would be consistent with the dollar stabilizing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a belief about the dollar stabilizing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 453.
MR. JOHNSON. That's not true. That's not what the staffsays. They have already built the March numbers into theirprojection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is stating that something is not true and contradicting what the staff says.


Passage number 454.
MR. KOHN. The staff would be the first to admit that thereis a range of uncertainty around that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is simply stating that the staff recognizes there is a certain level of uncertainty.


Passage number 455.
MR. ANGELL.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. This is because "MR. ANGELL" is not a complete statement or sentence and therefore does not convey any clear meaning or indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 456.
 We all agree but that's--MR. KOHN. One percentage point was perhaps being generous tothe staff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "We all agree" indicates consensus among the individuals being referred to.


Passage number 457.
MR. JOHNSON. But then that means that you expand on eitherside of that uncertainty.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson is simply making a statement based on a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 458.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We can say 6 percent or less; let metry that again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 459.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say 6 percent or less but I guessthe substantive question is whether we, in fact, would be concerned ifthe aggregates came in at 4 percent, let's say. If they came in at4 percent, all other things being equal, would that be a cause foreasing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply discussing a hypothetical scenario and questioning whether a particular outcome would cause a certain response.


Passage number 460.
-52-3/31/87MR. JOHNSON. Not if we had to restrain reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there would not be a need to restrain reserves.


Passage number 461.
MR. BOYKIN. Not [unintelligible] at this point in time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Boykin is simply stating that something is not clear or understandable at the current moment.


Passage number 462.
MR. BLACK. I think the only feasible alternative to what yousuggested is 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion or suggestion without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 463.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say 4 to 6 percent, or we can sayaround 6 percent or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply presenting different ways to describe a percentage range without any conflicting or contradictory statements.


Passage number 464.
MR. BLACK. That's the best one if we don't go with 4 to 7percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black suggesting that the option with a percentage of 4 to 7 is the best one.


Passage number 465.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are no substantive differences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there are no substantive differences, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 466.
MR. HELLER. I prefer 4 to 7 percent, though, to 6 percent orless. That really tilts it; that lets it get to zero if you want it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 467.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it would be interpreted asgetting it down to zero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is expressing a personal opinion or belief.


Passage number 468.
MR. ANGELL. There is some advantage in having us know whatwould precipitate a conference call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply stating that there is an advantage in knowing what would cause a conference call to be arranged.


Passage number 469.
MR. JOHNSON. In this first sentence in the operational partof the directive we say maintain the existing degree of reservepressure and we say there is a contingency there. But if we are goingto put in an M2 and M3 range consistent with that operationalsentence, it should be what the staff has projected, what thestatistical alternative would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the need to maintain the existing degree of reserve pressure and the appropriate range for M2 and M3. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 470.
 We might follow that up with asentence that says--MR. HELLER. Well, how about doing it like that. Use thefirst sentence and then say "This approach is expected to beconsistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period of around 6percent." And then say "Somewhat greater restraint would beappropriate, depending upon foreign exchange markets..." and so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

In the passage, there is a disagreement or contention between the speaker (Mr. Heller) and possibly another person or group as indicated by the phrase "and so forth." This suggests that there are further arguments or differing opinions being expressed after the mentioned statements.


Passage number 471.
MR. MELZER. I don't view that third sentence as really theoperational language. I can't ever recall a conference call, when Ihave been involved, over the aggregates misbehaving.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their own viewpoint and personal experience, without contradicting or arguing with anyone else.


Passage number 472.
 This is simplysaying--MR. BLACK. We used to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is not expressing any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact.


Passage number 473.
MR. JOHNSON. All I am saying is that we have these numbersin the directive that were [adopted] in the past and people couldeasily get the wrong impression.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is simply stating that the numbers in the directive could be misunderstood.


Passage number 474.
MR. BOYKIN. In the wording, these numbers are associatedwith our action to maintain, which is the first sentence. So, I don'tthink we have to put in ranges or other numbers because we are talkingabout something that might happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and stating their opinion on the matter.


Passage number 475.
MR. JOHNSON. It might help to move that sentence up, likeBob said, to immediately after the first sentence on the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is simply suggesting a possible revision to the sentence structure, based on Bob's suggestion.


Passage number 476.
3/31/87MR. BLACK. Somebody from west Texas; there's always been a[different] world down there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply describes the presence of a distinct world in west Texas, indicating a cultural or societal difference from other regions.


Passage number 477.
MR. HELLER. If we move the sentence up, we have a consistentdirective up front and then we have our exception that follows.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement. It presents a suggestion by Mr. Heller regarding the order of sentences, with a consideration of consistency and an exception.


Passage number 478.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will just transpose the question. Doyou understand the third sentence. The third sentence will then bethat the aggregates might come in lower than that and that's fine.It's all the same substance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It is simply explaining a process and stating that a certain outcome would be acceptable.


Passage number 479.
MR. JOHNSON. I think it's easier to assume that theaggregates would come in lower if the sentence on the aggregates isright after the first sentence and then we say "Somewhat greaterreserve restraint..." Obviously, somewhat greater reserve restraintmeans lower aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Johnson is offering his opinion about the interpretation of the sentence and suggesting a different way to structure it for clarity.


Passage number 480.
MR. HELLER. I think switching the sentence really makes abig difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Heller, is expressing their own opinion about the sentence and its impact, without any indication of disagreement or conflict with others.


Passage number 481.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Greater reserve restraint would take placebecause the reserve aggregates are high. A comment about the behaviorof the aggregates in that sentence might amount to the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement describes a cause-and-effect relationship between the high reserve aggregates and the resulting need for greater reserve restraint. A comment about the behavior of the aggregates would simply be an observation or additional explanation supporting the statement.


Passage number 482.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I see what you are saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 483.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The way it's structured, I don'treally care what we put in the second sentence about the aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their indifference towards the content of the second sentence about the aggregates.


Passage number 484.
MR. JOHNSON. I'd just say that we believe the staffprojection [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 485.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 4 to 7 percent is the staff's projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a projection made by the staff. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 486.
MR. JOHNSON. 4 percent is below what they project with nochange in reserve restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 487.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This allows for some change in reserverestraint, the possibility of some contingency. Where this sentenceis located, it encompasses the contingency as well. I am going tohave to look at what the staff puts down in these forecasts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of change and contingency, and planning to review the forecasts made by the staff.


Passage number 488.
MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that if we are going to say"this action is expected," we have to have some assumption that actionis taken other than no change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing an opinion or observation.


Passage number 489.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would change the word "action" to"approach," which encompasses the first two sentences.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The suggestion to change the word "action" to "approach" seems to be a simple suggestion for improvement, without any conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 490.
MR. HELLER. Mr. Chairman, I think that's where I see thedifference. If the third sentence says "This approach is consistentwith growth in M2 and M3...", then that surmises both sentence one andsentence two. I would rather have it the other way around and say weare implementing a policy of the existing degree of reserve pressureand this approach is consistent with M2 and M3 growth. And then Iwould say if things in the foreign exchange market happen, then wecould have a bit more restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing an alternative suggestion or preference for the wording of the sentence, expressing their opinion on how it should be framed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 491.
-54-3/31/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's fine, if you interpret thatas saying that if that next sentence happens then we can get slowergrowth in the aggregates. I think they are substantively the samething, but I am not sure that's the way it would be interpreted.Ordinarily, just as it is now, the second sentence is read to mean wewill seek greater reserve restraint if the aggregates are exceedingwhat we say. That is the ordinary construction of that sentence. Itstarts out with the aggregates and it says we will take note of thechange in that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses uncertainty about the interpretation of a sentence and suggests that their interpretation may differ from what is commonly understood.


Passage number 492.
MR. ANGELL. That's why we moved the aggregates down--so thatwould be less of a problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell is simply stating a fact or rationale behind a decision made.


Passage number 493.
MR. STERN. I think the structure in the draft reflects theconcerns about the exchange markets. The 4 to 7 percent range alsoencompasses alternative A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents the opinion of Mr. Stern about the structure in the draft reflecting concerns about the exchange markets and the 4 to 7 percent range encompassing alternative A. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 494.
MR. ANGELL. It sure does. I am trying to understand why itwas I used to enjoy Manley's persistence when he was on my side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing confusion as to why the speaker used to enjoy Manley's persistence only when he was on their side.


Passage number 495.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We better settle on something; wehave to live with each other for the next two-and-a-half days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It expresses a need to come to a resolution or decision due to the necessity of living together in the near future.


Passage number 496.
MR. HELLER. The original draft that Mr. Kohn produced is agood draft, in a way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that the original draft produced by Mr. Kohn is good in a certain way, implying a positive evaluation.


Passage number 497.
 You have taken out that sentence that's in allcaps, but otherwise that basically hits what we are really trying--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It hits maybe what you are trying to getto.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply pointing out that a sentence has been removed, but the rest of the statement aligns with what the other person is attempting to convey.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 498.
MR. ANGELL. There does seem to be a bit of a policydifference here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "there does seem to be a bit of a policy difference here" suggests that there is disagreement or contention between the parties involved regarding a specific policy.


Passage number 499.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is, but I don't think it's a verybig one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. No explanation or context is provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 500.
MR. JOHNSON. I don't think there is a policy difference atall. I certainly support more restraint, and I think you will getlower aggregates out of that restraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson expresses agreement with the idea of more restraint and believes it will result in lower aggregates.


Passage number 501.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then I think you ought not worry aboutthis language if you really don't think there is a policy difference,because I think it's saying what you are saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It suggests that the language being discussed aligns with the speaker's beliefs or statements, indicating agreement.


Passage number 502.
MR. MORRIS. For the benefit of the newcomers at the FederalReserve, I should note that the first statement Willis Winn made whenhe came to an FOMC meeting and we were talking about the directivewas, "This is the largest editorial committee I have ever sat on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a statement made by Willis Winn.


Passage number 503.
"MR. GUFFEY. I assume from the discussion that what we aretalking about in terms of restraint is only roughly a quarter of apercent in any event.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their assumption based on the discussion.


Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: passage?


Passage number 505.
MR. GUFFEY. It's only roughly a quarter of a percentagepoint, in any event, measured in terms of the federal funds rate.About 6-1/4 percent, I think, was the sentiment around this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey is simply stating a fact about the federal funds rate.


Passage number 506.
-55-3/31/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Clearly, without a consultation I thinkthat is [true].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the opinion of the writer without any opposition or debate.


Passage number 507.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As a practical matter, we have stuckevery conceivable number in the book into these directives in thepast, including ones that don't even appear in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is neutral and does not express opposing views or arguments.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say an annual rate of 6 percent orsomewhat less, or 4 to 7 percent, or 5 to 7 percent, but I think itdoesn't make that much difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing different options without expressing a preference or taking a side.


Passage number 509.
MR. JOHNSON. Around 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information or a statement about Mr. Johnson.


Passage number 510.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is nothing the matter with around 6percent, depending upon what you think of it. These forecasts arealmost always wrong by several percentage points. The substance hereis: Are we more concerned if it comes in at 3 percent or at 9 percent.That's the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage presents a question about whether a particular percentage (either 3 percent or 9 percent) is a cause for concern, but it does not indicate any conflicting opinions or debates between multiple parties.


Passage number 511.
 As a practical matter, the staff is saying thatthey expect it to be somewhere between 3 and 9 percent and--MR. ANGELL. If it's 9 percent, I think we better getexcited.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement from the staff about their expected range of percentage and Mr. Angell's statement.


Passage number 512.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you get more excited if it came inat 9 percent than at 3 percent.. I think that is the issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question and then states the speaker's opinion. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument.


Passage number 513.
MR. JOHNSON. Tell me what has happened in the meantime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Johnson, simply asks for information about what has happened during a certain period of time.


Passage number 514.
MR. KEEHN. Yes. What is going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. Mr. Keehn simply agrees or confirms that something is happening without any conflicting discussion.


Passage number 515.
MR. HELLER. And why is it coming about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 516.
 There is a bigdifference whether it comes about--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the only thing we know about it. Wedon't know about these other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there is a significant difference in something but clarifies that they do not have knowledge or information about other things.


Passage number 517.
 If everything was as it is nowand it came in at 9 percent, would you--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. For M2 or M3 in seven weeks, I wouldhave a stroke. M2 and M3 don't [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage; it is a statement expressing concern or disbelief at the possibility of a certain scenario.


Passage number 518.
MR. ANGELL. And the long bond would go to 8-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a numerical value for the long bond.


Passage number 519.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this is the substance. If nothingelse changed visibly, would you be more unhappy with 9 percent thanwith 3 percent. I am one who would be more unhappy with 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion about their own level of unhappiness with different percentages. There are no conflicting views expressed or any disagreement with another person's opinion.


Passage number 520.
MR. ANGELL. I am, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Angell simply states "I am, too" without any opposition or contradiction.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 521.
MR. BLACK. I think everybody would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the following passage. 

Explanation: The phrase "I think everybody would be" indicates that Mr. Black is expressing an opinion which might not necessarily be shared by others. This suggests that there is disagreement or contention present in the passage.


Passage number 522.
MR. JOHNSON. I think that's true. Of course, we haven'tfound M2 and M3 to be very interest sensitive. They don't seem to benearly as interest sensitive as M1. Maybe for M1, I would be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage presents Mr. Johnson's opinion and observation about M2 and M3 not being as interest sensitive as M1. There is no explicit disagreement or contention mentioned.


Passage number 523.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how interest sensitive theyare. All I would say is that after what happened last year, and givenwhat's going on, if they come in at 9 percent I would be more unhappy-56-3/31/87than if they came in at 3 percent. I am not saying that it would bethe end of the world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their personal opinion and expressing that they would be more unhappy with a higher interest rate, but they clarify that it would not be the end of the world.


Passage number 524.
MR. ANGELL. I would hate it because they are coming in at 3percent and I don't want to ease when they are coming in at 3 percent.Aren't they coming in at 3 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Angell expressing his personal preference about not wanting to ease when something is coming in at 3 percent.


Passage number 525.
MR. JOHNSON. What's happening now is built into theprojection of the staff, which is around 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the projection of the staff.


Passage number 526.
 Now, unless youbelieve that it's going to continue this way--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Put 6 percent or somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a fact or possibility and does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 527.
MR. ANGELL. We can say somewhat less. I think Bob Hellerdoesn't want to say somewhat; he would rather say 4 to 7 percent thansomewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The disagreement arises from Mr. Angell wanting to say "somewhat less" and Bob Heller preferring to say "4 to 7 percent."


Passage number 528.
MR. HELLER. If you change the words--the way you said it Iwould be happy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Heller, is expressing his contentment with a potential word change suggested by someone else.


Passage number 529.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have 4 to 7 percent, 6 percent orsomewhat less, or around 6 percent. Of the members of the Committee,who would prefer to say, of these three choices, "around 6 percent".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply presenting different ways of expressing a percentage without stating any conflicting opinions or disagreement between members of the Committee.


Passage number 530.
MR. JOHNSON. I would say around 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Johnson simply provides a response or estimate without any conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 531.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What were the others: 6 percent orsomewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents a question without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 532.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Members of the Committee: Do you want tosay around 6 percent, rather than 6 percent or somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrasing "Do you want to say around 6 percent, rather than 6 percent or somewhat less" suggests that there is a difference of opinion among the members of the committee regarding the appropriate percentage to be stated. Some members may prefer a more specific figure of 6 percent, while others may prefer a slightly higher or lower estimate.


Passage number 533.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My preference is 6 percent orsomewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply expressing a personal preference for a specific percentage or lower.


Passage number 534.
MR. ANGELL. The Chairman has given three alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the Chairman has given three alternatives without expressing any disagreement or argument.


Passage number 535.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three alternatives: 4 to 7 percent; around6 percent or less; or around 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents three alternatives, each suggesting a different percentage range. There is no disagreement or contention, just different options.


Passage number 536.
MR. HELLER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the passage itself.


Passage number 537.
 Will you explain the differences between the 6percent and--MR. ANGELL. That's the Chairman's prerogative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that it is up to the Chairman to explain the differences between the mentioned percentages.


Passage number 538.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who would prefer around 6 percent, period.That's unmodified, symmetrically around 6 percent. Well, that's halfthe Committee already. I suppose the others don't care whether it's 6percent or less or 4 to 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply states that half of the Committee already prefers around 6 percent, while the preferences of the others are not mentioned.


Passage number 539.
MR. BOEHNE. I could live with all of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne is expressing his agreement or willingness to accept all of the suggestions or propositions mentioned.


Passage number 540.
MR. KEEHN. I would rather say 6 percent or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a personal preference expressed by Mr. Keehn.


Passage number 541.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "I would, too." This is a simple statement expressing agreement or agreement with a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 542.
MR. ANGELL. 6 percent or less is all right with me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states their personal preference regarding an unspecified topic, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument mentioned.


Passage number 543.
3/31/87CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who prefers 6 percent or less. Thenwhat do we get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 544.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, you get to vote if you like. It's6 to 6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker's comment implies that there is a split vote, with six people in favor of something and six people against it.


Passage number 545.
MS. SEGER. We need to have 13 people on the FOMC.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement states a need for 13 people on the FOMC without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 546.
MR. BOEHNE. Who "could live with" an alternative might be agood way to get rid of this issue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Instead, it discusses finding a potential solution in a cooperative manner.


Passage number 547.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take a new vote. It's going to bearound 6 percent and the vote will be on whether we add "or less."Who is in favor of adding "or less". I changed the word "action" to"approach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is proposing a new vote and asking for participants' opinions on whether to add the phrase "or less."


Passage number 548.
"MR. ANGELL. And the word "approach" is better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 549.
MR. BOYKIN. If you change the word to approach, then 6percent or less I can live with very well; in fact, I would favor it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Boykin expresses his approval and preference for a change.


Passage number 550.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat greater reserve restraint mightbe acceptable depending on developments in foreign exchange markets,taking into account the behavior of the aggregates, the strength ofthe business expansion, progress against inflation, and conditions incredit markets. This approach is expected to be consistent withgrowth in M2 and M3 over the period from March to June at annual ratesof around 6 percent or less. Growth in M1 is expected to remainsubstantially below its pace in 1986." And I presume we still have 4to 8 percent or whatever we had on the range for the federal fundsrate. We are ready to vote, so we will vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is discussing the factors to be considered when determining reserve restraint and the expected growth rates of M2, M3, and M1.


Passage number 551.
MR. BERNARD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided does not mention Mr. Bernard, so it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


