Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 17, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 17, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. KeehnMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford, and Winn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris andReserve Banks of KansasrespectivelyRoos, Presidents of the FederalCity, Boston, and St. Louis,Mr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General Counsel 1/Mr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns, Ettin, Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld, Truman,and Zeisel, Associate Economists1/ Left the meeting prior to the action to adopt the domestic policydirective.11/17/81- 2 -Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMessrs. Gemmill and Siegman, Associate Directors, Divisionof International Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Fousek,Keran, and Koch, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City,Boston, New York, San Francisco, and Atlanta,respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus and Syron, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Richmond and BostonMr. Supel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank ofMinneapolisMs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 2.
 Clarkin, Senior Trading Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 17, 1981CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need approval of the minutes.SPEAKER(.). So moved.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 3.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. There's a short reporton foreign currency operations. There weren't many operations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states that there is a short report on foreign currency operations and that there weren't many operations.


Passage number 4.
MR. CROSS. I've had to suffer a lot of comments on that.[Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the given passage, Mr. Cross is expressing his personal experience of receiving comments on a certain topic. There is no evident contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 5.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments or questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
MR. RICE. What was the second occasion when you consideredintervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply poses a question about a specific occasion.


Passage number 7.
MR. CROSS. It was an occasion when the dollar was moving upvery rapidly toward the 2.30 to 2.32 level. It occurred at a timewhen questions were being raised about the German situation after theChancellor's health problems and after some money figures here hadsuggested that interest rates might be required to go up again at thatpoint. The dollar spurted up from about 2.28 to 2.32 and that causeda considerable amount of consternation. But [the advance] lasted onlya matter of hours and the dollar then began to retreat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing a sequence of events and observations about the movement of the dollar.


Passage number 8.
MR. RICE. There was no one particular event except theChancellor's health.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there was no particular event that led to the Chancellor's health.


Passage number 9.
MR. CROSS. I don't think the rise could be associated with asingle event at that point; it was certainly not comparable to theassassination of President Sadat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only contains a statement made by Mr. Cross expressing his opinion. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a recommendation for us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is a recommendation, but does not indicate any disagreement or contention about it.


Passage number 11.
MR. CROSS. Yes I do, Mr. Chairman. All of our swaparrangements will be coming up for renewal before the end of the year,and I would request the Committee's approval to roll them over foranother year in the normal way. Since last year [there have beenchanges] in three cases. The central banks of England, Canada, andMexico have specified the investments against which the interest ratesshould be calculated in the event that the Federal Reserve were todraw on those swaps. For good order we would propose that the changein the arrangements with these three central banks be incorporated inthe language at the time we renew them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Cross is simply requesting the approval of the Committee to renew swap arrangements, and informing them of some changes that have occurred since last year.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we symmetrical in all these now interms of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
MR. CROSS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 14.
MR. ALTMANN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement indicated by the word "Yes" in response to an unidentified statement or question. However, without the context of the specific statement or question, it is difficult to determine the nature and details of the disagreement.


Passage number 15.
MR. CROSS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context or information. The phrase "MR. CROSS" does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 16.
 Well, symmetrical--11/17/81MR. TRUMAN. The change was made last year for all the caseswhere we would draw at the foreign rate. When we did it for theGermans, we did it for all of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply explains a change that was made for all cases where they would draw at the foreign rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
 The problem was that not all thecountries were ready to come forward with a rate at that time, so theswaps for those cases were rewritten to say "an appropriate domesticrate" which in our case--MR. CROSS. And these three do not correct all of them.There are still some in that unspecified category.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, there is a disagreement or contention indicated by the phrase "And these three do not correct all of them." It suggests that there is a discrepancy or discrepancy between the three cases mentioned and the remaining unspecified cases.


Passage number 18.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We had a long negotiation, youremember, with the Japanese; it was not so long with the Germans.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the length of the negotiations with the Japanese and Germans.


Passage number 19.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's a question of the interestrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that there is a question or uncertainty regarding the interest rate, but there is no indication of conflicting opinions or disagreement between different parties.


Passage number 20.
 There's also a question of the exchange rate, which I nowforget--MR. TRUMAN. Well, that was eliminated, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the question or concern about the exchange rate has been eliminated.


Passage number 21.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The exchange rate was different when oneside was drawing than when the other side was drawing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the exchange rate was different at two different times without expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 22.
MR. TRUMAN. That has all been put on a symmetrical basis.On the one hand, it's on a symmetrical basis; on the other hand, theinterest rate was adjusted at the same time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that something (presumably an interest rate) has been adjusted on a symmetrical basis.


Passage number 23.
MR. CROSS. Some of them are not specified.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 24.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Our biggest problem with theJapanese, which we finally solved, was not getting a market ratebecause their Treasury bill rate was But we finallyworked that out. I had to put a lot of pressure on the Ministry ofFinance as well as on the Bank of Japan. There are two differentversions; but they're completely satisfied now with the arrangementsover at the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions that there was a problem with the Japanese and that it was eventually solved by putting pressure on certain entities. However, the passage does not indicate any lingering disagreements or conflicting views.


Passage number 25.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we seem to be in reasonable shape onthese arrangements regarding the terms. Do we have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they seem to be in good shape regarding the arrangements and asking if there is a motion to proceed.


Passage number 26.
MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, I think you're remembering therisk-sharing, and that is what was dropped in all the cases.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker, Mr. Truman, believes the chairman is remembering the risk-sharing.


Passage number 27.
 Thesubstitution that was made was that we would at the same time take--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm remembering the risk-sharing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a substitution and the speaker recalling the risk-sharing.


Passage number 28.
 I don'tremember the specifics of it at this point, but I won't--MR. TRUMAN. For the five that we had drawn upon in the post-1973 period, they had a provision that they would share the risk onour drawing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 29.
 That was the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, 50-50. Well, do we have motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply includes a statement and a question, without any clear indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 30.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "So moved" does not indicate contention or disagreement. Instead, it usually concludes a formal statement or proposal made during a meeting or discussion, showing agreement or support for what was just said.


Passage number 31.
MS. TEETERS. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or opposing arguments. It seems to be a simple statement or reference to someone named Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 32.
11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I hear no objections, you areauthorized to negotiate these on substantially the same terms as theynow exist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement about authorizing negotiations on certain terms. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 33.
MR. CROSS. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Cross is expressing gratitude or acknowledgment towards someone or something.


Passage number 34.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only includes the name "Mr. Sternlight," and does not provide any information or context to suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 35.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the passage only mentions a statement by Mr. Sternlight without providing any indication of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: The passage asks for questions or comments, which suggests an open invitation for input or discussion, but it does not imply any contention or disagreement among the participants.


Passage number 37.
MR. ROOS. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Peter, at these meetings weset desired rates of growth for M-1B. In the last 7 or 8 months [M1-Bgrowth has been] significantly below the lower end of the targetranges that we've set. As I listened to you, I got the impressionthat one of the reasons for that is that borrowings, as they actuallyevolved, were at a lower level than the assumptions we had made at ourmeetings. Under our procedures, when borrowings are below what weanticipate they will be, do you adjust the nonborrowed path or thetotal reserve objective to compensate for that reduced level ofborrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question for clarification.


Passage number 38.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The decline in borrowings over the past sixmonths was a consequence of the lower-than-path money growth. Moneygrew less than was targeted, [but the target] was the basis forsetting path patterns for total and nonborrowed reserves. Inparticular we pretty much stuck with our path for nonborrowed reservesas money grew more slowly and the banking system needed less reserves.Because of that slower money growth borrowing came down, and that hasbeen reflected in a considerable decline in rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing an explanation for the decline in borrowing and rates based on the slower-than-targeted money growth.


Passage number 39.
MR. ROOS. Well, I was under the impression that we settargets and then we do whatever we think is [necessary] to achieve theM1-B target, for example. So, if money growth is coming in below, andif borrowing comes in below, don't we take some action to counter thatsituation so that we can achieve the target that we've set forourselves. It seems to me that if we adjusted upward the nonborrowedreserve path, we'd get total reserves at a higher level and therebywe'd be able to achieve, or at least come closer to achieving, ourM1-B targets. Or am I [wrong].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Roos is expressing his thoughts and seeking clarification on the process of setting targets and taking actions to achieve those targets.


Passage number 40.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there have been adjustments of thatkind. There have been adjustments in the other direction when moneygrowth ran way ahead of desires. There was a small adjustment of thenature that you've described within this last period; the nonborrowedpath was raised because we were falling below in money growth as theperiod unfolded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply explaining that adjustments have been made in the past when money growth deviated from desired levels, and there was a small adjustment made recently to address a similar situation.


Passage number 41.
MR. ROOS. But as I listened to your report, I got theimpression that these adjustments were very small and slight. Whyaren't they made to the extent necessary to achieve the targets thatwe set.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on why the adjustments mentioned in the report were not made to the extent necessary to achieve the set targets.


Passage number 42.
MR. AXILROD. President Roos, the Committee also had an M2constraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement from Mr. Axilrod about the Committee having an M2 constraint. There is no disagreement or contention expressed in the passage.


Passage number 43.
11/17/81MR. ROOS. Well, had we adjusted nonborrowed reserves toachieve our M1-B--. Let me put it differently. You're suggestingthat we did not respond as might have been necessary to achieve ourM1-B target because we would have overshot the M2 target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply describing a suggestion or viewpoint.


Passage number 44.
MR. AXILROD. If the Committee had only an M1-B target andwas determined to achieve it no matter what was happening to M2 oranything else, then, of course, we would have had to push reserves inand raise the nonborrowed reserves path enormously, with a resultingdrop in interest rates and presumably more marked expansion in M2 andother things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a hypothetical scenario and discussing the potential consequences.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 45.
MR. ROOS. So, Steve, we're almost back to where we were whenwe had incompatibility of achieving interest rate targets andaggregate targets. Now we have two aggregate targets that sometimesare incompatible. Is that what you're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos is challenging Steve's statement and expressing his own perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 46.
MR. AXILROD. Well, yes, in some sense maybe they areincompatible. You can choose one or the other; you can't choose themboth. But given the [recent] changes in financial technology and theway people are behaving, the Committee inevitably has to make thejudgments it has been making: That it's going to take this attitudetoward one in case the other goes off and vice versa.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage as the speaker states that choosing both options is not possible.


Passage number 47.
MR. ROOS. Could we set those, if we really wanted to, andlock the doors. Could we set those two aggregate targets so that theywould be compatible so you could accomplish both of them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a hypothetical question and seeking clarification on whether it is possible to set two aggregate targets that are compatible with each other.


Passage number 48.
MR. AXILROD. Only if God were sitting at this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 49.
 Let metell you, it'd be--MR. SCHULTZ. Would you care to designate him.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 50.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now that Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Information and context are missing from the passage. Could you please provide more details or the complete passage?


Passage number 51.
 Axilrod has consulted all ofus--MR. ROOS. It depends on whether you're a smoker or a non-smoker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Axilrod has consulted everyone, and the response from MR. ROOS depends on whether they are a smoker or a non-smoker. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 52.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no specific passage provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 53.
MR. BLACK. Steve, do you believe pretty confidently that ifrates had come down M2 would have speeded up in view of the ratesensitivity that's so much in [evidence] now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply asking Steve for his belief or opinion on a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 54.
MR. AXILROD. Well, in the short run our experience is that[growth in] money market funds tends to speed up with rate declinesbecause of the lag in [the adjustment of] their rates. As ratesdeclined this time, we found a rather unusual experience in thatsavings deposits at banks accelerated. I assume it was just some sortof cautionary inflow. But all the evidence we have is that, yes, asrates decline we still tend to see growth in M2 as deposits become alittle more attractive relatively speaking. Now, this doesn't holdquite to the extent it did before because we do have components of M2that move with market rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation based on their experience and evidence.


Passage number 55.
MR. BLACK. That would be interesting to watch over time.I'm not sure that that will [continue].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It is simply a statement expressing curiosity or interest in observing something over time.


Passage number 56.
11/17/81MR. AXILROD. Well, it is atrophying a little, that's quiteright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply states that something is atrophying, indicating a decrease or deterioration, without any mention of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 57.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the full context.


Passage number 58.
MR. BALLES. Just following up on your comment, Steve:Earlier in the year, of course, we did have that M2 constraint as weall know, but at the October 6th meeting that proviso clause on M2 wasdropped and we set sort of independent paths for M1-B and M2. It wasmy impression, and you probably have more recent data than I've beenable to look at, that in this latest period since the October meetingboth M2 and M1-B have fallen below the path we set. Is that true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply is providing information about the path set for M1-B and M2, and asking for confirmation of whether they have fallen below that path. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 59.
MR. AXILROD. The M2 figure for October has fallen below byabout a couple of percentage points; our expectation at the time thatwe [constructed] the path was [a growth rate of] 11.8 percent and itwas published at 9.3 percent. In very recent weeks, the latest datashow an upturn in M2 because of the persisting strength in moneymarket funds and, as I mentioned to President Black, some strengththat we've observed in savings deposits at commercial banks. So wethink we're on a trajectory that gives us a very high November.Again, most of that is just extrapolating the trajectory of the lastcouple of weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing information and discussing the trajectory of M2 figures.


Passage number 60.
MR. BALLES. Well, in view of the fact that we apparentlyhave fallen below the paths set at the October 6th meeting on both ofthe Ms, I was a little curious about Peter's remark about the verysmall upward adjustment made in nonborrowed reserves. I think it waspretty darn small. Do you happen to recall the amount, Peter. Wasn'tit about $60 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a conversation where one person is seeking clarification about a remark made by another person.


Passage number 61.
MR. STERNLIGHT. $55 or $56 million or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a factual claim about the amount of money, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information presented.


Passage number 62.
MR. AXILROD. It was $100 million for a week; in terms of a3-week average it was $56 million or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement simply provides information and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 63.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If I could add one other point that seemsrelevant to me: As you know, there has been a considerable decline inrates as money growth has weakened relative to the longer-run paths.I think we've gotten away with that in the market in the sense thatthe basic credibility of the Fed's longer-term restraint policy hasnot been seriously questioned. A minority of voices--maybe one ortwo--has been heard here and there on the fringes raising a question,but by and large the Fed's credibility has not been questioned. Ithink a very vigorous response to achieve an M1-B target when it wasfalling considerably short would have very much endangered that[credibility] to the point where it would have been questioned in thisperiod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is expressing his belief that the credibility of the Fed's longer-term restraint policy has not been seriously questioned, despite a decline in rates and money growth. He states that only a minority of voices have raised questions, but overall the Fed's credibility remains intact.


Passage number 64.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions. If not, we canratify the transactions if you are prepared to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a statement and asks if there are any further questions before moving forward.


Passage number 65.
MR. SCHULTZ. I move it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Schultz is making a motion.


Passage number 66.
MR. WALLICH. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only includes one line of dialogue without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 67.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection; that wasn'tenthusiastic on the [motion] and the second. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there was no opposition or disagreement from anyone regarding the motion. Additionally, the mention of Mr. Kichline doesn't imply any disagreement either.


Passage number 68.
11/17/81MR. RICE. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. Is it too late to askMr. Sternlight a question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Excuse me, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 70.
MR. PARTEE. It certainly isn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is because the speaker is expressing certainty and agreement with a statement or situation.


Passage number 71.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's one short question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in a short question because it typically requires a simple yes or no answer without any room for debate or differing opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 72.
MR. RICE. Well, I'd like Peter to expand on that laststatement. What makes you so sure that the credibility of the Systemwould have been called into question more vigorously had we tried tokeep money growth closer to the targets. Isn't that just yourimpression. You don't have any hard [evidence].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement "What makes you so sure that the credibility of the System would have been called into question more vigorously had we tried to keep money growth closer to the targets. Isn't that just your impression?" expresses disagreement and challenges the credibility of the previous statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 73.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It's judgment, Governor--I can't prove it--just from the way that our responses are watched so diligently by anarmy of Fed watchers in the markets. They are watching to see whatour response will be and there are suggestions from various quartersthat money is falling short and we ought to be doing this or that torepair that situation. I had the impression that we were gettingclose to the point where credibility could be questioned each time wemade some overt move, whether it was on the discount rate or puttingin reserves at some particular funds rate level or something. We'vealways run little risks of that kind. We came through it withoutreally setting off any significant reaction but I don't think we werethat far from that on various occasions as we came through thisdeclining rate period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, suggests that there are suggestions from various quarters that the central bank should take specific actions to repair a money shortage situation. However, he also expresses his own doubts and concerns about the credibility of such actions and the potential negative reactions they could trigger. This indicates a difference of opinions and potential disagreements within the central bank regarding the appropriate response.


Passage number 74.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might add that we always have the luxuryhere of looking at these things ex post. As I remember thisintermeeting period--and I may have my timing off a little--we had abig increase in M1-B early in October. And the reason October turnedout to be low was the figures late in October that we didn't knowabout until we were in November. Now, in the middle of November, welook back and October looks low. When we were in the middle ofOctober, it looked high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the timing and perspective of evaluating data.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 75.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Also, pumping in more reserves whenthe economy is weak to compensate for a [shortfall] will notnecessarily result in an increased money supply. What one may find isthat it just causes a further drop in borrowing and more downwardpressure on interest rates. We may end up not being any closer to ourmonetary target and it may bring about a more precipitous [rate]decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that pumping in more reserves when the economy is weak will not necessarily increase the money supply. However, it also argues that this action may cause a further drop in borrowing and more downward pressure on interest rates. This suggests a disagreement on the potential outcomes and effectiveness of pumping in more reserves during a weak economy.


Passage number 76.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's what interest rates do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is making a statement about what interest rates do without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 77.
 They getyou closer to your monetary target if you move--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but there's a delayed effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that moving gets you closer to your monetary target, but it also acknowledges a delayed effect, which implies that the immediate impact may not be significant or may even have a negative effect on reaching the target. The presence of the contrasting ideas indicates disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 78.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the response "Yes" to a question or statement in the dialogue.


Passage number 79.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It may not show up for quite a fewmonths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage states a simple fact that something may not show up for quite a few months. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 80.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Mr. Kichline without providing any information or opinions that could lead to disagreement.


Passage number 81.
11/17/81MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only provides a statement reference without the actual content of the statement.


Passage number 82.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we go ahead with Mr. Axilrod andthen we'll call it all open [to questions].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It suggests a plan or suggestion to proceed with Mr. Axilrod and open the discussion for questions.


Passage number 83.
MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 84.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, both statements gave us a littlemenu of concerns. I think the time has come for comments on theeconomic scene and related comments you might want to make on thefinancial scene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply mentions that there are two statements regarding concerns, and suggests that it is time for comments on the economic and financial scene.


Passage number 85.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What's your peak-to-troughprojection, Jim.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple question asking for a specific projection from Jim. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 86.
MR. KICHLINE. About 2 percent if one were to go from Q1 1981to Q1 1982, and that compares with a mean of postwar contractions ofabout 2-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a statistic comparing the contraction percentage during a specific timeframe to the mean of postwar contractions. There is no expression of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 87.
MS. TEETERS. One question, Mr. Chairman: The third quarterinflation rate turned out to be quite a bit higher than we hadexpected and I wonder if there are any special factors there or is itsomething that's likely to continue. What are the risks on that side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple inquiry about the inflation rate and potential risks. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 88.
MR. KICHLINE. It was a couple of special factors. Onerelates to the inventory deflator and a technical problem that wethink will be reversed. Another was actually a positive feature thatturns out to be negative in the short run. We had a much steeperdecline of import prices and in that quarter, since they'resubtracted, it tended to boost the inflation rate. But we think onaverage the changes that we've made to the third and fourth quartersdon't represent a fundamental change in the inflation outlook,although I would say some things, such as service prices, have beencoming in higher than in our previous forecast. But it's not a bigproblem at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation and discussing various factors that may have affected the inflation rate, but there are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 89.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 90.
MR. ROOS. I have a question, Steve. As I understood yourrationale, you're concerned that if interest rates fall more quicklythan somehow would be warranted by present economic conditions, thatwould have adverse consequences. Am I not correct in saying that theonly way to stop interest rates from declining at what anyone mightthink is an excessive rate is to withdraw money, which has adepressing effect on M1-B. Is that correct so far. The only way tokeep interest rates from dropping by what anyone might think is aprecipitous amount is to be frugal in the way we supply reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Roos seems to disagree with Steve's rationale about the potential adverse consequences of interest rates falling too quickly. Mr. Roos questions the need to withdraw money to control the decline in interest rates and suggests that being frugal in supplying reserves could be an alternative approach.


Passage number 91.
MR. AXILROD. That's one way, assuming GNP. GNP could bedifferent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 92.
MR. ROOS. All right. Let me ask this then. If we believe,and maybe we don't, that there is some relationship between economicactivity and the rate at which the aggregates grow, especially thenarrow aggregate, and if in order to keep interest rates fromplummeting we keep the aggregates below what we think is [anappropriate] targeted range, can't that exacerbate the recession. And-7-11/17/81if the recession is more pronounced, won't that cause interest ratesto be low anyway. In other words, where does that string of reasoning--if you can dignify it by calling it reasoning--break down, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a series of questions and expressing their own doubts or uncertainties, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 93.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the context that I had in mind was thatthe Committee is making a short-run decision for, let us say, the nextsix weeks. And whether that decision is for 5 percent growth inmoney, or 6 or 7 percent--if money growth turned out to be any one ofthose [rates]--and then the Committee went ahead and attained its 1982tentative targets or something like them, I simply didn't think thatthe difference in those growth rates would matter very much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's thoughts and opinion on the potential impact of different growth rates in money.


Passage number 94.
MR. ROOS. Nor do I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 95.
MR. AXILROD. And they won't affect the year as a whole--theresult for the year 1981--because in large part that's given. Or atleast the year isn't much affected by those growth rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the growth rates mentioned will not have a significant impact on the overall result for the year 1981.


Passage number 96.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine context from the given passage.


Passage number 97.
 Yes, but I thought it--MR. AXILROD. So, that drove me to worrying about what kindof volatility might be promoted in credit markets with effects onexpectations from short-run efforts [to increase growth], given thefact that I assumed the Committee was going to phase down into its1982 targets, or phase down as the year began. That drove me intothese muddy areas of how people perceive what happens in creditmarkets. And I felt that if rates dropped sharply before anyone feltthat a sustained economic weakness was in train, that would start aspeculative bidding on commodity markets, use of credit for thosepurposes, and things like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and concerns and does not mention any differing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 98.
MR. ROOS. Well, I would share your thinking that what we dotoday in the short run isn't important. But my question--and maybe Iwas premature and it should be considered when we make our longer-termplans--was on this whole question of the relationship of [declining]interest rates and the aggregates. I think that should be consideredat that time, though maybe not today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 99.
 I thought that you were reallyaddressing the longer-term game plan and--MR. AXILROD. I was trying to say, President Roos, that anelement in today's short-run decision probably should be how theCommittee wants to phase into the targets for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 100.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement without having the passage provided.


Passage number 101.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions "MR. FORD" without providing any further information or context.


Passage number 102.
 In looking at your calculations of the effectsthat the different alternatives we're considering would have on rates,I noticed that you're projecting that from today until our nextmeeting in December, which is a period of 5 weeks I believe--andcoming into this meeting I thought Peter said that the fed funds rateis running a little over 13 percent right now--MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement about noticing a discrepancy in projections.


Passage number 103.
MR. FORD. So, you're saying that were we to choose to expandM1-B over the next 5 weeks at a rate under 9 percent, we could have a100 basis point drop per week in the fed funds rate potentially. Thatis the worst we could have, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 104.
11/17/81MR. AXILROD. Well, that isn't the worst. That's our bestguess of what these relationships are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the given situation.


Passage number 105.
MR. FORD. Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 106.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage as the passage itself is missing. Could you please provide the passage for me to analyze?


Passage number 107.
 Best estimates until--MR. FORD. Well, that did happen for a while. As I recall,when we put on credit controls over a year ago, we did have the ratedropping 100 basis points a week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about a previous event (the rate dropping 100 basis points a week) that occurred when credit controls were put in place over a year ago.


Passage number 108.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Even more for a couple of weeks in April.It was between 100 and 200 basis points a week for a few weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 109.
MR. FORD. I'm wondering what is in your modeling. That wasa very unusual period. If we were trying to achieve some step-up inM1-B to get back to our announced targets for this year, I'd besurprised, in the absence of credit controls, if we were to getanything like the kind of precipitous drop in rates that we had undercredit control. Wouldn't you. How does your model generate this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Mr. Ford is expressing doubt and skepticism about the modeling being discussed and questioning the potential outcomes.


Passage number 110.
MR. SCHULTZ. It depends on where we put the borrowing. Ifthose borrowings get too low, then rates can drop pretty fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is conditional and is discussing a cause and effect relationship.


Passage number 111.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "MR. AXILROD" is not enough to determine any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 112.
 Well, the model would have generated muchbigger drops in rates than--MR. FORD. Do you mean, in other words, that this is anadjusted number [from what the] model--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is seeking clarification or confirmation about the adjusted number.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 113.
MR. AXILROD. Well, no. The credit control program[produced] drops in money supply well below what was targeted at thattime. So, in order to hit the target, the declines in rates wouldhave been even more--much, much larger. So, this sort of assumeshitting the targets. Moreover, it does it with only 6 weeks to go; soyou have to get a lot of movement in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention. The speaker is disputing the effectiveness of the credit control program and suggests that the declines in rates would have needed to be much larger in order to hit the target.


Passage number 114.
MR. FORD. On the credibility question that you mentioned,Peter, are you concerned also about our credibility in terms of theaggregates and whether or not we're trying to keep reasonable the[deviations from] the long-term paths we've set. Isn't that also acredibility problem in addition to the worry about what happens if therates drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford is asking a question and seeking clarification on a specific topic. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 115.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think so, sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is simply expressing his opinion without any opposition or contradicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 116.
MR. FORD. In making your judgments, then, how do you judgeone kind of credibility against the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a neutral question about how judgments are made regarding different types of credibility.


Passage number 117.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, carefully.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Sternlight is speaking calmly and without opposition.


Passage number 118.
MR. FORD. We had some builders circling the statue in frontof the Atlanta Fed and they were thinking about hanging Mr. Volcker ineffigy. Their argument was: What are you guys doing. You're nottaking care of things. You ought to stop worrying about these ratesand let them come down. We are dying.11/17/81In that connection, I noticed in the Greenbook that yourhousing forecast for the fourth quarter, Jim, shows 870,000 starts onaverage. That must mean there's a bottom below that, which we'regoing to face either this month or next month, where housing startsare going to be reported at under 800,000 units. Is that what you[expect].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses a statement made by builders and a housing forecast, but there is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


Passage number 119.
MR. KICHLINE. No, not necessarily. We have 918,000 orsomething like that in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a number without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 120.
 So, it's below 900,000 on average forthe next--MR. FORD. It has to be. If you have an average of 870,000and you have 918,000 for the first month, where is the bottom. I'mworried. They came circling our statue of the eagle when starts were900,000. What are they going to--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: There is disagreement in the passage as Mr. Ford expresses concern about the projected numbers being below 900,000, while the speaker in the passage is suggesting that it is necessary for the average to be below 900,000. This disagreement is shown through their contrasting statements.


Passage number 121.
MR. ZEISEL. 840,000 is our low in [the quarter].SPEAKER(.). We'll have a bald eagle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 122.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Having resolved that piece of arithmetic,we'll go to Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is a simple statement indicating the next topic that will be discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 123.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, it disturbs me to sit here and letus contemplate what is really a fiction, which is these numbers thatwe're going by. I'm watching the volume of our check clearings inColumbus suddenly shoot up, which is an unusual phenomenon at themoment. If you look into that, it's unbelievable the money fundtransfers that are being put through by one our Columbus banks. Iwonder if the numbers we are dealing with here were closer to thereality of transactions balances if we'd have the same kinds ofreactions we're having to these numbers. To play these numbers outseems to me to be a serious mistake in terms of transactions balancesagainst the economy. I think these are too low in terms of reality ifwe adjust for the money funds, which are growing very rapidly [basedon] the push being made, at least in our District, not only in termsof large corporations but of individuals moving into these moneyfunds. The pressure is really very great to get individuals toconvert into money funds, which are transaction balances. It seems tome that it would behoove us to move promptly to find out whatproportion of these money funds is in fact transactions balances andto start to factor that into our thinking about these aggregates, ifthis becomes a guide in terms of our policy.My second point is that it seems to me we're stuck not onlywith arbitrary numbers but that our perspective is too short. If wethink a bit longer term about what we're trying to do, we get awayfrom some of these extremes in our thinking concerning this 5-weekperiod. Third, to try to get away from this damn base drift problem,which is going to kill us on the one side as it did last year on theother, I'd put this in perspective by going back to the fourth quarterof '79 and then making some growth rate projections out into theseperiods for what it takes to get us on a reasonable path from thatlevel until the March figure gives us somewhat different numbers thanhave been presented to us here. So, this is a series of things thatwe need to think about in our policy considerations.-10-11/17/81On the economic front, I have a concern which is not sharedby my colleagues, I must confess. I think we've kind of gotten overthe interest rate bulge temporarily here in terms of pressure oncorporations. But I have a feeling that the profits squeeze issetting in and that some managements are going to throw in the toweland that we're going to have more financial problems in the monthsahead than I think are factored into some of these forecasts. I don'tknow what the fallout of that is going to be in terms of psychology[and the effect on] this turnaround that is projected in the monthsahead. This really is causing me concern because of the fallout thatwould have for financial institutions that think they're in prettygood shape and could suddenly wake up with some rather sick loans ontheir hands that really aren't [known by] the public.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Winn, expresses concerns about the accuracy of the numbers being used, the short-term perspective, and the potential financial problems ahead. He challenges the assumptions and perspectives of his colleagues.


Passage number 124.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a couple of comments onyour comments. On that one, I am somewhat encouraged in a perversesort of way that the bankers I have been talking to recently realizethat they may have some credit problems on their hands, if realizationis the first step toward appropriate policies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 125.
MR. WINN. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Winn simply agrees with the statement.


Passage number 126.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On your first point on money market funds,I agree with the general direction of your comment. It's very hard tomake statistical analyses. We've tried to make some. I forget allthe assumptions, but on what I think would be considered the mostconservative assumptions that adds somewhat over 1 percent to M1-B interms of transactions balances. But that kind of calculation allowsnothing for indirect effects, for example that an individual minimizeshis transactions balance simply because he has a money market fund andknows he can draw upon it even if he doesn't draw upon it frequentlyor at all. [The problem] is a matter of continuing concern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the general direction of the comment made about money market funds.


Passage number 127.
 Butthere's no figure that comes out that says this much of the moneymarket funds is transactions balances and that much isn't because--MR. WINN. Can't we go back and take a look at some of theseaccounts and see to what extent they really have--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 128.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these calculations derive--and Idon't know how good the basic data are--[from information] that saysthere's this much turnover or this much check usage on these moneymarket funds. [That is, if] they had a normal kind of velocity and ifthey were NOW accounts instead of money market funds, they'd be thisbig. And that accounts for a relatively small fraction of moneymarket funds. But still, they've been growing so fast it does make animpact.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not present any particular contention or disagreement. It is primarily providing information about calculations and growth of money market funds.


Passage number 129.
MR. AXILROD. We also had an informal Michigan survey wherewe asked people what percentage of the money market funds weretransactions accounts to them and what were such and such. A verysmall percentage was transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the findings of an informal survey they conducted.


Passage number 130.
MR. WINN. What strikes me is the number of people one talksto who are becoming aware of them and now starting to use them. Thatreally is accelerating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the number of people using the mentioned technology is increasing rapidly.


Passage number 131.
MR. AXILROD. Well, this survey was conducted a few monthsago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply describing the timing of the conducted survey.


Passage number 132.
-11-11/17/81MR. WINN. That's the thing. I think in the last few monthswe've seen a really marked shift into this sort of account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about a perceived shift in accounts.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have the figures with me to lookat these things in a longer-term perspective, but I'd like to look atthat. I should get those figures, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have the figures at the moment but expresses a desire to look at them in a longer-term perspective and acknowledges that they should acquire the figures from Steve.


Passage number 134.
MR. FORD. I have it in a chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, simply states that he has something (presumably information or data) in a chart.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The year-to-year changes are quiteorderly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "The year-to-year changes are quite orderly" describes a situation without expressing any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 136.
MR. FORD. If you took the '79 base that [Mr. Winn] mentionedand [drew] a cone out from '79--in other words, if there were no basedrift--the growth of M1-B that we've had would put us inside therange, just below the middle according to my chart.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is simply presenting information based on a chart and making a statement about the position of M1-B growth.


Passage number 137.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, as a matter of interest, I've putthe 1981 average over 1980 in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or providing information.


Passage number 138.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, it's there in the back of the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage simply states that something is located in the back of the Bluebook. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: theres been a lack of communication between the team members, resulting in errors and delays.


Passage number 140.
MR. AXILROD. It's on page 6; it's the last line for M1-B.This happens to be a year where the difference between the Q4-to-Q4figure and the [yearly] average-over-average is a lot bigger than itis ordinarily. The difference is ordinarily more like 1 or at themost 2 percentage points. As you can see, it's close to 2-1/2 or 2-3/4 percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 141.
 That is, M1-B looks like it will grow about 4-1/2 percent year-over-year whereas for Q4-to-Q4 it's only growing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are adjusted figures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting information about the growth of M1-B and does not show any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply providing adjusted figures for comparison.


Passage number 142.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, this is shift adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 143.
MR. PARTEE. That's because we got [growth] early in theyear; so far it has been high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 144.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. I'm not sure in this calculation whetherwe ended up shift adjusting 1980, but that would lower it from 4.5 to4.4 or 4.3 percent; it wouldn't be that much of a difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about a calculation and the potential impact it would have on a percentage. There is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 145.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We started high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "We started high" does not involve any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints. It simply states a fact without any indication of disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 146.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The word "yes" suggests agreement, while "Mr. Partee" suggests that there is a speaker or participant who disagrees or has a different perspective.


Passage number 147.
MS. TEETERS. This would reverse next year, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statement that indicates contention or disagreement. It simply states the opinion of Ms. Teeters regarding a future situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 148.
 If itstarts low, then it will end up--MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. It averages out that over [the two]years they both come out the same, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The statement "If it starts low, then it will end up" suggests one belief, but Mr. Axilrod's response "Oh, yes. It averages out that over [the two] years they both come out the same, I think" indicates a different belief or opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 149.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might also say that I have no confidencein this shift adjusted figure anymore. I think it was an appropriatething to do earlier in the year. But at some point it loses me, interms of significance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their lack of confidence in the shift-adjusted figure and believes that it was appropriate earlier but loses significance at some point.


Passage number 150.
 I think we have already passed the point whereit loses me, but it's not---12-11/17/81MR. PARTEE. It's having very little effect now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their own opinion and the information is presented in a neutral manner without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 151.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it had a quarter of a percentagepoint or more [effect] in the second half of the year, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is stating a personal belief or opinion about the effect of something, without any containment or disagreement with others.


Passage number 152.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or information that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply presents the name "Mr. Axilrod" without any additional context or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 153.
 Well, it's not--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's nothing drastic.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The statement simply clarifies that something is not drastic.


Passage number 154.
MR. AXILROD. It's not unreasonable to say, Mr. Chairman--Ihesitate to mention it--that the staff, and in a sense all of us,underestimated the offsetting downward shift we would get [along with]the upward shift in M1-B from shifts in savings accounts. There weredownward shifts in movements of demand deposits into other things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that the staff underestimated the offsetting downward shift in savings accounts.


Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's the money market fundquestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple acknowledgment or response to a question, without any conflicting or opposing viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 156.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. In some sense we have twooffsetting errors here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that there are two different errors that counterbalance each other.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 157.
MR. CORRIGAN. But it seems to me that it all works in thesame direction. If you go back to the beginning of the year and lookat the spread between the M1 and M2 targeted growth rates, it wasgoing to be 2-1/2 percentage points. But we had fudged that; it wasreally something like 3-1/2 points. Now, if you look at where theyear is probably going to come out, that spread that we thought wasmaybe 3-1/2 is going to be 7-1/2 percentage points. The 4 percentagepoint difference in the observed spread versus what we thought thespread was going to be suggests to me that the weight of the argumentis overwhelmingly in the direction of M1-B being understated, whetherit's because of money market mutual funds or whatever. While I'munder no illusions that we knew exactly the relationship last Januaryeither, that alone leads me to the conclusion that I simply am notnearly as preoccupied with what the statistical measure of M1-B isversus what I think the reality is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, argues that the statistical measure of M1-B is understated and does not reflect the reality of the situation. He suggests that the observed spread versus the expected spread indicates that the weight of the argument is overwhelmingly in favor of M1-B being understated. This viewpoint contradicts the idea that the statistical measure accurately represents the situation.


Passage number 158.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage you provided does not contain any information or context. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement within the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 159.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I just wanted to point something out--noton this subject--[though] I agree that the velocity of M1-B hasincreased because of the money market funds. After all, we'llprobably have a 9 percent increase in nominal GNP this year withgrowth of only a couple percent on M1-B, which is unprecedented. Thathas to mean a considerable shift has occurred.But what I wanted to point out was that when Steve speaksabout the trajectory--plotting a course that would take us through thewinter and into the spring--he has been very careful every time he hasreferred to it in a statement to say "assuming the economicprojection." And I would argue that this begs the question, because Ihave a certain amount of sympathy with Larry's first question. I heldmy hand up when he asked it, though it has been some time since Larrymade his comment. There could be a circularity here that in effecthas a trajectory to no place, or as we say in regard to the discountrate "a bridge to nowhere." That's because, in fact, we may find thatthe nominal GNP numbers fade as we move ahead. We've had a little ofthat, certainly, in the fourth quarter [with GNP] being quite a bit-13-11/17/81weaker than we were anticipating all year. I have a sense of a littleshortfall from our projections as we've gone through the year. We'vecertainly had big shortfalls in relation to our expectations on M1-B.I looked at it and we have been below our expectations of M1-B atthese meetings for six consecutive months, and the average shortfallhas been 7 percent over that 6-month period. We've even been short onM2 compared to our expectations, the paths that we selected when wewent into the period. In the case of M1-B, that's partly because ofthis velocity problem. But I think it's partly because of shortfallsin economic performance, too.It's hard for me to believe that there will not be aneconomic recovery commencing in the second half of next year, giventhe size of the deficit that we'll have and the further cut in taxesthat will occur as of July 1st. But it's a fair piece until themiddle of next year, and I'm not at all sure that we can say withgreat confidence that the economy might not decline a good dealfurther below the projection, [say, by] the end of the first quarter,which could give us quite a serious problem as it occurs. If that istrue, and if we hold up interest rates, then we will get thecontraction in transactions balances that will make possible acontinuation of poor business. So, I just wanted to point out thatSteve has been very careful every time he referred to the longer-runplanning always to assume as a caveat that the economic assumption wasright.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Party is pointing out potential flaws in Steve's assumptions and expressing doubt about the accuracy of the economic projections.


Passage number 160.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 161.
MR. BOEHNE. I keep hearing, particularly from smallbusinessmen, that there is a lot of pent-up demand both in terms ofconsumer spending and investment demand, if only interest rates wouldcome down. They're referring mostly to bank rates and mortgage rates.I wonder, Jim, if there's any reason why that should be more true thistime around than in previous recessions--that there would be moreinterest rate sensitivity on the demand side. One can say that mayberates were so high that people backed off. But if it's true thatthere is this pent-up demand, that seems to me to argue for a shorterrecession of a more traditional V-shape. But I haven't been able tocome up with any really convincing reasons why it's necessarily truethat there ought to be more pent-up demand waiting on more interestrate [declines] this time than other times.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 162.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think it's a mixed picture. A coupleof years ago we had what were really fairly strong forecasts, giventhe interest rate assumptions. Our thinking there was largelyconditioned by the inflationary experience and a rough calculation ofreal interest rates. We didn't think real rates were that high and wehad relative to the model forecast--at least our own model--a fairlystrong GNP projection. Looking at it now, the argument is a bitdifferent. Our inflation forecast, looking ahead, is coming down. Inthe mortgage market there is a good deal of underlying demand that'srelated to demographic factors, and the interest rate is a constraint.But I'm not sure I'd frame it in terms of the interest elasticityhaving changed; we've just choked off a lot of potential demand in thelast two or three years. In the auto area, our view is that interestrates are probably a small factor in the depressed state of themarket. It is prices and incomes but not interest rates so much. So,I don't perceive the notion that rates coming down a bit--say the11/17/81mortgage rate goes from 18 to 16 percent--as a dramatic factor. Now,if you talk about the mortgage rate coming down into the 12 percentarea, for example, then I think big things will happen. So, ratherthan focus solely on the interest rate effects, we believe there aremany things going on in various markets. It's not just that theinterest rate elasticity is so high that we're going to get a bigbounceback, given where we're starting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own observations and analysis of economic factors, but there is no indication of disagreement or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 163.
MR. BOEHNE. One other comment on the inflation front: I hada number of meetings with groups of 15 or 20 people and I asked themwhat kinds of assumptions on inflation they were building into theirbusiness budgets. I didn't find an overwhelming number of people whowere reducing their own internal assumptions on inflation. Out of agroup of 15 or 20 people, maybe 2 or 3 people were actually loweringtheir budget assumptions. But I did find a difference in businessesthat are unionized and those that aren't unionized. Unionizedbusinesses tend to see noticeably less feistiness on the part of theunions in terms of wage demands, but in the nonunionized areas I don'tfind that happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the observations made by Mr. Boehne regarding the inflation assumptions being made by different types of businesses.


Passage number 164.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you find to be the typicalinflation forecast in these planning budgets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is simply asking for the typical inflation forecast in planning budgets. It does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 165.
MR. BOEHNE. I would say most are in the 9 to 10 percentrange, with a few outliers down around 8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply provides information about the interest rates without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 166.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That accords with my experience, but Ifind more outliers above than below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the author's personal experience without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 167.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I hear people who talk about [inflation]above 10 percent. Probably more people say they see it above 10 thansee it at 8 percent; but most of them are around 9 to 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 168.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The people say that they'replanning on a 5 to 6 percent wage increase next year. But they arenonunion. They pay relatively low wages; they [start with] theminimum wage, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The statement presents some disagreement by stating that the people are planning for a wage increase, but then immediately contradicts it by stating that they are nonunion and pay relatively low wages. This suggests that the reality and the plans may not align.


Passage number 169.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage only mentions one person, Mr. Rice, but does not provide any information or statements that suggest there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 170.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, at the last several meetings I'vebeen saying that the economy was sluggish, bumping along somewherebetween no growth and very low growth. I thought that was a goodthing in terms of a desire to reduce inflationary pressures and Ithought it would be good if we could keep the economy in that mode.But now we see that the economy has not remained in that pattern.Nearly all of the indicators point to a recession. And, as theRedbook indicates, pessimism is widespread among businessmen. Itappears to me that the only question really is how deep the recessionis going to be. My own judgment is that the staff forecast is aboutright. I would differ only slightly as to the timing of theturnaround. The staff sees a mild upturn in GNP in the second quarterof next year. I do not see a turnaround appearing as early as thesecond quarter. I do not see the mild pickup in housing and inautomobiles and in inventory that the forecast is based upon. I thinka turnaround has to await the tax cut of midyear and that it probablywill be toward the end of the third quarter before we see any realsigns of recovery. So, I would put the recovery further back in time,-15-11/17/81which means that we're likely to see very low economic activitycontinuing longer. In other words, the duration of the recessionwould be longer than is projected. I'm also more optimistic about theinflation picture for next year. In my view the course of inflationwill be somewhat less. The staff is projecting an average inflationrate of something like 8.8 percent, and I would expect it to beslightly lower than that.I was interested to hear Mr. Axilrod say he saw significantdifferences between this downturn and the one that occurred in thespring of last year. I certainly agree with that. This is a muchmore classic recession. I don't think it will be V-shaped; I don'tthink there will be a very quick snapback because the conditions aredifferent and the basis for a quick snapback in consumer and businessspending seems not to be present now. The main issues that seem to bebefore us then are: (1) How much of a drop in interest rates would wefind acceptable in the current circumstances; and (2) How much ofshortfall in the growth of M1-B from its target range would we findacceptable. And related to both of these questions is, of course, thecredibility issue. What happens to our credibility if we allowinterest rates to fall below whatever level we find acceptable andwhat happens to credibility if we continue to allow money growth tofall substantially below the target range. I see our credibilitybeing called into question much more when we are seen as letting up ina situation where inflation is gathering momentum and when interestrates are rising [than if] money is tight and we appear to be lettingup--and I emphasize appear--in a situation when interest rates arefalling and the economy is weakening. In current circumstances it'smuch more important to be perceived as sticking to our objectives andtaking our monetary growth target seriously. Therefore, at present--and I refer now to the period over the next six weeks to two months--it's important to be seen as not contracting the narrowest monetaryaggregate, M1-B, further than we had intended to six weeks ago. Iwould think that our credibility depends a great deal at this time onwhether we are willing to appear to move in the direction of trying toachieve our target for M1-B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker disagrees with the staff's forecast of a mild upturn in the second quarter and believes that a recovery will not appear until the end of the third quarter. The speaker also disagrees with the staff's projection of an average inflation rate of 8.8 percent and believes it will be slightly lower. Additionally, the speaker expresses concern about the credibility of the Fed if they allow interest rates to fall below an acceptable level or if they continue to allow money growth to fall substantially below the target range.


Passage number 171.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions "Governor Schultz," but does not provide any information or context to suggest contention or disagreement. It is a neutral statement.


Passage number 172.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, one comment about what Mr. Boehne said:As far as latent demand is concerned, we've had a policy of monetaryrestraint for a couple of years now and it does stand to reason thatin the interest sensitive sectors, which have been under pressure forthat length of time, there would be some latent demand--certainly, forexample, in housing. The auto sector would seem to have some latentdemand because of scrappage on the one hand and because of the recentvery rapid rise in used car prices; one would assume that would havesome connection. I happen to feel that auto sales may be a bit moreinterest sensitive than the staff does, as a psychological factor, ifnothing else. I recognize the sticker shock phenomenon. Anotherinteresting thing to note is that in the quarterly survey of theNational Association of Small Businesses a large percentage ofrespondents say that their biggest problem is interest rates. Butonly a portion of those people say that the problem is that they areunder terrific pressure. A lot of very solid small businesses saythat they'd like to expand if interest rates would come down, so Ithink there's considerable latent demand in that area as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own opinion and observations about latent demand. They mention examples of sectors where latent demand may exist, such as housing and the auto sector, and also mention the views of small business owners. However, there is no indication of disagreement or conflict between different viewpoints.


Passage number 173.
-16-11/17/81MR. BOEHNE. I think you're quite right about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne agrees with the statement made by someone else.


Passage number 174.
MR. SCHULTZ. Let me speak to what Bill Ford had to say,because I think that's the crux of the matter at this point in time.I believe that the very high interest rates have been a primary causeof the recession we're in. If that's the case, then we certainly needto have lower interest rates before the economy begins to pull up.And I think we clearly do need lower interest rates. There are threethings, though, that bother me a great deal about the speed and depthof that drop [in rates]. The first is that if we let borrowing go toolow--I'm not sure about Steve's frictional level of $50 to $100million because I have a feeling it may be a little higher--we getinto a situation where the funds rate could drop very precipitously.And if the funds rate were to drop to a negative real rate, that wouldbe an indication to the market that would not be very favorable. Youasked Peter what his judgments were about expectations. The fact isthat the army of Fed watchers out there has history on its side infeeling that we are going to cave in. We have in the past and theycontinue to expect history to repeat itself. So, I think a very sharpand precipitous drop in the funds rate could have seriousexpectational consequences.The second part follows on that expectational point. It isimportant that we get mortgage rates down if we're going to get somerecovery in housing. Now, how do we go about doing that. Well, if weget more savings flows into the thrifts, that helps. If the rates onall the other alternative investments come down, then the mortgageswill look better. But the fact is that the thrifts have been killedby investing in mortgages over the years, so the expectational factoris very important for them in terms of when they're going to startmaking mortgage loans again. The California thrifts keep coming inand telling us that they're not making any mortgages at all even withthese very high rates. So, how do we get them to [make such loans].I'm not sure that a very precipitous drop in short-term rates is thekind of thing that would make the thrifts feel that they'd want to goout and start making mortgage loans again. The expectational factorsare important there. I don't really know how to assess that, but it'ssomething to be considered.The final thing that just scares the devil out of me--itgives me some nightmares--is what will happen if we do get thisrecovery in the first or second quarter and then the tax cut comes in;I just have to feel that interest rates are going to start back upagain at some point in time. Now, 1982 is an election year. Whatkind of problems will this country face in its anti-inflation effortsif we are in a period of rising interest rates in a politicalcampaign. On the question of how rapidly interest rates come down andhow rapidly they come back up, in talking to small businesses of alldifferent kinds, my sense is that there are thousands of them outthere that are hanging on by their fingernails and they're going tocontinue to hang on when they see interest rates coming down. Butwhen they see those interest rates start to turn back up again, Ithink a lot of them are going to let go, and we could be facing areally, really serious problem. Willis Winn brought in a letter thismorning which he says is typical of what he has been getting frombusinessmen. In effect it says that the Fed is being too tight andit's causing the recession and not letting the President's programwork. It's that kind of argument. Now, what happens if we get into-17-11/17/81the summer in a political campaign under those kinds of circumstances.I just have a feeling it could wreck the whole anti-inflation campaignand then we're in deep trouble. I think we do need to get interestrates down. It's important. But the speed and depth of that drop andthe potential for the rebound is something that we really have to keepin mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It primarily consists of the speaker expressing concerns and considerations about the speed and depth of interest rate drops and the potential consequences.


Passage number 175.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot determine without more context.


Passage number 176.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, some of the things I'm going to say echowhat Fred has just said. As I listen to the staff, they are tellingus, I think, that we are in a classic recession now. It is quitepervasive across sectors; it has cumulative characteristics, but theeconomy is by no means falling apart. We are not looking at a 1974-75; we're not looking at a second quarter of 1980. I find myself inbroad agreement with that, and I think that is what the tone of theRedbook is saying also. But, frankly, I don't like what we're goingthrough. I would much rather have seen a continued more or lesssideways path instead of heading into a recession. If we look back atwhat has been happening in the last two years, we find that theeconomy got too weak in the early part of 1980 and it got too strongin the last half of 1980 and then it was too weak again. In allcandor we have to acknowledge that the behavior of financial variableshas been principally responsible for that. I don't think we ought tocast any blame. If I had been responsible for running the whole thingmyself, I don't know that I could have done any better and I may wellhave done worse.I certainly agree with Willis Winn's comments that we'relooking at the behavior of a measure of transactions balances that wehave not the foggiest notion of how to interpret. But I don't thinkthe answer is simply to recast our statistics, because what we'regoing through is a wholesale change in ways of portfolio management onthe part of both businesses and individuals. And it's going to take along, long time for this to shake down until we finally understandwhat these monetary aggregates mean. I think what we have to do is totake into account what is happening to interest rates, at least tosome degree; and there just isn't any doubt in my mind that interestrates have gone through much too wide swings in the past couple ofyears. In retrospect, I come to the conclusion that when we let thefed funds rate get up to the 18 to 20 percent range, the behavior ofthe economy subsequently has become too weak. And when we let it getdown into the 8 to 10 percent range, the economy has become toostrong.. Now, those are rather wide limits, but somewhere betweenthose two limits is where we want to be.I agree with Mr. Axilrod's comments that the economy isdifferent now than it was in the second quarter of 1980, so we're notgoing to see the same kind of response that ensued upon removal ofcredit controls when interest rates on short-term securities wereslightly below 10 percent. But let us remember also that we have anenormous amount of fiscal stimulus coming along in the latter half ofnext year, and that's going to work the other way. And I agree withEd Boehne that we have a lot of pent-up demand out there that couldbegin to affect the economy if interest rates come down a lot further.The most important policy question we need to focus on as aCommittee today is how far and how fast we want interest rates to fall-18-11/17/81from here. I would remind you that interest rates are already lowerthan the trough level of interest rates that underlies the staffforecast. The staff forecast has a trough level of Treasury billrates--that is, on short-term securities--of 11-1/2 percent in thefirst quarter of 1982. We're already below that. I think we will seea significant further reduction in important rates of interest likemortgage rates if short-term rates stay where they are for a while.It may well be that some further decline in short rates isappropriate, maybe even desirable, but we need to be extremelycautious in how far we let them go because inevitably if the economybegins to recover strongly, with a combination of a relaxation offinancial constraints and fiscal stimulus, the rates are going torocket back up again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the staff's assessment of the current recession and their concern about the wide swings in interest rates. They also mention the need for caution in further reducing interest rates.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how many people we canget through here, but let's try a couple more. Mr. Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about trying to get more people through a certain place.


Passage number 178.
MR. WALLICH. Well, in every recession there is a periodwhere one becomes alarmed if it looks worse than one had expected.And that is the period that I think we're passing through now. But Ithink the staff is right that there is a foundation under the economy.It's partly the tax cut next year. I think the pent-up demand inhousing, automobiles, and investment, as it gradually comes alive,will prevent a very deep drop. So, I think concern of a very severerecession isn't justified. If the economy is worse than it seemed afew months ago, so is the inflation outlook, or at least it hasn'timproved.If I may go back for a moment to the targeting problem thatLarry Roos raised, the way I understand this is that the Committeesets the money supply path and the borrowing assumption. The staffderives from that a total reserves path and a nonborrowed reservespath given the borrowing assumption [and] we then target thenonborrowed. And a change in the nonborrowed [path] would simplyamount to going back to total reserves targeting. A change in thenonborrowed [path] is the analogue of a discount rate change. It's amajor decision and it should be made by the Committee, not just maderoutinely because we're not hitting the money supply target. The samecould be said about changing the total reserves target. That too, itseems to me, can miscarry as a result of excess reserves building upor being drawn down, and the target should not be changed without aCommittee decision.On the aggregates, I share what has been said about M1-B.It's not a sacred number; it's a very profane number. It has beenmisspecified. There's a member of the Shadow Open Market Committee inNew York who has an adjusted M1-B that is growing at a 10 or 12percent annual rate. All he does is put in 50 percent of money marketmutual funds and overnight Eurodollars and RPs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their own analysis and opinions on the economy and monetary policy, without contradicting or arguing against any other viewpoint.


Passage number 179.
 You can--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, he's not complaining about theshortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that someone is not complaining about a shortfall, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 180.
MR. WALLICH. He's not complaining. He has been complainingabout our excessive reserve expansion, you see. Everybody can findsomething wrong with us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is stating that someone (not specified in the passage) has been complaining about the excessive reserve expansion. The phrase "Everybody can find something wrong with us" suggests a general acknowledgment that criticism can be found towards the topic, but it does not necessarily indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 181.
MR. SCHULTZ. Who's that, Heinneman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question and does not show any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 182.
-19-11/17/81MR. WALLICH. Heinneman. I think that Willis is perfectlyright that the bank in Ohio is in effect making it possible to have azero balance checking account. And I think we're moving further inthat direction. So, M1-B is highly suspect. Well, I guess I won'tsay any more on the aggregates. Just a word on interest rates: Whathas been said here is exactly what I think. If we stick firmly to anaggregates target, we're going to have very wide swings in short-termrates. After a while long-term rates will cease to follow this raterace and will probably remain high because people have the experience,if they ever buy bonds, of losing money as bond prices rise. If weget a V-shaped interest rate [move], we'll lose credibility. I thinkour credibility is really much more linked to interest rates; manymillions of people are more interested in them than in the monetaryaggregates in which, at least in Washington outside of three buildingsnot including this one, there isn't all that much faith.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with Willis about the bank in Ohio and the direction towards a zero balance checking account. They also agree with what has been said about interest rates. They express concern about the swings in short-term rates and the potential loss of credibility if there is a V-shaped interest rate move.


Passage number 183.
MR. RICE. It depends on what phase of the cycle we're in,Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the answer to the question depends on the phase of the cycle.


Passage number 184.
MR. PARTEE. Three buildings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 185.
MR. WALLICH. I'll tell you the addresses in a minute. Thereare two buildings on each side of it. I'm simply trying to say that Ithink we ought to aim at a saucer-type movement of interest rates. Irecognize that we need to have some compromise between not completelyletting go of our aggregates targets and avoiding excessive moves ininterest rates. That's what we need. And in that process, we oughtto avoid getting to negative real rates, as Fred said. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion and suggesting a strategy (aiming for a saucer-type movement of interest rates) in order to find a compromise between certain targets and avoiding extreme moves in interest rates. He acknowledges the importance of avoiding negative real rates, agreeing with Fred's point. Overall, there is no disagreement or contention expressed in this passage.


Passage number 186.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe we'll go drink coffee and thenget through the list. I won't blame it on you at all, GovernorWallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting doing something and stating that they will not blame the governor for something.


Passage number 187.
 It's a rather long--[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's welcome Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests taking a break and welcoming Mr. Balles.


Passage number 188.
MR. BALLES. Out our way we happen to have a big worldwideengineering outfit called Bechtel Engineering and they've just hadsome publicity about a brand new kind of business they're gettinginto. They think there's a great future in it. It's calleddecontamination and decommissioning from nuclear power plants.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Bechtel Engineering's interest in decontamination and decommissioning from nuclear power plants.


Passage number 189.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought they were decontaminating the M1figure. That's what George Schultz said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is merely stating that the speaker thought the M1 figure was being decontaminated based on what George Schultz said.


Passage number 190.
MR. BALLES. Maybe we should have George's boys take a lookat our problem with the Ms and see if we can get some decontaminationand decommission. I was kidding Dave Lindsey that if I were his boss,I'd give him an assignment to answer the question: "Will the realmoney supply please stand up."What I have to say today is that I'm torn between Lyle'spoint that we don't really know what these Ms mean anymore--and I amvery sympathetic to that--versus my feeling that we want to avoid aprocyclical monetary policy. As I look back over the last couple ofyears, we took very positive action in focusing on a gradualdeceleration of monetary growth. I think that was a bold action and-20-11/17/81we had a lot of guts in letting interest rates rise to unprecedentedlevels in carrying that out. And I guess I would be a littleuncomfortable if we weren't symmetrical on the down side. But giventhe recession we're now in and our guesses as to how long it willlast, it wouldn't bother me to see interest rates come down somewhatfurther. I'm considerably influenced in that by the real risks I seeof this downturn getting more serious than the staff projects,although I can't really disagree with their forecast. But the risksare there; we all know about them. There are very serious risks inthe thrift industry, extremely serious recessions--and that's the onlyword for it--in the forest products industry and the auto industry,and there is a cost-price squeeze going on in agriculture. To theextent that we can give them some near-term relief, lower rates, itwould simply head off the risks coming from those sectors ofconverting this present recession into a major contraction. I'mhoping that we'll avoid an actual shrinkage in the money supply suchas we had in the mid-1970s. And while I certainly wouldn't want tosee the extreme fluctuations in interest rates that we witnessed in1980, I don't see very much risk of that happening in late 1981 andearly 1982. Maybe I've been brainwashed by being too close to theforest products industry, but I recently appeared on a paneldiscussion along with Henry Reuss and they were ready to hang me ineffigy, Mr. Chairman, instead of you, maybe as your proxy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While the speaker presents different viewpoints and considerations, there is no direct contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges different perspectives and weighs them against each other.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 191.
MR. SCHULTZ. That gives [unintelligible] more important. Ifthey hang them all, that's all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.
Explanation: The speaker is expressing a potentially controversial position about the hanging of someone or multiple individuals.


Passage number 192.
MR. BALLES. To Henry's credit, I'm glad to say that hesupported what we have been doing. He said it was necessary and waswhat just had to be done. That was a pleasant surprise; I didn't haveto fight with him. But I'll tell you, I do have to fight with thebuilders and the forest products people who say they are bleeding todeath or hemorrhaging. They say: What can you do for us. And do itsoon because if you don't do it soon, it's going to be too late.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there is no disagreement between MR. BALLES and Henry on their support for something, but MR. BALLES does mention that he has to fight with the builders and forest products people who are demanding action.


Passage number 193.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. End of story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it simply states "End of story," indicating the completion of a narrative without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 194.
MR. BALLES. End of story.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement made by Mr. Balles, indicating that something has been conclusively resolved and there is no room for further discussion or disagreement.


Passage number 195.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without a specific passage provided, it is impossible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 196.
MR. KEEHN. Just to comment on the situation in the ChicagoDistrict, the problems, of course, have been serious all year butthere certainly has been further deterioration since our last meeting.And it's clear that [just about] all of the sectors have now beenaffected, with very few exceptions. Turning to the auto situation,October can only be classified as a disaster. Any hope for 1981 atthis point, of course, is gone. The optimism that some of them havefor 1982 is significantly eroded and I think the automotive situation,therefore, is very serious. Capital expenditures in our area havebeen further curtailed, particularly in the automotive industry, withsignificant cutbacks. The Christmas shutdown schedules, which werealready going to be heavy, have been extended considerably. Thisrecession is a little different in the Midwest than other recessionshave been. In the past the agricultural sector has offset theindustrial sector. This time that is not the case. Because of highproduction, farm incomes are down and, as a result, the agriculturalarea is also in a very serious predicament. And that has impacts on-21-11/17/81people who manufacture products for that sector, several of whom havegotten themselves into very weakened, precarious positions. In turn,the banks that extend credit to the farms are beginning to see someslowdown in payments, and I think it is inevitable that there will besome problem loans developing among those banks as they go through aforeclosure procedure.I am considerably more pessimistic than most with regard tothe outlook for '82. I admittedly come from an area where there is avery heavy concentration of industries that have been most affected.But I am beginning to wonder if the consensus view that we will allcome to work on the first of July and find that someone has turned thelights on is really going to come to pass. I think we're placing anawful lot of hope that the tax cut will produce significant benefits.I think the recovery will begin to take place as we see a permanent ormore lasting impact on inflation. And until we get into the contractsettlements next year, I don't think one can forecast how that willcome about. I don't want to imply that any of this should indicate asignificant change in policy for us. On the contrary, we continue tohave the broad support of the business and financial industry and Ithink they would encourage us to stay with the general direction ofour current policy. But my hunch is that with the economy as weak asit is rates will continue to come down and we can continue to maintaina fairly restrictive stance on the aggregates without necessarilyhaving a negative impact on the recovery prospects. So, I would urgethat we continue with this. But I do want to report that thesituation in the Chicago District continues to be serious and isdeteriorating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates contention or disagreement regarding the outlook for the economy in 1982. The speaker, Mr. Keehn, expresses a more pessimistic view while suggesting that others may have a more optimistic consensus view.


Passage number 197.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage is not provided, please provide the passage for analysis.


Passage number 198.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, until the last two peopletalked it seemed that I was perhaps one of the few people in the roomwho wasn't confident that I knew what we ought to be doing. But I dosense a clear trend around the table that we're fighting last year'swar, which of course is always a danger. It seems to me that thelatest Maginot line is that if the federal funds rate drops below 10percent, the economy is going to turn on the dime and shoot uprapidly. That seems to me, at least for the first half of 1982, to behighly unlikely. Quite the contrary, I think there is a risk that ifwe're too rigid in following this particular [policy] line, we couldwell end up with a much deeper recession than we're projecting. Idon't have the confidence that that would be the case, but that riskis clearly there. With that background, I tried to read some of theeuphemisms that Steve Axilrod is now developing for the Bluebook. Iagree with him, looking at the options, that we're not going to affectthe monetary growth rates in the last weeks of this year. But hetalks about a more restrictive policy producing a "smoother transitionto targets for 1982" and that's the euphemism that I've been trying tointerpret. What I think it means--I'd like to ask Steve--is thatwe're going to have some very low monetary growth rates early in theyear, which would be helpful in offsetting very rapid growth rateslater in the year. But if we set out to produce overtly very lowmonetary growth rates in the first half when the economy is very weak,we could generate a larger recession than any of us would think wasconstructive in the situation. Have I interpreted you wrongly, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 199.
-22-11/17/81MR. AXILROD. Well, what I meant was that that alternativewould reduce the odds of the funds rate going to 5 percent between nowand year-end and rising back up to 15 to 20 percent early next year asan effort was made to hold the aggregates next year down to, say, inthe 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range tentatively adopted. That'sliterally what I had in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their previous statement and clarifying their intended meaning.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 200.
MR. MORRIS. Finally, looking at the options for thismeeting, two of the options call for a more restrictive policy than weannounced at the last meeting. It's hard for me to envisage whateconomic data have come in over the past five weeks that would lead usto support a more restrictive policy than we did the last time. Icould certainly buy "B" because we could still say that we're shootingfor 7 percent growth through the rest of the year, which is a numberwe put out last time. I find it very difficult to figure out how wewould explain coming out with the 5-3/4 percent target underalternative C, after having given our sanction to a 7 percent growthrate before we knew how sharp the decline in the economy was going tobe. I should think that would take some doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris expresses his disagreement with the more restrictive policies suggested in options B and C. He does not see how the economic data from the past five weeks support a more restrictive policy, and he also finds it difficult to understand how they would justify a lower growth target after previously approving a higher target.


Passage number 201.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 202.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I certainly would agree that theeconomy is soft. We even have some sense of that in the Ninth FederalReserve District at this point. And that softness is well reflectedin statistics and in business behavior and sentiment. My own personalhunch would be that the fourth quarter at least could be even softerthan the staff is now suggesting. But at the same time I also sensethat there is at least a residue of optimism in terms of the longer-term outlook and expectations. In part that grows out of peoplelooking ahead to the tax cut and in part out of some of these pent-updemands that people have been talking about. There also is still somelingering hope that the inflation rate may be coming down in ameaningful way, although recent events perhaps have not worked in thedirection of reinforcing that. The relevant point here is that if wewant to talk about a sustained recovery--whether it starts in thesecond quarter or the third quarter--the sustainability quotient isgoing to depend on two or three critical things. One is bending downthat inflation rate, including the wage side. Another is the budgetsituation, which hasn't even been mentioned here, and as I would lookat that right now recent events seem to have worked in the directionof making it harder rather than easier to get on with the furtheradjustments that have to be made in that area. The other thing thatis very important in connection with sustainability is that we simplyhave to create and maintain an environment in which some of these veryserious liquidity and balance sheet strains that are all over theeconomy can be turned around. And achieving that turnaround under thebest of circumstances is not something that is going to be donequickly or easily. It's going to take some time, which in turnimplies that it will not be done in an environment in which we havethese zigzag patterns of interest rates and these zigzag patterns ofeconomic activity. That leads me very much in the direction thatGovernor Gramley suggested. And fundamentally it leaves me with theview that we ought to be proceeding slowly and deliberately withrespect to this interest rate situation, even though I, too, obviouslywould conclude that there is some further latitude that can beconstructively used here. But I think we have to be cautious and we-23-11/17/81have to try to avoid some of the problems of the past as we try towalk this very thin line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, expresses agreement with the softness of the economy but also mentions a residue of optimism in the longer-term outlook. He discusses the importance of bending down inflation rates and addressing the budget situation, which he believes recent events have made harder. He also emphasizes the need to create and maintain an environment for turning around liquidity and balance sheet strains. While he acknowledges some further latitude in interest rate adjustments, he urges caution and proceeding slowly. This shows disagreement or differing viewpoints on the appropriate approach and timing for addressing economic challenges.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 203.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage is referring to Governor Teeters, and without further context or information, it is impossible to determine the specific contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
MS. TEETERS. Some of my concerns have already beenexpressed. I have a strong feeling that we're monetarists when theeconomy is expanding and we're interest rate targeters when it beginsto collapse. If we move in and put a floor on the interest rate,which is what it sounds like around here, we'll be in real trouble.We haven't kept up with what we said we were going to do. I thinkthere is still latitude to lower interest rates from where they arenow. This staff forecast has a bottom rate on mortgages of 16-1/2percent; that doesn't speak of any revival in the housing market nextyear. I think we can move it down. I agree with Lyle that we havelet interest rates swing both too high and too low. Or rather we letthem swing too high; I have seen very little evidence of theirswinging too low at this point. I think we will probably want to paymore attention on the high side as well as on the low side in the nextcycle. There's also a tendency to be very unconcerned when rates riseand then to sit and agonize for weeks about lowering them. We didthat last summer and a few other times on the discount rate. It seemsto me that we should be symmetrical and not try to fudge or change ourphilosophical point of view as we go along.If you look at this forecast--and we have had a lot ofsurprises in the forecast on a quarterly basis over the past threeyears--it takes until the end of 1982 for real GNP to get back towhere it was at the beginning of 1980. Now, that's a very, very slow-growing economy; and although there have been lots of ups and downs,we end up at the end of 1982 with an 8.8 percent unemployment rate forthree solid quarters. That is not my definition of a revivingeconomy. And we have 8.8 percent [unemployment] projected primarilybecause interest rates are assumed to rise next year. When an economyis growing as little as this one is projected to grow with no impacton interest rates, some policy parameter is wrong. And this is evenafter a very large tax cut at midyear. We're not talking about anexuberant economy next year anyway; we're talking about an economythat is just barely keeping its head above water. If we then comedown and set a floor on interest rates at 12-1/2 percent, we're goingto end up like the supply siders did with the Stockman article;somebody is going to notice that the emperor doesn't have any clotheson and that we aren't accomplishing anything. Our inflation rates forthe past three years have been 9.7, 9.8, and 9.4 percent and this isafter three years of monetary restraint. Every time we think we'regoing to get a dip in the inflation rate, something comes along and[drives] it back up again. I think we should become increasinglyconcerned about the rate of real growth in this economy and do what wecan on inflation. But [we also need to] realize that we don't havecomplete control and that we could do extreme harm if the economycontinues to run at these very low levels of real utilization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. The speaker expresses disagreement with the approach of the group and raises concerns about their actions and decisions.


Passage number 205.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's forthright, anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 206.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no passage provided, therefore it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 207.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have to align myself with thosewho think that the downturn is apt to be more serious than the staff-24-11/17/81has suggested. With a sharp deceleration in M1-B growth and the veryhigh real interest rates here in the summer and the point that WillisWinn made that there seem to be a lot of [potential] bankruptcies--which many of our contacts are telling us will surface pretty soon--the downturn may be somewhat greater than the staff is projecting. Bythe same token, I'm somewhat encouraged by the reaction of some of thelabor unions in the softening economy and [by the fact that] the moneysupply has been kept under good control. So, I would be a little moreoptimistic about how much we might be able to do in the way ofcontaining inflation.Now, when we get to the policy issue, I think there are twoclear alternatives here. Everyone recognizes that we can't do muchabout the aggregates issue [this year]. But what we do will make somedifference for next year. Most people have focused on the firstchoice, the desirability of maintaining our credibility by notappearing to have thrown in the towel by overreacting and lettinginterest rates come down too fast. But that deals with only one ofthe two credibility problems we have. That one relates to the beliefon the part of a lot of people that generally we've erred on the sideof ease [in the past]. But there's another credibility problem andthat is that we haven't had a very good record of hitting our targets.And that is the one that impresses me more. So, I'd like to focus onthe risk that the continuation of the shortfall in M1-B might worsenthe recession and thereby impede our efforts to reduce inflation overthe longer run. If this downturn is really serious, the pressures aregoing to be pretty unbelievable for us to ease later on. So, I wouldfavor this second course of action. And if we do follow that, it'scertainly likely that we're going to have to let rates fallsignificantly. I don't know how far and no one else does. But Idon't think the market would necessarily conclude that we have thrownin the towel if this is the path that we follow, so long as M1-B isnot moving above what we set as our long-run target. So, that's theway I would like to go. I'm well aware of the limitations of M1-B;but even with its imperfections, I believe it's a better target thananything else we have. And that preference of mine has beenstrengthened by the considerable weakness we've had in the economyfollowing the weakness in M1-B. We've had strong M2 growth and yetthe economy has weakened pretty considerably. So, my preference isfor alternative A, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Black disagrees with the staff's projection of the downturn and suggests that it may be more serious than they suggest. He also disagrees with the focus on maintaining credibility and argues for a different course of action.


Passage number 208.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 209.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to alignmyself with comments made earlier by Governor Schultz and GovernorGramley. It seems clear to me that the weakness in the economy thatwe're experiencing now is something that we've been looking forwardto. We've achieved it and we hope it doesn't go any deeper. But it'sa point at which, if we make a mistake with regard to interest ratelevels, in my judgment our credibility will indeed be in jeopardy.Let me just make one other observation. For those who have commentedabout achieving an M1 growth represented by alternatives A, B, or C,I'd like to observe that we are talking about only a two-month periodremaining in this year. I believe Frank Morris spoke of adopting "B"or "C," which are somewhat more restrictive than what we adopted atthe last meeting. At that meeting we were looking at a three-monthperiod, and the incoming evidence suggests that we cannot achieve what-25-11/17/81we set out to do in September or October. To try to do so in theremaining 6 weeks of this period would not be my prescription.I think the focus should now be on the interest rate level;to moderate the interest rate reductions to smooth the transition intothe first quarter of 1982 is important. I would also observe that theinterest rate levels have been reduced rather significantly over thelast 60 days; the lagged effects of those interest rate reductions arenot clear, but they are significant. Let me remind you that as of thefirst of September, for example, the federal funds rate was averagingclose to 16-3/4 percent; it's now at 13-1/4 percent, I believe Petersaid, and rates on short-term governments have had an even furtherreduction. We don't know what the effects of this will be but theyshould be positive on the economy. As a result, just to turn looseand let interest rates continue to fall to achieve an aggregate growthtarget for the year over the remaining part of the year is not what Iwould prefer.I would suggest a prescription of alternative C with an 11 to16 percent federal funds range, a borrowing level in the neighborhoodof what it is now, which I understand is about $350 million. However,to avoid the possibility that things might turn around and we wouldget much stronger growth in the aggregates than was forecast in theBluebook, I'd like to suggest a change in the language of thedirective. I'd say growth of 5 percent from September to December, assuggested by alternative C, "or somewhat higher," thus acceptinghigher growth if it occurs. I think the [chances] are that it willnot be that high. But if it is that high, in view of the past recordover 1981 we should accept it for these last two months without movinginterest rates back up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is aligning themselves with previous comments and offering their own perspective and suggestions.


Passage number 210.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide an answer without the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 211.
MR. ROOS. If I were to express a preference among the threealternatives, I'd lean toward "A" or "B." But, as has been statedbefore, this decision is a very short-run decision. If what hashappened in the past few months were to happen over the next twomonths, regardless of whether we choose "A," "B," or "C," we probablywon't hit our choice right on the nose. So, I don't think what we dotoday is all that important. I do think, though, that what we do inour next two meetings is extremely important, and I'd like verybriefly to address myself to a couple of concerns that I've had as Ihave listened to the discussion today.First of all, regardless of the terminology that tendssometimes to disguise it, there is significant sentiment beingexpressed that we should revert to paying primary attention tointerest rate stabilization. That was our practice prior to October1979. This [view] is apparently based on some very real skepticism asto whether the aggregates are meaningful, whether they're definable,and whether they're controllable. I've heard a lot of people say thatM1-B should be discarded because M2 somehow or other fits somewhatbetter today. I would remind those people that if M2 were really themeaningful aggregate and were growing as strongly as it has, wewouldn't be faced with a problem of the slow economy and recessionarycharacteristics that we're facing today.-26-11/17/81However, I think there's an even more fundamental concern aswe look ahead and that is the decision as to whether or not we oughtto revert to our former practices. We know that our mission is to tryto achieve reasonable price stability and to achieve steady economicgrowth. As some of you have said, it's not desirable to have [large]variations or ups and downs in interest rates. Well, I would remindyou that prior to October of 1979 we spent precious hours discussingwhether or not interest rates should be set 1 point or 1/2 pointhigher or lower. We attempted to conduct monetary policy by targetingon interest rates. And I would remind you, unless I misread whathappened, that when we convened on October 6, 1979, after many yearsof carefully attempting to guide the ship by controlling interestrates, we were very concerned that we had seen significantfluctuations, cyclical and other types of fluctuations, in economicactivity and we also were experiencing shockingly high rates ofinflation.Now, even though we may assume that our efforts to controlthe aggregates have not been as fruitful as we might have wanted, ifyou review what has happened since 1979, I think you would concludethat there is some relationship between the behavior of the aggregatesand price stability, lagged, and economic growth. Compare the timeswhen the aggregates grew above our ranges and see whether or not therewas a stimulative effect on the economy a few months afterwards.Indeed, [consider] whether the slow growth we've had isn't reflectedsomewhat in the present weakness in economic output that we'reexperiencing. So, I would conclude my remarks merely by saying that ifwe decide that [what we did in] October '79 was wrong, then let's tellthe world that we're going to go back to where we were prior toOctober '79. I would submit that if we do that, we would have themost violent upward movement in the interest rate pattern imaginableand our credibility would be forever destroyed, because our Chairmanhas done a very effective job of convincing people that we aredetermined to pursue this new course. But if we start equivocating,if we start waffling, I think we're in for severe problems. These aresome of the issues that perhaps we will discuss in the next couple ofmeetings. Certainly today there are a lot of people who would say:"Let's pitch out [the decision of] October '79 and go back to interestrate stabilization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses a preference for options "A" or "B," which suggests that there may be differing opinions among the group regarding the best course of action. Additionally, the speaker raises concerns about reverting to previous practices and emphasizes the importance of making a decision that aligns with the current direction of the organization. This indicates a potential disagreement or contention among the group regarding the approach to be taken.


Passage number 212.
"MR. SCHULTZ. I don't think I heard anybody at the table saythat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 213.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, [Roger] just said it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not enough information is provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 214.
MS. TEETERS. It's implicit in setting a floor on interestrates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The statement does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement about setting a floor on interest rates.


Passage number 215.
MR. GUFFEY. Not at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement "Not at all" indicates that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 216.
MR. SCHULTZ. I didn't think so. I don't believe you'd getanybody to vote for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, states that he doesn't think anyone would vote for something, but there is no opposing view presented or argument being made.


Passage number 217.
MR. ROOS. Fred, it was certainly implied when people saidwe have to avoid upward and downward gyrations in interest rateswhich, of course, contradicts any ability to control the aggregates.At least I think [it does].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention. Mr. Roos is expressing his interpretation of the statement, but he does not indicate any disagreement or contradiction with it.


Passage number 218.
-27-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to say there aredifferences in emphasis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply acknowledges that there are differences in emphasis, indicating a recognition of varying perspectives or viewpoints.


Passage number 219.
MR. SCHULTZ. That may be; I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage shows agreement between the speaker (Mr. Schultz) and someone else.


Passage number 220.
 But I don'tthink anybody wants to--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's also fair to say thatequivocation is in the eye of the beholder.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply offers a perspective and suggests that the perception of equivocation may vary among individuals.


Passage number 221.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but there is not enough information provided in the passage to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 222.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't say anything about my preferenceson the alternatives before. I agree almost totally with what FrankMorris had to say. I would choose alternative B. I don't know thatit's all that important to get a 7 percent increase in M1-B inNovember and December, but I certainly would like to have anappreciable increase. As you know, we've chosen 7 percent since July.And we've only had 7 percent in one month of the months that have goneby. So, I'm not really sure what it means when I say I'd like the 7percent alternative because it may not be that at all. But I guesswhat I'm saying is that if M-1B growth turns out to be significantlybelow 7 percent--and significantly below I would define as being below5 percent--I would assume that we would not regard the federal fundsrate range as being a [constraint] that would stop [us from] trying toget more growth. So, I'm prepared to accept 10 to 15 percent on thefederal funds rate range, as stated in the directive. But if theaggregates continue as weak as they have been--not what the staff isprojecting, but what they have been--I would want us to break below 10percent on the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their agreement with Frank Morris and discussing their preferences for alternative B. There is no conflict or disagreement between speakers in the passage.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. However, the passage is incomplete as it only contains a name "Mr. Solomon" and does not provide any further information or context to analyze the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 224.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the split among us is sharpertoday than it has been in a long time. It turns, really, on thequestion of how much importance one gives to a moderate, orderlydecline in interest rates as against a more rapid drop. I'm concernedabout the reaction in the bond markets if there were a rapid drop inthe fed funds rate. There could be a very negative reaction and thismoderate decline that we've been seeing--and yields in bond marketshave the best chance of influencing and bringing down mortgage rates--could be cut off very abruptly if markets see a precipitous decline inshort-term money rates. I think it's true that many of us here aremore concerned about declines in [real] interest rates when theythreaten to drop too precipitously, in our judgment, and becomenegative. But I don't think there's anything inherently immoral, letalone unaesthetic, Nancy, about asymmetry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply discussing different opinions and concerns about the decline in interest rates.


Passage number 225.
 The--MR. PARTEE. It creates a very poor economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It simply states that something "creates a very poor economy."


Passage number 226.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'm not too sure; it depends onwhere our priorities are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and explaining that the answer depends on what their priorities are.


Passage number 227.
MS. TEETERS. That's not the argument I heard when they weregoing up, either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It only mentions a different argument that the speaker, Ms. Teeters, heard in the past.


Passage number 228.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I've never argued that there has tobe a mechanistic asymmetry in conducting a complicated monetarypolicy. In any case it, I align myself with Fred Schultz, Lyle-28-11/17/81Gramley, Roger Guffey, and although he's somewhat elliptical, I thinkJerry Corrigan, Henry, and a few others.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing alignment and agreement with several people, indicating a consensus of views.


Passage number 229.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not clear whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without further context.


Passage number 230.
 I didn't say anything--MR. SCHULTZ. You're just elliptical looking, Jerry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that they did not say anything and commenting on Jerry's appearance.


Passage number 231.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I've always been elliptical looking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a personal observation or characteristic of Mr. Corrigan.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 232.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would argue that we should havesomething close to alternative C, say 6 percent, for October toDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "I would argue" indicates that there is a disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 233.
MR. PARTEE. That's "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any argument or disagreement. It simply contains a statement by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 234.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 235.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the full passage, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 236.
 Oh, for the two months, October--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or 5 percent for September toDecember, if you want to use that, but I think it would be silly toformulate it that way in the directive. Secondly, I also think afunds rate range of 11 to 16 percent makes sense because we've hadthis sharp decline of about 300 basis points in the fed funds rate.And if it were to drop to 11 percent from 13-1/4 percent within theremaining six weeks of this year, that's a very substantial drop. Iwould find it surprising that people would want to see it drop fasterthan from 13-1/4 to 11 percent within a 6-week period. I believe thatthe recession will continue into early next year and that there willbe further pressures to continue the downward [trend] of rates, whichI think we have to accept. My only point is that [the decline] bemoderate and orderly or we will have a perverse reaction in the bondmarket. Now, I would assume we would start with an initial borrowingof $350 or $400 million. I also would agree that if growth in themoney supply comes in higher, we could accept that. The disadvantageof targeting higher monetary growth is that there's a greaterlikelihood that we will get a decline in interest rates at the frontend of the period at a much more rapid rate, instead of spreading itout over a period of months in a more moderate way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage includes statements that express differing views or opinions. For example, the speaker suggests that a funds rate range of 11 to 16 percent makes sense, but also acknowledges that it would be surprising if people wanted to see a drop from 13-1/4 to 11 percent within a 6-week period. The speaker also acknowledges that there may be further pressures to continue the downward trend of rates, but cautions that the decline should be moderate and orderly to avoid a negative reaction in the bond market. These conflicting statements indicate contention or disagreement within the passage.


Passage number 237.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we have a lot of debate back andforth, I think we ought to get through our list here with Mr. Boykin.Then we will attempt to draw all these conflicting stands into happyharmony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage mentions the possibility of debate, but there is no contention or disagreement being expressed directly in the passage itself. The focus is on getting through a list and trying to bring conflicting stands into harmony.


Passage number 238.
MR. BOYKIN. I've been sitting here, Mr. Chairman, trying tobe sure I had the strength of my convictions. If I can figure outwhat my convictions are, maybe I'll have the strength. I would liketo comment very briefly on the economy down our way, particularlysince I have a slightly different story to tell this time around. Ithink there has been a decided change in attitudes in the EleventhDistrict over the last six weeks. We see weakness starting to spreadin our area. Of course, like the rest of the nation, retail sales,autos, and housing have been weak for some time. We are starting tosee some increased layoffs in the manufacturing area--in the aircraftand the electronics industries. Also, there are some early signs ofpossible weakness in the energy industry. The drilling boom seems tobe slowing a little. I'm told that one can actually see a few rigs-29-11/17/81stacked in the yards, and that has not been the case for quite sometime, although the demand for the deep offshore rigs remains strong.We have had unusually heavy rains, particularly in the north centralTexas area, and that is going to cause quite a bit of crop loss,particularly in cotton and wheat. People are estimating a loss ofabout $25 million in that area. Also, we're beginning to hearconcerns expressed about the possibility of over-building in thecommercial area, particularly in the Houston and Dallas markets. Asfar as the staff's outlook on the economy, that is about the way Iwould see it. It's a reasonable outlook and it's consistent with whatI'm hearing.On the policy side, a very sharp decline in [the federalfunds rate] right now would cause me a lot of concern, particularlyfor the implication for the long-term rates. [As for] credibility andperceptions, I think there's more likelihood of serious criticism fromthe majority of people on the interest rate side rather than on notmeeting the stated targets. Steve's explanation of how alternative Cwas constructed and what it's intended to do I find very persuasive,and I'll line up on alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their observations and opinions about the economy in their area.


Passage number 239.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to summarize a bit.There are some differences in emphasis, but I'm not sure--we'll findout--whether they're as great as they appear to be.Oh, let me ask you a question, a side issue, on this energybusiness. You say there are some early signs of a much [less] rapidincrease at the very least. I've heard the view expressed that a lotof the activity currently in the energy area is based upon anassumption that the oil price is going to be--I'm trying to rememberthe figure now--$80 or $90 a barrel in the 1990s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply summarizing and expressing uncertainty about the differences in emphasis they mention. They also ask a question about the energy business, but this does not indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 240.
 And then if thatassumption is a disappointment--MR. WALLICH. In real terms. In constant dollars.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response "In real terms. In constant dollars" is simply providing clarification or further explanation of the previous statement.


Passage number 241.
MR. PARTEE. In nominal terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In nominal terms. Presumably, they'redoing the drilling. It isn't all that clear to me, but the point wasthat the price [assumption] was high enough that a lot of people mightbegin questioning it. Do you have that feeling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the clarity of the situation but agrees that the price assumption is high enough to raise questions for many people.


Passage number 243.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes, that does seem awfully high. On the otherhand, we get a few scattered reports of some shutting in going on,just not producing. They know it's there and ready to go but areholding back because of the supply side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker agrees with the statement that the production level seems high but also mentions some reports of shutting in going on, without expressing disagreement with the current situation.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A price of $90 a barrel, if it's innominal terms, isn't even an increase in real terms if these 10percent inflation forecasts are correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is providing an explanation based on the assumption that if 10% inflation forecasts are correct, a price of $90 a barrel would not be an increase in real terms.


Passage number 245.
MR. SCHULTZ. May I ask a question in line with that. As youpointed out, most of the drilling going on is deep drilling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. Instead, it is a statement by Mr. Schultz requesting permission to ask a question related to the topic of deep drilling.


Passage number 246.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any evidence of contention or disagreement. It is just a response indicating agreement.


Passage number 247.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's natural gas drilling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreements or contentions about natural gas drilling.


Passage number 248.
-30-11/17/81MR. BOYKIN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage is a quote or part of a document and does not contain any statements or arguments that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 249.
MR. SCHULTZ. Is there any oil at those [deep] levels. Arethey doing a lot of betting on natural gas decontrol. Is that [amajor factor].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking questions and seeking information.


Passage number 250.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes, I think it almost has to be, Fred. Weheard a report, and the Chairman heard it also, of some deep wellsdown in the Laredo area where [it cost] about $4 million to drill onewell and $8 million to drill another. As the director who wasreporting on that said, somebody has to be thinking something that hewas not aware of. I would think they have to be betting on decontrol.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information or context to indicate whether there is contention or disagreement involving Chairman Volcker.


Passage number 252.
 Well, I think there are a lot ofassumptions in the gas business that the price of gas is going to be$12 or more a cubic--MR. SCHULTZ. MCO.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 253.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Foot or MCO or a thousand cubic feet,whatever it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is simply stating different ways of measuring something, without expressing any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 254.
MR. SCHULTZ. Thousand cubic feet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the measurement in thousand cubic feet.


Passage number 255.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not in the 1990s but in 1985 or 1984.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the time frame in which something occurred.


Passage number 256.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even under the present law, newlydiscovered natural gas will be fully decontrolled by 1985.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is stating a fact about a future event that will happen under the present law. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage.


Passage number 257.
MR. GUFFEY. It is today, I believe, for newly discovered.But they have to compete with the old gas.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the competition between newly discovered gas and old gas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 258.
MR. BOYKIN. But isn't there still a question of whetherit's interstate or intrastate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But isn't there still a question of whether it's interstate or intrastate" indicates that there is a question or debate about the classification of something as interstate or intrastate.


Passage number 259.
MR. GUFFEY. It's my impression that that's not true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 260.
 Anynew gas is--MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there is a new gas, without providing any conflicting information or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 261.
 If it's below 15,000 feet, but it's almostall--MR. BOYKIN. We were told the other day by one energyeconomist that there are 17 different price levels for gas, if you canbelieve that. It's based on all kinds of combinations, as you say:the depth, the age, whether it's going interstate or intrastate. Butthere are 17 different price brackets.SPEAKER(.). Is it also based on how it smells.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speakers are discussing different factors that affect the price of gas, such as depth, age, and whether it's going interstate or intrastate. The mention of 17 different price brackets is not a point of contention, but rather an interesting fact shared by one speaker. The mention of how gas smells is unrelated to the discussion and does not create disagreement.


Passage number 262.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The cheating must be enormous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement, as the statement simply expresses the belief that the cheating is significant.


Passage number 263.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not even sure what that director wasassuming with regard to $80 to $90 a barrel. I think it probably wasin real terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the director's assumptions regarding the price of oil.


Passage number 264.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Gramley or any potential contention or disagreement related to him.


Passage number 265.
 Well, in nominal terms, 10 percent---31-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In ten years, 10 percent is nothing.That's right. He must have been talking in real terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that in nominal terms, 10 percent is not significant over a ten-year period. The statement following "That's right" is in agreement with the previous statement.


Passage number 266.
MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] is 7 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker's statement seems to be unrelated or unintelligible, making it impossible to determine if there is any disagreement.


Passage number 267.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I've said my piece on the interest rateissue. I'm not bothered by the fed funds rate getting down below 10percent, but not between now and the next meeting. I would go withthe idea of a target and then say "or somewhat lower." My choicewould be alternative B with initial borrowing at $350 million and afederal funds range of 11 to 16 percent. It's basically "B," but witha different funds rate [range]. After all, that's a consultationpoint. I think we ought to consult if it gets [to 11 percent];remember, the next FOMC meeting is only 5 weeks away, so it's a veryshort period of time. I suspect, as I said yesterday, that we'regoing to have to move that basic discount rate pretty soon. And Iwould have some concern about the rate going [down] faster than that,which is why I say 11 to 16 percent. I'd have some concern about theborrowing getting down any lower than $200 million during this periodof time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 268.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I buy the $350 million and I buy the "B"[specifications] but I would want the funds rate at 10 to 15 percent.I certainly can't imagine it over 15 percent, and I would want us to-35-11/17/81consult very promptly if 10 percent is going to hold us up and wewould not have a good growth in the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his opinion and preferences, but there is no indication of any disagreement or opposing views.


Passage number 269.
MR. SCHULTZ. Incidentally, I'd be willing to go 11 percentwith 15 percent on the top end; the only problem is that it's only a4-point range. I don't think we're going to hit that [upper limit]anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is expressing his willingness to compromise on a specific percentage and acknowledges that there may not be agreement on reaching the upper limit of that range.


Passage number 270.
MR. PARTEE. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not show any disagreement or contention. It simply consists of Mr. Partee providing a response without any opposing viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 271.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I had Steve draft a couple of alternativedirectives. Let me read them to make sure I understand them first.Well, let me just try this on you. The concept is simple enough; thelanguage can be worked on, obviously. One option follows a practicewe have used at least once and maybe more than once, and I think it'sa good practice unless we have to deviate from it because it doesn'tsound like so much fine-tuning. It starts with exactly the samedirective that we had at the last meeting, but it puts it in the pasttense, so to speak. It says that at the previous meeting we decidedon 7 percent and 10 percent, [respectively as the quarterly targetsfor M1-B and M2]. Then "In reviewing these quarterly targets, theCommittee felt that shortfalls in growth would be acceptable if theyare generally consistent with phasing into the tentative monetarygrowth targets set for 1982 and as they may occur in the context ofdeclining interest rates." Then it goes on with the federal fundsrange. So, it says in effect: This is the target we had set for thequarter; we recognize we set it; it looks like we're low and we'llaccept the shortfall provided interest rates are declining; and we'renot too unhappy with the shortfall in the light of phasing into nextyear.The other option, presumably, would be consistent with doingsomething like "C." We'd put in those numbers for the next twomonths, but say a somewhat higher growth rate would be acceptable asconsistent with the quarterly target set at the previous meeting andjust repeat the targets of the previous meeting. That doesn't sayanything about--. What I was looking for was whether there's anyinterest rate allusion in that one. There is not, I guess. But inthat one we put in the low number and say we're perfectly happy toraise it to where we set it at the last meeting. The other says thatwhat we said at the last meeting is okay, but we're happy with ashortfall [in money growth] if interest rates are declining, and it'slogical for moving into next year anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different options and alternatives for directives.


Passage number 272.
MR. PARTEE. What if you're not happy with a shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement asking about the consequences of being unhappy with a shortfall.


Passage number 273.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you're not happy with any shortfall,you're not going to be happy with either of these formulations becausethey both are low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a conditional statement that doesn't involve any disagreement or contention. It states that if someone is not happy with any shortfall, they will not be happy with either of the two formulations because both are low. This is a statement of fact rather than a point of contention.


Passage number 274.
MR. PARTEE. That's my reaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of personal opinion or reaction.


Passage number 275.
MS. TEETERS. What if you're not happy with next year'stargets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is simply posing a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 276.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you really want it much higher--if you want a 7 percent target next year--then you wouldn't buy thisone. But I think all it's saying basically is that the number is-36-11/17/81something less than 7 percent. It's more consistent with what we'retentatively thinking about next year than 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining that the given number is less than 7 percent and is more aligned with their tentative thoughts for next year.


Passage number 277.
MR. RICE. Why does 7 percent for the next [5] weeks meanthat we favor 7 percent growth next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Rice without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 278.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention or disagreement in the passage because "doesn't" implies negation or disagreement with the previous statement, yet we do not have the previous statement to make a complete judgment.


Passage number 279.
MR. RICE. I didn't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Rice, simply expresses his belief or opinion without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 280.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't say we favor 7 percent growthnext year. What it says is that if we have 7 percent growth--. Well,the thought expressed around the table by a number of people was thatif we push hard for large growth now, then we will have to slow itdown next year, and that may be undesirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating what was said by a number of people around the table regarding the potential consequences of pushing for large growth now.


Passage number 281.
MR. PARTEE. We will have a lot of shortfall to make up,though, when we get into next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that there will be a shortfall to make up in the upcoming year.


Passage number 282.
MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Rice's viewpoints or opinions, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 283.
 Well, we still have--MR. AXILROD. It may not be as clear as I was trying to makeit. The 7 percent was for the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be an explanation, with one speaker providing clarification on the previous statement.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's for the quarter. This is justrepeating what we said at the last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is simply acknowledging agreement and confirming that the information being shared is the same as what was discussed in the previous meeting.


Passage number 285.
MR. AXILROD. Last meeting we said we'd like the quarter tobe this way. The operative sentence says we're going to accept theshortfall from that so long as interest rates are declining, whichcould mean that 7 percent over the next two months would be ashortfall from the 7 percent for the quarter. It wouldn't preclude avote from a Committee member who favored that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a decision made in a previous meeting and discusses a potential scenario.


Passage number 286.
MR. RICE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a simple affirmation without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 287.
MR. PARTEE. But it's open [ended]. It could get to zerowith interest rates declining. It still seems to me a test of thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee expressing his perspective or observation.


Passage number 288.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I was trying to say that you wouldn'treally like it much below where you were going into next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod is simply stating his opinion or perspective.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 289.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is no explicit mention of contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 290.
 We have a smaller--MR. PARTEE. What is "some shortfall".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states the existence of a shortfall without providing further details or opinions.


Passage number 291.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, we have to give some verbalguidance on how much of a shortfall is acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there needs to be verbal guidance on how much of a shortfall is acceptable.


Passage number 292.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we better have it in the directive becauseit sounds as if it could be zero or minus 10 percent as long asinterest rates were declining.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 293.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage or context, I am unable to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 294.
 That's why a shortfall--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've used language of this sort before,Chuck. That's ridiculous, if I may say so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "That's ridiculous, if I may say so" implies that the speaker disagrees with the previous statement or viewpoint.


Passage number 295.
-37-11/17/81MR. PARTEE. It's not ridiculous because we're 7 percentagepoints off our expectations on average for the last six months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about being 7 percentage points off expectations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 296.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not when you take account of M2.That's just wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage states that the assertion about not being accounted for when considering M2 is incorrect.


Passage number 297.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Partee's opinion or any conflicting views.


Passage number 298.
 Well, I thought M2 was below--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 is still in this directive. M2, infact, is currently projected to be on target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply affirming that M2 is included in the directive and is on target.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 299.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree with Chuck, but for differentreasons. My concern is that the markets will assume that we mean onlya very modest shortfall if we say a shortfall will be accepted.Secondly, I'm concerned about the [possible] interpretation of thecaveat about declining rates. We'd have to say at least an "orderly"decline of rates, or something like that, which doesn't imply thatwe're pushing gung-ho for that. I think on balance there's lessdanger of misinterpretation if we use the other alternative--if we putin something like alternative C and say we will accept something lowerthan that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with Chuck's perspective, but their reasons for agreement differ. The speaker expresses concern about the interpretation of certain statements and suggests using an alternative option.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 300.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you going to do in yourconception if growth comes in less than alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is possible contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker is asking about what action to take if growth comes in less than alternative C. This implies that there may be differing opinions or options regarding what to do in that scenario.


Passage number 301.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then the fed funds rate is going togo [down] until we change it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests that the Fed funds rate will go down until a change is made.


Passage number 302.
MR. CORRIGAN. I have been thinking about alternativedirective formulations this morning, too. I must say I struck outbecause of the very problems we're running into here already. Mypreference at this point would be to have the directive state theaggregate numbers for October to December that are in alternative Cwith the language "or somewhat higher" with borrowings at $350 to $400million. I could accept combining that formulation with a federalfunds rate of 10 to 15 percent, simply because I think it's going tobe hard to get the aggregates specifications even in alternative C,given the economy. But I do think that kind of language formulation,notwithstanding Frank Morris's concerns, is more prudent and safer interms of people understanding what we're doing. And obviously, if theaggregates were soft, we still would have the opportunity to use theconsultation procedure to make further judgments as we go along.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is expressing his preference for a specific directive formulation, but he acknowledges that there may be challenges in achieving the aggregates specifications. He also mentions that there is room for further judgment and adjustment through the consultation procedure if needed.


Passage number 303.
MR. FORD. I had Frank down for "A." Are you saying youagree with Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford is simply asking for clarification about the person's agreement with Frank's opinion.


Passage number 304.
MR. CORRIGAN. No. I said notwithstanding his concern abouthow to explain why we're now at 5-3/4 percent instead of 7 percent. Ithink that can be dealt with. No, I'm talking about "C" or somewhathigher and, as I said, I could go with 10 to 15 percent for the fundsrate band simply because I think it's going to be hard to hit any ofthese things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 305.
MR. GUFFEY. I would join in that, except that for thefederal funds band I would prescribe 11 to 16 percent simply becauseof the shortness of the horizon; we're [only] looking at the next [5]weeks. If the funds rate drops to the tune of another 2-1/4 points,that is close to being a precipitous drop over the last three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Guffey, agrees with the statement but adds a specific condition for the federal funds band based on the shortness of the time horizon.


Passage number 306.
-38-11/17/81MR. CORRIGAN. That's my preference, too. I'm saying I couldlive with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, there is no indication of disagreement or contention. Mr. Corrigan is expressing agreement with someone else's preference.


Passage number 307.
MR. GUFFEY. Oh, I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 308.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would agree with Roger, and I would preferthe 11 to 16 percent. I do think the alternative formulation, thefirst one that you read, is awfully fuzzy. It's sufficiently fuzzythat I don't know whether anybody would know exactly what we'retalking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Gramley and Roger agree on preferring the 11 to 16 percent option and consider the first formulation to be unclear.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unlike the other one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage provided is incomplete and does not contain any information or statements to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 310.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I would prefer alternative B just as it iswritten. I don't know how many others feel that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 311.
MS. TEETERS. I would prefer alternative B with the 10 to 15percent. I think there is a real problem of perception in that itlooks as if we've tightened monetary policy at the wrong time if we gowith the 5-3/4 percent target for M1-B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. MS. TEETERS expresses disagreement with the alternative B with the 5-3/4 percent target for M1-B and prefers alternative B with the 10 to 15 percent target. She argues that choosing the lower target could create a perception problem of tightening monetary policy at the wrong time.


Passage number 312.
MR. RICE. I would prefer to see alternative A, but I'd bewilling to accept the money growth figures for alternative B with theborrowing at $200 million and a federal funds band from 9 to 14percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice states his preference for alternative A, but he is willing to accept alternative B under certain conditions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
MR. PARTEE. $200 million is awfully low as a start forborrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker believes that $200 million is a low starting point for borrowing, suggesting that they disagree with or are disputing the proposed amount.


Passage number 314.
MR. RICE. I'm willing to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Rice is expressing his willingness to do something.


Passage number 315.
MR. BOEHNE. I prefer alternative B with a funds range of 10to 15 percent and an initial borrowing level of $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states Mr. Boehne's preference for an alternative (alternative B) with specific numbers related to funds range and initial borrowing level. There is no mention or indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 316.
MR. BALLES. I'm concerned in formulating this directive, Mr.Chairman, that it certainly will appear odd that we have adopted thealternative C specifications at a time when we know the economy isworse. And that leads me to join those who have spoken up in favor ofalternative B. It's a minimum of what I'd like to see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing concern about the chosen specifications, but ultimately agrees with those who support an alternative option.


Passage number 317.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, no one has really [addressed] FrankMorris' point about what has happened since the last meeting tojustify making our targets more [restrictive] than they were.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that Frank Morris raised a point that has not been addressed yet.


Passage number 318.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A big decline in interest rates and ashortfall in M-1B in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating two separate pieces of information without any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 319.
MR. RICE. I don't think that justifies it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. Mr. Rice simply expresses his opinion without any opposing statements or arguments from others.


Passage number 320.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information about Mr. Corrigan or any specific topic to indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 321.
 The shortfall in October is the easiest one inthe world to--MR. RICE. I don't think that justifies anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems more like a statement followed by a personal opinion.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may have to agree, but you asked me whatjustifies it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Instead, it focuses on the speaker's potential agreement with an unidentified subject, and their quest to determine the justification for that agreement.


Passage number 323.
-39-11/17/81MR. PARTEE. I think Tony is absolutely right. We've nowseparated the interest rate people from the aggregates people. Andit's very hard to bring them together.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is agreeing with Tony's statement that the interest rate people and the aggregates people have been separated and it is difficult to reconcile their perspectives.


Passage number 324.
MR. KEEHN. Can't we to some extent cover the problem ofappearing to be tightening by commenting about moving into next year.Consistent with what you said, we could say we are positioningourselves by this particular choice to move into the band that we willselect for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It suggests a possible solution or strategy for addressing a problem without any conflicting opinions or opposition.


Passage number 325.
MS. TEETERS. That will scare the market out of its mind ifyou do that because they would interpret it to mean that we're headingagain for the lower end of the range next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters is stating a potential consequence of a specific action and explaining how it could be interpreted by the market.


Passage number 326.
MR. KEEHN. No, I'd say we would be positioning ourselves tomove into the band that we will select for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement by Mr. Keehn without any contradictory or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 327.
MS. TEETERS. I don't like next year's targets; I thinkthey're too low. I hate to commit myself to them; it gets to thepoint that we can't do anything about them in February. We'resupposed to take a new look at them in February. This freezes us inconcrete as to what we're going to do for next year's target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters expresses her dissatisfaction with next year's targets, stating that she believes they are too low and that committing to them restricts their ability to make changes in February.


Passage number 328.
MR. PARTEE. That's what you've said all along.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is affirming what the other person has been saying consistently.


Passage number 329.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, do we have any other comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 330.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I'm concerned mostly about thepossibility of the funds rate falling below the discount rate and ofvery low borrowing. Then things could get out of hand and confront uswith the need to keep lowering the discount rate in order to preventthat. For that reason, I would start off with a [relatively high]borrowing assumption and I would like to consult at a somewhat higher[funds rate] level on the way down. Consulting doesn't mean that onestops there. But at least at a time when much higher mobility ofinterest rates is a possibility, we ought to look at it earlier ratherthan later. So, I would go for $400 million for borrowing and 12 to16 percent on the funds rate without any expectation that it would goto 16 percent. But neither would I like it to drop below 12 percentwithout talking about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is concerned about the possibility of the funds rate falling below the discount rate and wants to consult and potentially increase the borrowing assumption and the funds rate level. This suggests that there may be differing viewpoints on the appropriate actions to take regarding interest rates.


Passage number 331.
MR. FORD. I'm concerned about the appearance of setting agoal. Maybe I have a problem with understanding the philosophy ofthese statements even after hearing them discussed so often. As Iunderstand it, the philosophy when we set a target is that it is atarget and we may not always achieve it. We have a problem nowbecause we've been underachieving both the short-run and the long-runtargets on one of the things we look at, M1-B. Were we to put out adirective that appears to have set tighter targets as we're facing theprospect of what may be a very serious recession, starting from adisastrously low level of economic activity in major industries suchas housing and autos, we could scare the devil out of everybody byhaving people perceive that we're trying to be very tight. So, theconcern and all the talk about how to couch this is very important.I'd be inclined to err on the side of staying with the target that wemay not achieve, the one we had last time, and not narrowing the fundsband again but allowing it to have a little more leeway on the downside. I'd go with something more like Emmett Rice's prescription of a-40-11/17/81"B+" or "A-" type prescription, with a borrowing assumption of perhapsa quarter billion dollars or somewhere in that range and a wide fundsrate range. If I counted right, 4 or 5 times earlier this year we seta 6-point range. Why not set a 6-point range of 9 to 15 percent, sortof centered on where we are now and allow ourselves a little moreleeway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing concern and suggesting a different approach to setting targets. The speaker acknowledges the philosophy of setting targets but raises concerns about the current situation and the potential negative impact of setting tighter targets. They propose an alternative approach with a wider range for flexibility.


Passage number 332.
MR. GRAMLEY. That 9 to 15 averages 12, not 13-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a mathematical calculation.


Passage number 333.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The basic problem we're dealing with is arepetitive problem. We are setting a target for the next six weeksand nothing we do here is going to affect what those numbers are overthe next six weeks. We have to have a little longer perspective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the problem is repetitive and that setting a target for the next six weeks will not have an immediate effect on the numbers. It then suggests the need for a longer perspective. There is no disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 334.
MR. FORD. You're right. There's only a difference of $2billion in M1-B on "A," "B," and "C." It's less than the amount ofchange we've had on the last two Fridays.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that the difference in M1-B on "A," "B," and "C" is only $2 billion, which is less than the amount of change they have had on the last two Fridays. The statement simply presents a fact without any argument or disagreement.


Passage number 335.
MS. TEETERS. But that argues more for the appearance of itand that we stay with the 7 percent. I agree with you that nothing wedo is going to affect what happens over the next six weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Ms. Teeters, is agreeing with the other person's suggestion to stick with the 7 percent and acknowledging that their actions will not have an impact on the next six weeks.


Passage number 336.
MR. RICE. We all agree on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that "We all agree on that," indicating that there is consensus and no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 337.
MR. FORD. So, the whole question is what the market [willthink].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is explaining the question that needs to be addressed.


Passage number 338.
 If they think we're tightening--MR. BOEHNE. I would still stay with "C" the way it'sprescribed with a borrowing assumption of $350 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a statement of agreement between the speakers.


Passage number 339.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. We're not going to resolvethis before lunch. I guess I come back more strongly to my gutfeeling that we're better off not horsing around with the target thatwe set last quarter in a formal statement. But I'd clearly admit thatwe are prepared to see a shortfall under certain conditions. It seemsto me we clearly are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and acknowledging different perspectives but does not argue or disagree with anyone.


Passage number 340.
MR. FORD. And that we wouldn't be surprised.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Ford, without any indication of conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 341.
MS. TEETERS. I think that's more like it. It's not thatwe're willing to see a shortfall but we expect that it's going tohappen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the speaker's belief that a shortfall is likely to occur.


Passage number 342.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's about the same assaying we're willing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contradictory or opposing views. It simply states a personal opinion or agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 343.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 344.
 Maybe we should simply say there areonly six weeks left to go and there's no point in--MS. TEETERS. Is it the difference between [desiring] andaccepting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a suggestion and then asks for clarification or confirmation.


Passage number 345.
MR. MORRIS. What we do in the next 6 weeks will impact whathappens to the money supply in the first quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact and discussing the potential impact of certain actions on the money supply in the first quarter.


Passage number 346.
MR. BOYKIN. That's right. The world doesn't stop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply agreeing with a statement.


Passage number 347.
-41-11/17/81MR. BOEHNE. We buy a little more insurance that the moneysupply is not going to fall out of bed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the speaker is buying more insurance to ensure the stability of the money supply.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 348.
MR. CORRIGAN. The next six weeks matters, too, if we getborrowings down to whatever that frictional level is. I agree withGovernor Schultz; I have a hunch that the frictional level ofborrowing is higher than Steve was suggesting, although I can't besure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Corrigan agrees with Governor Schultz but disagrees with Steve about the frictional level of borrowing. He expresses uncertainty about the exact level but implies that it may be higher than Steve suggested.


Passage number 349.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I happened to look back at the data,President Corrigan, and it might be of some interest to the Committeethat in June and July of last year the level of adjustment plusseasonal borrowing--and I think the funds rate ran a little below thediscount rate at times in that period--came out [in millions ofdollars] at 104, 34, 127, 44, 75, 20, 121, and 145 for 8 straightweeks in June and July. So, it can run quite low. There's noguarantee, but it can run quite low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply sharing data and observations without expressing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 350.
MR. CORRIGAN. Look what happened in August and September.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 351.
MR. AXILROD. Well, borrowing sort of goes up. It doesn'tgive you any scope for shortfalls in required reserves because youcreate large excess reserves. That can happen. That's the danger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is presenting information and explaining a concept, without any conflicting views or contradictory statements.


Passage number 352.
MR. SCHULTZ. The question though, Steve, is: When we firsthit that frictional level what happened to the funds rate. That'swhat gets me concerned. There's a point at which the drop in thefunds rate gets very rapid in that kind of period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, is expressing concern and wondering what happened to the funds rate when it reached a certain level of friction.


Passage number 353.
MR. AXILROD. That's only, Governor Schultz, if this so-called frictional level, which might happen in any event, is alsoaccompanied by a very sharp rise in excess reserves. Then the fundsrate could drop very substantially.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is stating a conditional scenario that requires certain circumstances to occur for the funds rate to drop substantially.


Passage number 354.
MR. CORRIGAN. Did that happen in those weeks that youmentioned last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a question and asks for clarification.


Passage number 355.
MR. AXILROD. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Mr. Axilrod simply responds with a straightforward answer.


Passage number 356.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me talk a little less theology and alittle more practically at the moment. Suppose we start at $350million as an assumption. Make the figure a rounder number and startat $400 million, Mr. Axilrod. In the ordinary course of events, youset a nonborrowed reserve path. You start it, just as an assumption,at $400 million and you will put in a growth path for M1-B. Let megive you two hypotheses for that growth path you put in for M1-B: Oneis 6 percent, just to keep the numbers round, which is close to "C;"and for the other extreme, say, 8-1/2 percent, or round that down.Now, if the money supply comes in around 6 percent, the borrowingswould remain at $400 million or whatever the [initial] level is, if weadopt "C. Presumably, that's what would happen. If we put in the[higher] number on the basis of "A" and the money supply comes in atthat same 6 percent, how much would the borrowing level go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different hypothetical scenarios for the growth path of M1-B and its potential impact on borrowing levels.


Passage number 357.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context provided. Please provide the passage or more information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 358.
 Well, roughly it would be $200 million lower onthat, having started the path at---42-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be $200 million lower by thelatter part of December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a disagreement or uncertainty regarding the estimated amount of $200 million. The use of words such as "roughly" and "would be" implies that there is some contention or lack of agreement about the exact figure.


Passage number 359.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, I was looking at a monthly average, but itwould be in that area in December. It's $2 billion divided by 10,roughly. It's not quite precise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply providing an explanation and giving a rough estimate. There is no clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 360.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the range of what we are talkingabout in nondiscretionary action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating the range of what is being discussed in nondiscretionary action.


Passage number 361.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What does that $200 milliondifference mean in terms of the implied fed funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question asking for an explanation of the meaning of a $200 million difference in terms of the implied fed funds rate.


Passage number 362.
MR. AXILROD. Well, sometimes it means nothing. One of ourrules of thumb has been 25 basis points per $100 million; another hasbeen 20 basis points. They've all been wrong at various times. So,one could say somewhere between 40 and 50 basis points is representedmerely by that. But, as the Chairman has said, misses in money supplyare often much larger than this little range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It presents different rules of thumb and acknowledges that they have been wrong at times, but it does not involve any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 363.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I think I am saying, in practice, isthat we might set that path, depending upon where we start it, closeto the "A" specification; we're probably not going to be very quickabout making discretionary upward adjustments in the path if theshortfall is anywhere within the range of "A" to "C." We mightconsider one if it came in at 3 percent or less. It depends on whathappens in M2 and all the rest, but that's what we're talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is explaining a potential course of action without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 364.
MR. PARTEE. You have practically no room for discretionaryupward adjustments in nonborrowed reserves because even under thecircumstances you have cited--and remember we set a monthly average--if we're 3 points off, we're down to the frictional level of borrowingby the end of the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the limited room for discretionary upward adjustments in nonborrowed reserves.


Passage number 365.
 So there is no room to have an upward--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's not a lot of room; that's right.And that's why we're talking about relatively small numbers here. Wehaven't got a lot of room unless we really wanted to push extremelyhard. Precisely, we don't have much room.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains that there is limited room for something and acknowledges that the numbers are relatively small.


Passage number 366.
MS. TEETERS. I'm not sure what you said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems to be a statement or clarification made by Ms. Teeters.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 367.
 Did you sayconstruct a path on "A" or--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is one alternative one couldtake. But we would not be very quick about making discretionaryadjustments. It depends upon where we start off or what people thinkabout this. If we start off at $400 million and it fell to "B" or "C"or a little less, we're going to end up with $200 million. If it fellmore sharply than that to well below "C," we're going to end up at alower level and we may run into the federal funds rate constraint.That's what the operational decision is. Now, if we set it up theother way, it depends upon where we set the initial level ofborrowing. In either case, I think we're saying that if it runsabove, we don't do a thing--we accommodate it--which we've done oftenin the past.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two alternative options and indicates that the decision depends on different factors such as where they start off or what people think about it. The speaker also mentions potential constraints and different possible outcomes. This suggests that there is disagreement about the best approach or course of action.


Passage number 368.
MR. CORRIGAN. The way you stated it, isn't really theoperative question how fast we want to get to that frictional level ofborrowing. If we started with $400 million and a 6 percent path as-43-11/17/81distinct from $400 million and an 8 percent path, doesn't theoperative question then reduce to how fast we want that borrowinglevel to get down to whatever that frictional level is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan, presenting a question for discussion.


Passage number 369.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's the operative question.And we're talking about a very narrow range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It is simply posing a question and acknowledging that the topic being discussed is limited in scope.


Passage number 370.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, the real policy issue is the onewe discussed: Do we want a more rapid rate of decline in the earlypart, that is, in the next few weeks, or do we want to stretch it outand have a more moderated rate of decline. If we go for "A," we'retaking a bigger risk that we will have the pressure earlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is presenting two different options for policy and discussing the potential risks associated with each option.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon where we set the initialborrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is merely stating that the outcome or result depends on the initial borrowing.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 372.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'm assuming the same range of$350 to $400 million. If you construct the nonborrowed reserve pathon "A" rather than "C," then there's a greater risk that we'll get thedownward pressure earlier and to a larger degree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is assuming a certain range for a particular amount of money, and they mention the risk of getting downward pressure earlier and to a larger degree depending on the path chosen. This indicates a level of disagreement or potential disagreement about how to handle the situation.


Passage number 373.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It moves in that direction. We're talkingabout very small numbers in the next three or four weeks or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 374.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. I accept that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: it is evident from the given information. Please provide the passage so that I can determine the contention or disagreement.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The most important thing is where we setthe initial borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the most important thing is the initial borrowing.


Passage number 376.
MR. BOEHNE. And where the discount rate is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is a continuation of the previous statement, providing additional information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The discount rate will be an importantconsideration in where the market [goes]; in fact, that's going to bemore important than this other thing. I'm afraid that the only twothings that are going to make any real difference here, in the rangethat anybody is talking about, are if somebody says we want to go allout and make sure we're going to hit 7 percent M-1B growth and weought to start with zero borrowings. Then we'd be talking about avery different kind of approach. But with the initial borrowing levelsomeplace in the range that we're talking about, these otherdifferences are going to be minuscule in a mechanical application ofthis [directive]. What is going to make the difference is if and howquickly the discount rate is changed and whether we make adiscretionary adjustment as we go along.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is arguing that the discount rate will have a greater impact on the market than any other factor, while also acknowledging that others may have differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 378.
MS. TEETERS. You wouldn't see the borrowings going above$400 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 379.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't see the borrowings going above$400 million under any conceivable conditions that I can imagine overthe next five weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a personal opinion, stating that the borrowings will not exceed $400 million in the next five weeks.


Passage number 380.
MR. FORD. Unless you lower the discount rate by about 3 or 4percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, Mr. Ford is stating a suggestion or recommendation, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


Passage number 381.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage only mentions "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without providing any further information or context that could suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 382.
 Well, if we adopted a whole different kindof strategy, but barring a deliberate counter movement on the discountrate---44-11/17/81MS. TEETERS. You're assuming the discount rate will go downto around 12 percent during this period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a hypothetical scenario and mentioning that the assumption is that the discount rate will go down to around 12 percent during that time.


Passage number 383.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm assuming that is quite possible. Iwill not make any premature assumptions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and caution by saying they will not make any premature assumptions.


Passage number 384.
MR. FORD. It depends on what [the Reserve Banks] recommendto [the Board].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the decision or outcome will depend on the recommendations made by the Reserve Banks to the Board.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we see both continuing weakness inbusiness and continuing weakness in the aggregates, I think that wouldbe a reasonable assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion and is not engaging in any argument or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 386.
MR. CORRIGAN. I would still argue that if we're going to getthere, I'd rather get there in an orderly way. I would start offconstructing the path off 6 percent with the borrowings at $400million and if we have to adjust, we have to adjust. But I would wantto get there in a deliberate, orderly way if we have to get there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing a personal preference for achieving a certain outcome in a methodical manner.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 387.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you're saying, "in a deliberate,orderly way" makes a difference of maybe $25 million in borrowings inthe second week in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is a contention in the passage. The speaker is expressing disagreement or doubt about the statement made.


Passage number 388.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know. I'm not sure I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, expresses uncertainty and states that he is not sure if he agrees with something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 389.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that wrong, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage includes the question "Is that wrong, Mr. Axilrod," which implies a potential disagreement or contention between the speaker and Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 390.
MR. CORRIGAN. My concern is getting into the realm of thisfrictional level of borrowings. I'm not sure I know what it means,but in my own mind's eye I have to leave room for the possibility thatgetting there could result in a situation where we would get a buildupin excess reserves and the federal funds market would really fallapart. That may be an outlier concern, but I have it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, expresses his own concern and acknowledges that it may be an outlier concern. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting views from other individuals.


Passage number 391.
MR. GRAMLEY. I share Jerry's views all the way. I could buythe idea of keeping a 7 percent path instead of a 6 percent path andputting in a contingency clause to the effect that an overrun wouldnot be resisted in any way. But the idea of too disorderly a drop ininterest rates at this point is the most important thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, states that he agrees with Jerry's views and suggests a potential compromise.


Passage number 392.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're focusing on the wrongthing. That's going to be more affected by the way we set the initialborrowing assumption than the mechanical thing that falls out of this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 393.
MR. GRAMLEY. I agree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "MR. GRAMLEY. I agree." This indicates that Mr. Gramley is in agreement with a particular statement or viewpoint.


Passage number 394.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a 4-week period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a timeframe of 4 weeks.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 395.
MR. FORD. The appearance matter that Nancy mentioned is theone that keeps coming up in my mind. If this reads that we tightenedthe bands for the aggregates and we did not lower [the funds raterange]--we're at 12 to 17 percent now and you say we're going to go to11-1/2 percent or stay at 12 percent, as a number of people haverecommended--it's going to come off that the economy is crashing downand the Fed is cheering it on, possibly. Possibly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing concerns about the potential negative perception that the economy is crashing down and the Federal Reserve's actions may be supporting it.


Passage number 396.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is [the bottom of the range] now, at12 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply asks for the current location of something, namely "the bottom of the range," without indicating any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 397.
-45-11/17/81MR. STERNLIGHT. The range is 12 to 17 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 398.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Incomplete


Passage number 399.
 The range is 12 to 17 percent and if you're sayingwe are not even going to lower the range--MR. WALLICH. But the range really doesn't mean that it'sbeing held there. It's a checkpoint for consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The second person is simply providing clarification and adding context to the statement made by the first person about the range.


Passage number 400.
MS. TEETERS. Only on the way up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states "Only on the way up."


Passage number 401.
MR. PARTEE. It has worked extremely well. Well, I thinkmaybe your point is a good one. Maybe we ought to start the initialborrowing a little higher for safety.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee agrees with the point being made and suggests an adjustment to ensure safety.


Passage number 402.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're in a very narrow range here.I have a strong feeling within the narrow range that we've discussedhere. All I'm trying to do is make the point that if we have toconstruct a reserve path, and that's what we're talking about, thedifference between "A" and "C" at the extremes is not an immediateone; once we've set the original borrowing assumption, it can't changejust mechanically by more than $25 or $50 million a week unless themoney supply really falls out of bed. It would be changed because themoney supply fell out of bed not because of the difference in theassumption; there's only going to be a $50 million difference in earlyDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining a point about the narrow range of possibilities and the potential change in borrowing assumption.


Passage number 403.
MR. PARTEE. That is something I want to guard against. Itmight not fall out of bed, but then it might fall out of bed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing a concern or caution, but there is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 404.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, if it does, then the borrowing isgoing to come down. But it doesn't make any difference whether wepick "A," "B," or "C." If the money supply is negative, borrowingsare going to go way down. That would be because the money supply wentdown, not because we picked "A," "B," or "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply states that the borrowing is going to come down if the money supply is negative, regardless of whether option "A," "B," or "C" is chosen. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 405.
"MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 406.
 If we had borrowing at $400 million and then setthe reserve path on 7 percent for October through December and had afunds range of, say, to 10 to 15 percent or even 11 percent tosomething, I think that would take care of the appearance problem inthe directive as well as give us an approach on--MR. PARTEE. But I do believe that it's probably when thefunds rate breaks that we will really get the system to generatemoney. Because then the banks can't nicely lend their federal funds;they've got to get out there and do something else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 407.
MR. BOEHNE. I think that kind of break comes below 10 or 11percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, is expressing his personal opinion or belief about a certain threshold (below 10 or 11 percent) without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements being presented.


Passage number 408.
MR. PARTEE. It would come with a break in the money supply,which would force these rates down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It is simply explaining a possible outcome if there was a break in the money supply.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 409.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, if we move in your directionto the 7 percent for October to December--I don't mean September,[but] October to December--would you accept a funds rate range of 11to 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a change in the funds rate range for a specific time period, but it is unclear if Chuck would accept this change.


Passage number 410.
-46-11/17/81MR. PARTEE. I don't want a top of 16 percent. I think thatjust looks absolutely ridiculous.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses their personal opinion that a top of 16 percent looks ridiculous, but there is no direct disagreement or contention mentioned.


Passage number 411.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that looks a little foolish tome.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 412.
MR. PARTEE. I think then it would be a question of whetherwe want to narrow it to 11 to 15 percent. I might accept that. Thereare others who wouldn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his personal opinion about narrowing something to 11 to 15 percent, and acknowledges that there are other people who may not agree with him. This indicates a difference in opinion rather than outright contention or disagreement.


Passage number 413.
 I think the biggest thing is--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why do we have to keep the funds raterange at 5 points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 414.
MR. PARTEE. Because we don't want it to seem constraining.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a preference or concern.


Passage number 415.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But everybody knows that the up sideis academic anyway in the next five weeks. So, why couldn't it be 11to 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The reason for this is that there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting opinions presented. The statement is presenting a question or possibility without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 416.
MR. FORD. Because then it will be perceived that in the lastthree meetings we've closed in on interest rate management. We wouldhave gone from a 6-point spread to a 4-point spread and the chargewill raised that we're managing interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The passage simply states a statement made by Mr. Ford about the progress made in interest rate management.


Passage number 417.
MR. RICE. That's the way it's going to look.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by Mr. Rice indicating how something will appear.


Passage number 418.
MR. GRAMLEY. I could buy Ed's formulation of $400 millionand 7 percent with a 10 to 15 percent federal funds range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their agreement with Ed's formulation regarding the purchase of $400 million at 7 percent interest, within a federal funds range of 10 to 15 percent.


Passage number 419.
MR. PARTEE. I think maybe that's what we ought to settle on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or suggestion, but it is not met with disagreement or contention from others.


Passage number 420.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have a feeling maybe we ought togo to lunch and settle it after lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the use of the phrase "maybe we ought to go to lunch and settle it after lunch." The speaker is suggesting a peaceful resolution to whatever issue or discussion they are having.


Passage number 421.
MR. SCHULTZ. Good idea. When in doubt, punt.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreement as the speaker is expressing agreement with the idea of punting when in doubt.


Passage number 422.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have a quick lunch.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple plan to have a quick lunch.


Passage number 423.
[Lunch break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me consider the numbers, with an unduedegree of technicality, because we're in a very narrow band. I don'tthink there's much disagreement here on these details; whether theywill work out or not is another question. Let me just get clear in mymind again what I asked you before. The difference, going all the wayto the extreme, of something like an 8-1/2 percent growth rate and a 6percent growth rate just in setting the reserve paths is going to be$2 billion, did you say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker mentions considering the numbers, but states that there is not much disagreement on the details.


Passage number 424.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. The difference is roughly $2 billion inDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a difference of $2 billion in the month of December.


Passage number 425.
 So, if we set the reserve path on the highest [growth rate]and the lowest one turns out to be what actually happens, then theaverage level of borrowing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, don't make the lower one whatactually happens. That's where we're setting the path theoreticallynow. We don't know what is going to happen yet. That's the nextquestion I'll ask.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 426.
-47-11/17/81MR. AXILROD. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage appears to be the beginning of a statement or conversation, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 427.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your path would be $2 billion higher inDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 428.
MR. PARTEE. With "A" than with "C".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it simply states that Mr. Partee prefers option "A" over option "C".


Passage number 429.
MR. AXILROD. The level of the money supply, M1-B, under "A"is put in at about $400 million higher in November than under "C."That's the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the difference in the level of money supply between two options, "A" and "C".


Passage number 430.
MR. PARTEE. And how about December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply shows "MR. PARTEE" asking a question without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 431.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" alone. However, without additional context, it is difficult to determine if there is contention or disagreement related to Chairman Volcker in the entire passage.


Passage number 432.
 Well, is that because there's a biggerdifference in--MR. CORRIGAN. But on the reserve path, it's only differentby $40 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a statement or observation made by the speaker, discussing a price difference of $40 million.


Passage number 433.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the reserve path difference would be verysmall; it's not different by much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It states a simple fact about the reserve path difference being very small, without any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why not. I don't understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification rather than disagreeing with someone else's statement or opinion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 435.
MR. WALLICH. Because it should be $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention. The speaker suggests that the amount should be $1 billion, indicating a disagreement or difference in opinion.


Passage number 436.
MR. STERNLIGHT. The reserve path is relevant to just the 5weeks. It's not quite the average for the month of December; it's the5 weeks ending December 22 or whenever it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the reserve path is only relevant to the 5 weeks ending in December, rather than the entire month.


Passage number 437.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm looking at the December part of thereserve path. The first period is not going to make any difference,because we're going to give you the level of borrowings. I'm nottalking about what the money supply actually does now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 438.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual content of the passage.


Passage number 439.
 Well, if you tell us the level of borrowing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It simply implies that the level of borrowing is important information that is being requested.


Passage number 440.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having the actual passage or more context.


Passage number 441.
 We will hold that level of borrowing through--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you'll hold the nonborrowed reservesthat are consistent with it at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 442.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. This can be determined by the absence of contrasting viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 443.
 And the difference in the amountof those two--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It'll make no difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that the difference in the amount of something will not make a difference.


Passage number 444.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: In the given passage, MR. AXILROD responds with a simple "yes" without any further context or information. Therefore, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on this response.


Passage number 445.
 But if you're asking about the differencein the amount of the nonborrowed reserve paths--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I'm asking--go ahead. Thatwill only be different in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple request for clarification.


Passage number 446.
MR. AXILROD. I would say Jerry is right; it's roughly $40million. You'd take the $400 million difference and divide it by 10or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both Mr. Axilrod and Jerry agree on the estimated amount of $40 million.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 447.
-48-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you telling me the difference in thetheoretical money supply--not the actual--for December between 6percent and 8-1/2 percent is only $400 million in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or contention regarding the stated difference in the theoretical money supply between 6 percent and 8-1/2 percent.


Passage number 448.
MR. AXILROD. Well, no.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker simply answers a question without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 449.
MR. WALLICH. It could be $800 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a possible amount of $800 million.


Passage number 450.
MR. AXILROD. By December the difference is $2 billion, muchof which would affect reserves in January. So I'd need to make a veryexact calculation here. If you just take the December $2 billiondifference, that would be a $200 million difference in reserves,roughly. If you take the November difference, that's a difference ofabout $40 million in reserves, roughly. And the average for the5-week interval between Committee meetings will be somewhere betweenthat $40 million and $200 million on a nonborrowed reserve path, givenborrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply a statement of calculations and potential outcomes.


Passage number 451.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we're talking about a difference ofonly $200 million, which wouldn't really materialize all in Decemberin choosing the path. Now the much bigger difference in the actualborrowing is going to be [because of] what actually happens to themoney supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement presents only a comparison of two different amounts and discusses the potential impact on the money supply.


Passage number 452.
MR. AXILROD. That's right; that's how I started.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement acknowledging agreement.


Passage number 453.
MS. TEETERS. Is your proposal that if the money supply comesin short we would lower the borrowing.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply acknowledges and agrees with Ms. Teeters' proposal without adding any conflicting information or opinions.


Passage number 454.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I am trying to see--howmuch room we've got for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a statement without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 455.
MR. PARTEE. We stay on the nonborrowed path if growth comesin short, so borrowings go down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply states that if growth comes in short, borrowings will go down in order to stay on the nonborrowed path.


Passage number 456.
MS. TEETERS. So borrowings fall off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 457.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 458.
MR. AXILROD. Our staff projection, for what it's worth, isessentially alternative C. That is, we would expect money supplygrowth to come in at around 5 percent in November and 6 percent inDecember. It may be a little short of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a projection made by the staff, indicating their expectation for money supply growth in November and December. There is no contention or disagreement mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 459.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unfortunately, with all due respect, thatisn't worth much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage as the speaker disagrees with the value of something, stating that it "isn't worth much."


Passage number 460.
MR. AXILROD. Right. We think it will be that or a littleless. So if you set the path at "A" and we were nearly right on "C,"then borrowing by sometime in December would probably be a couplehundred million less than whatever borrowing number you choose,assuming nothing is done to raise nonborrowed reserves. That's oneway of looking at it. But the error could be a lot bigger than thatdifference, one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 461.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 462.
 $200 million is---49-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's the same $200 million I havehere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that the mentioned $200 million is the same amount they have.


Passage number 463.
MR. AXILROD. Right, but it depends on where you start it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement is a neutral observation and does not involve contention or disagreement.


Passage number 464.
MR. PARTEE. It has been two months or 6 weeks; it's come up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply stating a time frame.


Passage number 465.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, it's a lot of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is a significant amount of borrowing.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but you're saying that's if it camein roughly around 5-1/2 percent. If it came in at 3 percent orsomething, that's another $200 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Yes, but you're saying" indicates that the speaker is acknowledging a previous statement and providing further information or clarification.


Passage number 467.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, then borrowing would be down to close tozero.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that borrowing would be close to zero.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 468.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's where it begins to bother me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. It can be inferred from Mr. Schultz's statement that something is bothering him, implying a disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 469.
MR. AXILROD. Then you'd be $400 million below path on totalreserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by MR. AXILROD without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 470.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how to avoid this.We'd just run into the federal funds rate constraint then. We have toconsider what we want to do with any of these alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is stating a problem and expressing uncertainty about how to avoid it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 471.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it seems to me the more we go for thereserve path under alternative A, the greater the likelihood thatwe're going to run into the frictional level of borrowings very soon.If you can agree with the staff's forecast that the actual moneygrowth is more likely to be "C" than "A," and then you say to yourselfthat, if anything, we're more likely to come in below that than aboveit, you've really compounded the problem that I've been worrying aboutby selecting 8 or 8-1/2 as the money number on which we calculate thenonborrowed reserve path. Although it's true that it's only $40million on average for the full month of November, it's going toaccumulate to a lot more than that on an ongoing basis by the fifthweek of this period. I think it gets to be a rather significantdifference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is expressing disagreement with the path and forecast being discussed by the staff. He believes that selecting a specific money number for calculating the nonborrowed reserve path will compound the problem he has been worrying about. He argues that the accumulation of this money number will result in a significant difference.


Passage number 472.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I do, too. The pressure we will geton rates will be significantly different if we have a shortfall. Andthat's what the real issue is about today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the pressure on rates will be different if there is a shortfall, and that is the main issue being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 473.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think the question is: Should we haveserious downward pressure on rates, if we have shortfalls--not only,as Lyle says, from 8-1/2 percent down to 5 percent, but below 5percent or whatever it is. Shouldn't we be having serious downwardpressure on rates because of the weakness that that implies for theeconomy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, believes that there should be serious downward pressure on rates due to the weakness in the economy. However, it is implied that there may be other differing opinions on this matter.


Passage number 474.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The question is how far; that's theissue. If it drops another 225 basis points in the next 5 weeks fromwhere it is presently, that's quite a substantial drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting a hypothetical scenario and does not involve conflicting opinions or perspectives.


Passage number 475.
 If we gobelow--MR. PARTEE. If you look at cyclical declines, it's not avery fast drop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about cyclical declines not being a very fast drop.


Passage number 476.
-50-11/17/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're probably going to need moredecline in January and February, too, beyond that though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing a prediction or expectation about a potential decline in January and February.


Passage number 477.
MR. PARTEE. The faster we get it down, the less distanceit's going to have to travel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a fact that the faster something is brought down, the shorter the distance it will have to travel.


Passage number 478.
MR. WALLICH. Well, very soon we'll have done as much as wedid in 1980. We will have cut rates about in half. This would seemto be doing the same to the funds rate and bill rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the rate cuts that have been made and comparing them to those made in 1980.


Passage number 479.
MR. PARTEE. But I think Paul is right that we'd hit thefunds rate constraint if we go through this frictional borrowinglevel, and we'd have a conference call as to what to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It mentions that Paul is right about hitting the funds rate constraint, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention being expressed.


Passage number 480.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I can't convince myself that itmakes all that much difference. Unless it made a real difference,even if the money supply was growing someplace in this range, wewouldn't want to see the federal funds rate drop any more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage expresses uncertainty and a lack of conviction, rather than contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 481.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I have an instinct--Mr.Sternlight may have a different one or may share it--that when we'retalking about borrowings between $100 and $350 million, neither of uscould argue that the funds rate would be--. At the low end there's alittle greater odds that it will drop below the discount rate. At thehigh end there may be a little greater odds that occasionally it willbe trading a point above the discount rate. But basically it would bearound the discount rate, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Mr. Sternlight may have a different one or may share it" suggests that Mr. Axilrod and Mr. Sternlight may have opposing viewpoints on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 482.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage as there is no mention or indication of conflicting views or arguments being presented.


Passage number 483.
 Well, the risk is that it might drop verysharply below the discount rate, and in that case--MR. AXILROD. But only if required reserves turn out to be alot weaker than our nonborrowed path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement describing a potential risk and a response to that risk.


Passage number 484.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But still, I don't think these differencesmake much difference in themselves. The question is: What happens ifa real shortfall in the money supply is added on top of it. In thatcase we're going to run into [the need for] a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents a perspective regarding differences and then poses a question about the potential consequences of a shortfall in the money supply.


Passage number 485.
MR. AXILROD. In that case the lower the growth rate inmoney you start from, the less chance you have of being presented withthat problem early, so to speak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a causal relationship between the lower growth rate in money and a decreased chance of encountering a problem.


Passage number 486.
MR. GUFFEY. It seems most desirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. The use of the word "desirable" indicates that there is agreement or consensus about the idea being discussed.


Passage number 487.
MR. PARTEE. That's ignoring our policy responsibility notto have a consultation if we have great developing weakness in theeconomy. We don't want to avoid the problem; we want to precipitateit so we can talk about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is stating a policy preference and emphasizing the need to address weaknesses in the economy.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 488.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or we'll have our consultationearlier if we agree on an 11 percent floor rather than a 10 percentfloor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The author is suggesting that there is potential disagreement or contention regarding the proposed floor percentage. The use of the word "if" suggests that agreement on the floor percentage is uncertain, which implies potential disagreement.


Passage number 489.
MR. PARTEE. That's true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 490.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably the practicaldifference here. I take it that everybody is agreed that, whichever-51-11/17/81one of these numbers we put in, if the money supply came in higher inthe short run, we wouldn't want to run up the borrowings, although itwould be called for if we put in the low number. We'd have tooverride the thing, but I think that's understood.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that everyone is in agreement on the fact that running up borrowings would not be desirable if the money supply came in higher in the short run, regardless of which number is chosen.


Passage number 491.
MR. CORRIGAN. If we put the "somewhat higher" thing inthere, that makes it explicit.SPEAKER(.). Sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It seems to be a casual conversation where one person suggests adding something and the other person agrees with it.


Passage number 492.
MS. TEETERS. Which higher thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 493.
MR. CORRIGAN. Regardless of what number we pick, if we put"___ percent or somewhat higher," it makes it explicit that we're notgoing to run up the borrowing if the money supply comes in stronger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a condition that regardless of the specific number chosen, it is explicit that borrowing will not increase if the money supply comes in stronger.


Passage number 494.
MR. SCHULTZ. What happens if we just take what we had lasttime, which is the 7 percent--leave it alone--and set the borrowingsat $400 million and our consultation rate on fed funds at 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 495.
MR. GRAMLEY. Do you mean 7 percent for October to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 496.
MR. SCHULTZ. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply responds with "No" without expressing any conflicting view or argument.


Passage number 497.
MS. TEETERS. November to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 498.
MR. PARTEE. He means September to December, doesn't he.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is seeking clarification on a particular timeframe.


Passage number 499.
MR. GRAMLEY. September to December you calculate at 8percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the calculation for the months of September to December is done at 8 percent.


Passage number 500.
MR. SCHULTZ. No, November to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Schultz.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 501.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's not the same as we had the lasttime. "A" is what we had last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, states that "A" is not the same as what they had last time, implying a difference or discrepancy between the two.


Passage number 502.
MS. TEETERS. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact without indicating any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 503.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes

Explanation: The presence of the word "yes" suggests that there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's the only thing. Of course,we can do that whatever we say in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that whatever is said in the directive can be done.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 505.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I would go with Fred'sproposal. To me it's really important that we not repeat what we didlast year. That's the one time I dissented and I'd have to dissentagain, I think, if the fed funds floor were put so as to permit such asharp drop in the funds rate over a short period of time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they would go with Fred's proposal and then expresses their disagreement by stating that they would dissent again if the fed funds floor were put in place in a way that allows a sharp drop in the funds rate over a short period of time.


Passage number 506.
MS. TEETERS. Don't forget that last year the economy wentdown at a real rate of 9-1/2 percent in the second quarter. No wonderthe rates dropped so fast. We're going to have a decline here ofabout half that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states facts about the economy and the decline rate without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 507.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The reaction to that would be veryperverse in the bond market. I'm convinced of it. And I think thatis much more meaningful to an economic recovery.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the author's belief or opinion about the reaction in the bond market and its significance to an economic recovery.


Passage number 508.
-52-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the obvious in-between course is todraw the path just using the 7 percent. That leaves it between the 8-1/2 and 6. Something around 7 or 7-1/2 percent splits the difference;it sounds all right to me. If the money supply really goes off on thedown side, we're going to have a consultation anyway. I think that'squite evident.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any contention or disagreement. It presents a proposed course of action and acknowledges the possibility of a consultation if certain conditions are met.


Passage number 509.
MS. TEETERS. What are you doing. Are you suggesting "B"with a quarter billion dollars of original borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any form of contention or disagreement. It is a simple question and statement.


Passage number 510.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think in terms of "Bs" or whateverhere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "I don't think in terms of 'Bs' or whatever here." The speaker is simply expressing their personal perspective or preference, indicating that they do not use the term "Bs" or a similar concept in their thinking process.


Passage number 511.
MR. PARTEE. Well, communicate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating the need to communicate.


Passage number 512.
MR. WALLICH. Set the borrowing requirement high to be safe.Set the path, however, so we get some addition to reserves during theperiod and some downward pressure on rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests setting the borrowing requirement high for safety purposes and also mentions the goal of adding to reserves during a certain period and putting downward pressure on rates. There is no conflicting perspective or argument presented.


Passage number 513.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we're talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "That's what we're talking about" is a statement of agreement or affirmation, rather than contention or disagreement. It suggests that the speaker agrees with or supports the previous statement or idea.


Passage number 514.
MR. SCHULTZ. One might term my proposal "a son of a B," Iguess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents Mr. Schultz's proposal, which he humorously refers to as "a son of a B."


Passage number 515.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're talking about $400 million, which Iwouldn't want to exceed in the short run and, say, 7 percent just forpurposes of drawing the path. That's all we have to do at the moment.Then we've got to write a directive which encompasses this. And westill have the choice of whether to put in a low figure and say "orhigher," or to put in a high figure. I tried to rewrite the onestarting with the high figure. I had some bias, I must confess,toward not changing the directive, which we can't meet anyway everymonth. But let me try this wording on you: "After reviewing thequarterly targets for M1-B from September to December at an annualrate of 7 percent (after allowing for NOW accounts) and for M2 at anannual rate of about 10 percent or slightly higher..." And weprobably should put a phrase in there "adopted at the last meeting" orsomething. "...the Committee decided some shortfall in M1-B,generally consistent with phasing into the tentative money growthtargets set for 1982, would be acceptable in a context of declininginterest rates and continued strength of M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing different options and considerations for writing a directive, but there are no conflicting viewpoints or arguments presented.


Passage number 516.
"MS. TEETERS. M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a simple statement or name.


Passage number 517.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 rather, yes. I don't know; this seemsfairly plain to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses their agreement with the statement, indicating that it seems clear to them.


Passage number 518.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't know how that relates to whatwe've been talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley simply states that he doesn't understand the relevance of the previous discussion to their current topic.


Passage number 519.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it relates to what we were talkingabout just now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 520.
MR. FORD. Is that the end of it, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 521.
MR. PARTEE. It couldn't be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Contention or disagreement is present in the passage. This is indicated by the use of the phrase "It couldn't be," which suggests a disagreement or contradiction to a previous statement or assumption.


Passage number 522.
-53-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply mentions Chairman Volcker without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 523.
 Well, it goes on and gives the federalfunds range, but that's--MR. WINN. What's that going to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The excerpt only provides factual information and does not involve any conflicting opinions or disagreements.


Passage number 524.
MR. STERNLIGHT. 7 percent in November and December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a percentage figure without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 525.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the same language; we've got to fillin the blanks. I take it we have a split between 11 to 15 percent and10 to 15 percent, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the percentages without any conflicting statements or opposing views.


Passage number 526.
MS. TEETERS. I would much prefer the 10 to 15.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is just a statement by Ms. Teeters expressing her preference for something. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 527.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The word "All right" is a simple expression that does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 528.
 My feeling in substance isthat we ought to consult at 11 percent, but I--MR. FORD. I don't think we should do this now. With a rangeof 6, then 5, and then 4 points, we're going to be charged with comingevery time closer and closer to managing interest rates. Whether ornot they perceive it correctly, that's what is going to be said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The first speaker expresses their opinion that they should consult at 11 percent, while the second speaker immediately disagrees and expresses their view that they should not do it now.


Passage number 529.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't consider that entirely a bad idea.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this statement. It expresses a subjective opinion but does not address any opposing views or conflicting perspectives.


Passage number 530.
MR. FORD. If that's what you want.SPEAKER(.). Fred, did you hear that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Ford simply agrees to do something after it is suggested to him by the speaker.


Passage number 531.
MR. WALLICH. Why do we need to specify. One sort ofinference [about] interest rates here is the borrowing assumption.The Chairman may consult the Committee, so the funds rate constraintisn't even a binding action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any contention or disagreement. There is a discussion on specifying a certain aspect related to interest rates, but no disagreement is expressed.


Passage number 532.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the substance of your comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given statement is a question asking for clarification or further explanation and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 533.
MR. WALLICH. I'm wondering why we need to expose ourselvesto the charge that we're managing interest rates when we're not doingthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing wonderment and questioning the need to expose oneself to a certain charge.


Passage number 534.
MR. PARTEE. Do you mean just take out the funds ratereference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple clarification question.


Passage number 535.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Take out the whole sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but without the passage, I cannot determine if there is contention or disagreement in it. Please provide the necessary context for me to analyze.


Passage number 536.
MR. WALLICH. Take out the whole sentence.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the following passage. The passage is just providing information stating that Mr. Wallich suggested removing a certain sentence.


Passage number 537.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's certainly widening it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that something is widening. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinion being presented.


Passage number 538.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage indicated by the presence of the word "no" in response to an unspecified statement or question.


Passage number 539.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Nobody is really going to believethat we're indifferent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a belief that nobody will believe the speaker is indifferent. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 540.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what people would concludefrom our taking out the sentence entirely at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement as it refers to uncertainty about people's conclusions rather than conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 541.
MR. BLACK. They'd never get it from Henry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that "They'd never get it from Henry" without any opposition or conflicting viewpoint provided.


Passage number 542.
MR. MORRIS. That we've gone completely monetarist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about a particular economic approach being adopted.


Passage number 543.
-54-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think for sure, at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I think for sure, at this point" does not indicate any disagreement or conflict. It seems to be a personal opinion or thought.


Passage number 544.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage based solely on the given information "MR. PARTEE."


Passage number 545.
 What is it, 75 percent of--MR. MORRIS. Milton Friedman has finally won.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply mentioning a statistic and making an observation about Milton Friedman winning something.


Passage number 546.
MR. FORD. Let's try it and see what happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting trying something to see what happens, without any opposing viewpoint or disagreement mentioned.


Passage number 547.
MS. TEETERS. I still don't like the phrase about phasinginto next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of disagreement or contention. It is simply a statement expressing someone's personal dislike for a specific phrase.


Passage number 548.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think that is essential, butI don't know how other people feel about it. It gives some feeling ofthe dimension of what we're talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker shares their perspective by saying they don't think something is essential, but they also acknowledge their lack of knowledge about other people's feelings. The passage mainly expresses uncertainty rather than disagreement.


Passage number 549.
MR. KEEHN. To restrain ourselves this late in the yearwithout putting that comment in about leading us into next year wouldbe bad. I'd be very much in favor of including those words.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Keehn, expresses his agreement and support for including certain words in a comment.


Passage number 550.
MS. TEETERS. My problem is that [money growth rates] arecoming in so low this year that if we start talking about lowertargets next year--there's already talk around the market of our beinglower-limit monetarists--it gives the impression that we're headingfor the lower limit next year as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a concern or problem expressed by Ms. Teeters regarding the potential impact of low money growth rates and the perception that the organization may be approaching lower limits in the future.


Passage number 551.
MR. KEEHN. Well, as I said earlier, it seems to me that thedirection we're going will tend to put us toward that range. We canphrase it in a way that we are aiming toward that range, notnecessarily that we'll fall under it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Keehn is expressing his opinion and stating that the direction they are going will likely lead them toward a certain range. He also suggests rephrasing it to indicate that they are aiming for that range without necessarily guaranteeing they will fall under it.


Passage number 552.
MS. TEETERS. Well, we're already under for this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. MS. TEETERS is simply stating a fact or observation.


Passage number 553.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage since only the title "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" is provided, which does not present any specific content or information.


Passage number 554.
 Yes, but the language doesn't--MR. KEEHN. The language doesn't say that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 555.
MR. RICE. Well, we're going to be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: unable to make the deadline for the project. We have encountered several unexpected obstacles that have delayed our progress. The team has been working diligently to overcome these challenges, but it simply cannot be done in the given timeframe. We propose extending the deadline by two weeks to ensure that we can deliver a high-quality end product.


Passage number 556.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible] then we would have ashortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 557.
 [Unintelligible] the language--MS. TEETERS. It sounds as if we're trying to pull [money]down so we can make next year's target, and we're already below wherewe want to be next year--or where you guys want to be next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This is indicated by the phrases "sounds as if we're trying to pull [money] down" and "or where you guys want to be next year," suggesting disagreement or conflicting goals between two parties.


Passage number 558.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we have the very real question of what todo about this year's shortfall--whether to add it to next year's rangeor not. We haven't discussed that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting a question or issue to be discussed, but there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 559.
MR. WALLICH. If we move to plain M1, then we're back to theunadjusted and that's right in the middle of the range. So, we'dstart right from there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply stating a fact about starting from the unadjusted midpoint of the range.


Passage number 560.
MR. FORD. We can do a definition shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they can do a definition shift, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 561.
MR. WALLICH. We got rid of the base drift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker states that they got rid of the base drift, implying that it was a positive achievement without any conflicting ideas or opinions being presented.


Passage number 562.
MR. SCHULTZ. We got rid of the base drift.-55-11/17/81SPEAKER(.). Somebody said there is a definition shift.[Secretary's note: Mr. Guffey was leaving the room.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz and the Speaker seem to be discussing technical issues with no opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 563.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [To Mr. Guffey] Are you going to vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 564.
MR. GUFFEY. No. I don't have a vote or I would stay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker states that they do not have a vote, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 565.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we having a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It simply asks a question about whether there is a vote taking place.


Passage number 566.
MR. FORD. Instead of base drift, we're going to usedefinition shift.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It appears to be explaining a decision or plan.


Passage number 567.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we can argue out nextyear's targets here. We have a wide enough range [of views] to startwith. All this is meant to convey is that we're recognizing that 7percent is high and we wouldn't mind being a little lower. That'swhat we're saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply explains that the speaker does not believe they can reach a consensus on next year's targets in their current discussion. They mention that they have a range of views, but there is no evidence of disagreement or contention among those views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 568.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't understand why we want to deviateso drastically from the kind of operational directive we typically setup. In effect, we're using language that doesn't have any meaning tome. And I don't know how it will have any meaning for somebody on theoutside. Why [don't] we go along the lines of what Fred wassuggesting of specifying for the directive that we're seeking M1-Bgrowth of 7 percent between October and December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: Mr. Gramley is expressing disagreement or contention with the proposed operational directive. He does not understand the reason for deviating so drastically and believes the language used does not have any meaning for him or the intended audience. He suggests following Fred's suggestion instead.


Passage number 569.
MR. PARTEE. Or somewhat higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 570.
MR. GRAMLEY. Or somewhat higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Or somewhat higher" is a neutral response indicating that the speaker agrees with the previous statement and suggests a slight possibility of the value being higher.


Passage number 571.
MR. PARTEE. That makes it seem quite consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that something seems consistent, indicating agreement or similarity.


Passage number 572.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage without actually having the passage provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 573.
 Then we know what we're talking aboutCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think you're going to getagreement on that. I'm allergic to [unintelligible] down everymeeting, if I may say so, some target for the next 5 weeks that hasnothing to do with [unintelligible]. It's just the law ofdistribution; we don't come very close to it, whether we're above orbelow it. I'd like to relate the actions in one meeting to theactions of the previous meeting. It's just presentational. We didthat, I guess, last time. I forget what we did last time insubstance, but it was some kind of reiteration of the target at thebeginning of the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the phrases "Well, I don't think you're going to get agreement on that" and "I'm allergic to [unintelligible] down every meeting." These statements indicate a lack of consensus or disagreement among the speakers.


Passage number 574.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, there may not be agreement around thetable, but I like what Lyle and Fred are suggesting for the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there may not be agreement, but the speaker agrees with what Lyle and Fred are suggesting.


Passage number 575.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what "7 percent or higher"means. If we get a shortfall, what do we do then. Does that implyreal aggressiveness. It sounds like it to me. You're saying now thatwe're starting out there; I don't think the staff projection is worthmuch, but I think the probabilities are we could well be below 7percent. Then we'd better be very aggressive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is a series of statements and questions about a certain percentage and the potential need for aggressiveness in response.


Passage number 576.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought it was going to be "7percent or lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It simply states a thought or expectation without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 577.
"-56-11/17/81MR. BOEHNE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is simply mentioning a name and a date, there is no indication of any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 578.
 Say 7 percent--MR. SCHULTZ. Well, if we said "7 percent or somewhat lower,"what does that do for you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no direct contention or disagreement in this passage. The person is asking for clarification or the potential impact of a statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 579.
MR. WALLICH. Then do we accept it if gets higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker's statement suggests that there may be opposition or disagreement regarding accepting something if it gets higher.


Passage number 580.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the problem: Do we accept it ifgets higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is incomplete and does not present any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 581.
MR. WALLICH. I can see myself accepting if it gets higher,but I wouldn't want to set the few steering mechanisms we have toaccomplish that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and personal preference without contradicting or challenging any other statements or views.


Passage number 582.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's highly unlikely it would behigher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is making a prediction or speculation, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting opinion presented.


Passage number 583.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it could happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Well, it could happen" is simply expressing the possibility of something happening, rather than taking a stance or engaging in conflict.


Passage number 584.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who knows in this world. But I think wehave to have agreement that if it's higher, we don't want to doanything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement expresses uncertainty but then presents a conditional agreement.


Passage number 585.
MR. GRAMLEY. That's the one thing I can agree with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 586.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I thought we had some agreement thatif it's lower, we don't want to be all that aggressive either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their belief that if something is lower, they should not be overly aggressive in their actions. There is no opposing viewpoint or contradictory statement provided.


Passage number 587.
MR. GRAMLEY. I certainly can go along with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement and is willing to support the statement.


Passage number 588.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know; it depends on how much lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is expressing uncertainty about a situation, but there is no conflict or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 589.
MS. TEETERS. Isn't there agreement to let the borrowingsslide if it begins to come in low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is an agreement to tolerate or overlook any borrowing that falls below a certain threshold.


Passage number 590.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I said "not all that aggressive."We'd let them slide as they would naturally slide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentious or disagreeable statements. It simply states that the speaker is not aggressive and would let certain things slide.


Passage number 591.
MS. TEETERS. But the question is on what path to constructM1-B, isn't it--whether it's 7 or 8 percent in the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 592.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Tentatively, I thought we'd arrived atconstructing the path on 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the author's tentative thought about constructing the path on 7 percent.


Passage number 593.
MR. WALLICH. Well, if we start with a sufficiently highborrowing assumption, I could go with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is agreeing with the suggestion made by someone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 594.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we're talking about $400 million, as Itake it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker says "No, we're talking about $400 million" which implies that they are disagreeing with something or someone regarding the amount being discussed.


Passage number 595.
MR. PARTEE. That's surely high; that's the borrowingassociated with "C" in the Bluebook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 596.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The problem is that if we don't usethe 7 percent number, we then get into the formulation--if we don'twant to change it in the middle of the quarter--in which the wordingis so fuzzy that nobody really knows what it means. If we want to-57-11/17/81follow a policy of not changing target numbers during each quarter,that would have to become, I think, a consistent policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the potential issue of using a different number and the confusion that it could cause. They also suggest a consistent policy to avoid changing target numbers during each quarter.


Passage number 597.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we had a strong reason forwanting to change it, we would change it, obviously. But I think whatpeople are saying here is that if we met that original target,everybody would be happy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is explaining that if there were a strong reason to change something, they would do so. They also mention that if the original target is met, everyone would be happy. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 598.
MR. CORRIGAN. What if we took your language there--I'm notsure I have it right--and got rid of the business about the generallydeclining interest rates and next year's targets, and just had theinitial reference to 7 percent growth for the quarter. We could putin a phrase that said the Committee sought growth in the monetaryaggregates consistent with the 7 percent, taking account of theshortfall in October, and said nothing else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests a disagreement or contention as Mr. Corrigan is proposing to remove certain parts of the language and make changes to the statement.


Passage number 599.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what that means.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their lack of understanding or knowledge about something.


Passage number 600.
MR. PARTEE. I think that means we'd make up for it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement where Mr. Partee expresses his belief or opinion about making up for something. There is no indication of contention or disagreement with anyone else in the passage.


Passage number 601.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions a person's name without providing any information or context for disagreement.


Passage number 602.
 Well, it means we could go ahead and constructa path--MR. AXILROD. [The staff will] construct the path on whateverthe Committee tells us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a willingness to construct a path based on the instructions of the Committee.


Passage number 603.
MR. CORRIGAN. I was trying to get around the problem somepeople have with declining interest rates and next year's targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that Mr. Corrigan was trying to find a solution to a problem related to declining interest rates and next year's targets. It does not present any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 604.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we could do it by saying "forgetting theshortfall in October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 605.
"MR. GRAMLEY. We could say "while noting the shortfall inOctober.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply mentions that someone (Mr. Gramley) is making a note about a shortfall in October.


Passage number 606.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say "The Committee decided in thelight of the shortfall in October to accept a lower rate for thequarter." That we can say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a decision made by a committee based on a shortfall in October.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 607.
MS. TEETERS. But affirm the target for the last two months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, MS. TEETERS, appears to be asserting that the target has been affirmed for the last two months. However, without further context, it is difficult to determine if there is any disagreement or contention surrounding this statement.


Passage number 608.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that's what we're doing. We'reaccepting the shortfall and saying: Let's get it back on 7 percentfrom now on, if we reasonably can.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 609.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have several precedents for saying weaccept this kind of thing in a context of declining interest rates, orthe reverse, don't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is introducing the possibility of having precedents for accepting a certain behavior in a particular context, while implying that there may be alternative viewpoints or arguments against it.


Passage number 610.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, there were a couple of instances of thatthat I have found.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement about the discovery of instances.


Passage number 611.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, one each way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as "one each way" does not indicate any conflicting or opposing views being presented.


Passage number 612.
MR. AXILROD. It was back in December '80, but that followeda period of rapid growth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a factual piece of information without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 613.
-58-11/17/81MR. CORRIGAN. Didn't we have something like that in thedirective in April or May of last year, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question and does not indicate any disagreement between the speakers.


Passage number 614.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, in May there was a shortfall from the2-month rate specified, and it was accepted in the light of the rapidgrowth in April. They all followed rapid growth; that's the problem.They didn't follow slow growth. In August, Mr. Chairman, followingthe slow growth in July, the Committee just reaffirmed the third-quarter target of 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating some facts about the growth rates in different months.


Passage number 615.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We were expecting at that point a prettyhefty growth in August, like 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about an expectation, there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 616.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms that the statement made is correct.


Passage number 617.
MR. CORRIGAN. And we weren't faced with zero borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 618.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have arrived at wording that says:"The Committee decided in the light of the low rate of growth inOctober of M1-B, that some shortfall in the growth of M1-B from thetarget for the quarter would be acceptable, in a context of declininginterest rates and continued strength in M2." That should be worded,I think, in a conditional way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing their personal wording preference to phrase a statement in a conditional manner, but there is no disagreement or differing opinions presented.


Passage number 619.
 If M2 is--MR. GRAMLEY. You're going to drive the monetarists up thewall with that. In the context of a weakening economy and declininginterest rates, we'll accept shortfalls from our targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response of "we'll accept shortfalls from our targets" indicates agreement with the idea of accepting shortfalls in the context of a weakening economy and declining interest rates. The initial comment about driving the monetarists up the wall seems to be more of a lighthearted remark rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 620.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's in substance what you want to do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of what the speaker believes the listener wants to do. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 621.
MR. GRAMLEY. I know. I'm not a monetarist. I was justthinking about those sensitive ears out there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 622.
MR. WALLICH. Why can't we just say "After taking note of themovements of the aggregates," with no specification as to what theywere, "the Committee decided...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple question inquiring about the absence of a specific specification.


Passage number 623.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: passage?


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 624.
MR. WALLICH. You have to decide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The phrase "you have to decide" suggests that there is a decision to be made, indicating the possibility of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 625.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think that's what we're going todecide.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their belief or assumption about a future decision, indicating uncertainty rather than disagreement or debate.


Passage number 626.
MR. WALLICH. But you're saying here "after noting theshortfall" or "after accepting a shortfall." I don't think we need tosay that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a point of view without any opposing or conflicting statements.


Passage number 627.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the lesser evil is to put the7 percent number down and not worry about the fact that we'rechanging.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the opinion of the speaker, without any conflicting views presented.


Passage number 628.
MR. BLACK. The only alternative is to put a short-term rangein and I don't want to suggest that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply mentions his preference for not suggesting a short-term range.


Passage number 629.
MS. TEETERS. It's easier to say 7 percent for the last twomonths.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is a fact presented by Ms. Teeters. It does not express any disagreement or contention with another party.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 630.
-59-11/17/81MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if I may say so, in response toPresident Solomon's comment: I'm not an expert on public relationsbut the Committee had put down a third-quarter number of 7 percent; itwas missed and I think it was understood. For the fourth quarter anumber of 7 percent also was put down, which will probably be missedand probably will be understood. But if the Committee then decides toput down a November-December number that is also 7 percent, people aregoing to wonder after you've missed that one. This would be yourthird try.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axelrod disagrees with President Solomon's comment about the Committee's understanding of missing the third-quarter number and expresses concern about potential public perception if the Committee also misses the November-December number.


Passage number 631.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is partly what bothers me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing a personal concern or frustration.


Passage number 632.
MR. FORD. We're becoming predictable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is making a statement about their own observation or perception. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 633.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We keep promising these short-term resultsthat we don't get. That is precisely what bothers me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses their frustration and disagreement with the fact that promises of short-term results are made but not achieved.


Passage number 634.
MR. FORD. The market can adjust it to that point, so long aswe stay consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is suggesting that the market has the ability to make adjustments as long as consistency is maintained. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 635.
MR. KEEHN. It seems to me there's a real risk in putting outa [number in the] directive that we know we can't achieve. Apparentlywe're far enough through the period that the opportunity of having the7 percent come in is very remote. If that's the case, are we betteroff using a number which is more achievable and gives us morecredibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and concerns about the risk of setting an unachievable target. They are questioning whether it would be better to use a more achievable number to maintain credibility.


Passage number 636.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not that far off in the sense thatwe'll probably hit the M2 target. And what we're saying in thisformulation is that we agree we will probably miss on M1. That is thepurpose of this [wording].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that they are close to hitting the M2 target and agrees that they will probably miss the M1 target. The purpose of the wording is to convey this agreement.


Passage number 637.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is your projection for now,Steve, 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question asking for someone's projection or prediction.


Passage number 638.
MR. AXILROD. Alternative C is essentially our projection, orwe think it will come in a little lower. That's why we bent thewording that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining the reasoning behind the wording used in alternative C.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 639.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what we're trying to do isstructure a compromise, Si. We're most likely to hit alternative C orbelow, but that's not acceptable to a substantial number of people,Chuck and others. So we've been trying to grope for a compromise inthat area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is disagreement about finding a compromise. It is stated that alternative C or below is not acceptable to a substantial number of people, including Chuck and others. The use of phrases such as "trying to grope for a compromise" also suggests that there is difficulty in reaching a consensus.


Passage number 640.
 If we go back to your kind of language, even though it'sconfusing to the public, we'd still have to have a privateunderstanding on how much shortfall--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there isn't any what you callprivate understanding. Yes, we have to set a reserve path, whichwe've just tentatively set; there's no obscurity about it. The way toavoid these things in the future--but it would get us into otherproblems--is to say we're setting the reserve path at X, which weconsider consistent with 7 percent. We are not promising we're goingto make 7 percent; that's just where we're setting the reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply explaining a concept and stating their position on setting a reserve path.


Passage number 641.
MR. SCHULTZ. What is the great difficulty with using 7percent--and that sets the reserve path--and then using the borrowing-60-11/17/81assumption and the fed funds constraint to take care of the fact thatwe are going to miss that one way or the other.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement evident in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply discussing a potential difficulty and suggesting a solution.


Passage number 642.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we're trying to do, as Iunderstand it. I think we have agreement on the substance; it's justhow to describe it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, the speaker states that they believe there is agreement on the substance but may have difficulty in finding the right description. There is no indication of disagreement or contention in this statement.


Passage number 643.
MR. SCHULTZ. My problem is my simple mind; I don't have anydifficulty with what I just said. But maybe others do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, states that he personally does not have any difficulty with what he just said, but acknowledges that others may have a different perspective or struggle to understand. This does not indicate disagreement or contention; rather, it shows an understanding of potential differences in viewpoints.


Passage number 644.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you think you can give language for adirective, if I understood you correctly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on whether they understood correctly if the other person can provide language for a directive.


Passage number 645.
MR. SCHULTZ. I just would use the number 7 percent in astraightforward directive--the normal kind that we have used before.I'd use the numbers for M1-B and M2 that are under alternative B,which are 7 percent and 11 percent or something like that. And thenI'd put in a fed funds constraint, which I would prefer at 11 percentbecause it's very difficult to know what is going to transpire in thisvery short period of time and I think it's worthwhile to confer at 11percent. I'd start with a borrowing assumption of $400 million,recognizing that there is every likelihood that it will come down andnone that it would go up because we would be generally tolerant ofsome additional strength in the aggregates, which none of us feels isgoing to happen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is simply stating his preferences and suggestions.


Passage number 646.
MS. TEETERS. What about the language you had a minute agothat we would provide reserves in the two-month period that would beconsistent with a 7 percent rate of growth in the money supply. Shiftit from a pinpoint to a reserve supply in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by MS. TEETERS is simply asking about the language used regarding the provision of reserves in the two-month period.


Passage number 647.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's just the traditional form.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is stating a fact about the traditional form without presenting any contrasting views or opinions.


Passage number 648.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 649.
 And say we're going to hit the money supply at7 percent, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the wording we have--that weprovide reserves consistent with the 7 percent. This says "behaviorof reserve aggregates." We can do it just by putting in thosenumbers. That's right. And every month we're putting in numbers thatwe aren't going to make. We can do that; that's simple enough. But Idon't think it conveys any more information.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a method of manipulating the money supply.


Passage number 650.
MR. SCHULTZ. A number has two purposes. One is a target;then there is a number which is used to construct a nonborrowedreserves path. So, it has two functions. And it seems to me thateven if we really don't think conditions are such that we will make itas a target, it is useful in setting the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents two functions of a number and discusses its usefulness in setting a path.


Passage number 651.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question. The more I look atthis, the more I think we're arguing over nothing. We act as if theonly thing people read is this paragraph. Whatever we say we're goingto have to describe in the rest of the policy record, and we'represumably going to describe it in more or less similar terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply reflects the speaker's belief that the argument is pointless and that the details will be described in similar terms in the policy record.


Passage number 652.
MR. PARTEE. How about something like "While taking note ofthe moderate shortfall in growth of the aggregates during October"--and it was only a moderate shortfall--"the Committee continues to seek-61-11/17/81expansion at the rate of about 7 percent in M1-B and 10-1/2 percent inM2 in the period ahead." And that says we gave up October.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the growth of aggregates in October and indicating the Committee's continued goals for expansion in the future.


Passage number 653.
MR. MORRIS. While noting it and ignoring it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that Mr. Morris took note of something and chose to ignore it.


Passage number 654.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 655.
 Yes, taking note, we continue to seek--MS. TEETERS. Don't you have M2 growth too low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Yes, taking note, we continue to seek" indicates agreement or acknowledgement, and the statement "Don't you have M2 growth too low" is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 656.
MR. PARTEE. I didn't have the Bluebook open right there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker did not have the Bluebook open in that moment.


Passage number 657.
 Ithink 10-1/2 percent is about--MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement by Ms. Teeters seems to be a personal opinion or belief about the percentage.


Passage number 658.
 11-1/4 percent is--MR. CORRIGAN. I didn't say it very well, Governor Partee,but that's the gist of what I was trying to say before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 659.
MR. GRAMLEY. We'd have to drop out the language "seeksbehavior of reserve aggregates." Or maybe we wouldn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a potential change to the language being used.


Passage number 660.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the traditional way of doing it. Idon't think it makes any difference in substance; we'll describe itall anyway [in the policy record]. But it gives you less informationand we're still back to this business about jumping up and down everytime we have a 2-month target or a 5- or 6-week target over which wedon't have much control.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the traditional way of doing something and expressing the speaker's opinion without any conflicting viewpoints mentioned.


Passage number 661.
 But if you can rationalize it and say that'swhere the reserve path--MR. WALLICH. How about "set the reserve path designed toachieve X percent growth".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 662.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what we say ordinarily.That's the traditional form.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a commonly accepted belief or traditional form of expression.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 663.
MR. PARTEE. I really don't think this is a good month to tryto reform the way we state the directive. It's in the middle of aquarter, as you said before; it's at the end of a year; and it's in aperiod where we're going to fall short of our growth for the year as awhole. And we just shouldn't be doing fancy things with the directiveright now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Partee, disagrees with attempting to reform the way the directive is stated in the current month. He provides reasons for his disagreement, such as being in the middle of a quarter, nearing the end of the year, and experiencing a period of expected growth shortfall.


Passage number 664.
 If we want to do it, we can do it in January and start outa new year with a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we don't have this kind of problem inJanuary--at the December meeting--because we're starting a new periodfor which we have no targets. So, we don't have the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the timing of a potential action and stating that there would be no problem with it in January because it is a new period with no targets.


Passage number 665.
MR. BALLES.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 666.
 Does anybody recall how we handled this a yearago when we went through some gyrations in order to get the monetarygrowth rates cranked down so that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we presented a quarterlytarget a year ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is a simple inquiry about a past event.


Passage number 667.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think so either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 668.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The difference now is that we have putthese things on a quarterly basis, and we did that with a purpose inmind--maybe it was only in my mind--which was to be a little-62-11/17/81consistent over the quarter. The concept was for the meeting in themiddle of the quarter to review the target we already set for thequarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their reasoning for putting these things on a quarterly basis and emphasizes their own personal purpose for doing so.


Passage number 669.
 Now, this is a kind of reversion to taking a look at it--MS. TEETERS. I like Chuck's language. Governor Partee'slanguage finesses all of our problems and we've had enough discussionhere, I think, that the Manager will know what it is we're trying toachieve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 670.
MR. PARTEE. We could be more specific as to the time periodby saying "for the remainder of the year" instead of "in the periodahead."SPEAKER(.). That is five weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 671.
MR. SCHULTZ. No, it's almost seven.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that it is almost seven, without any conflicting or opposing viewpoints presented.


Passage number 672.
MR. PARTEE. It's essentially November and December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 673.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we're arguing aboutany substance. As a matter of form, I don't like it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 674.
 But ifeverybody else likes it--MS. TEETERS. What's the funds rate formulation, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 675.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, I didn't specify that. We were just talkingabout directive language. The specs the Chairman will recommend tous, I'm sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply providing clarification about the topic of the conversation.


Passage number 676.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on that, I would prefer the 11 to 15percent just to get a consultation at around 11 percent. If we wereabsolutely symmetrical around where we now are, we'd make it 10-1/2 to15-1/2 percent, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 677.
MR. GRAMLEY. It gives us a little breathing room.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is stating an observation or opinion about a situation, but there is no opposing viewpoint or conflict present.


Passage number 678.
MR. BOEHNE. Why don't we make it 10 to 16, Schultz. Betteryet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne suggests a change in the age range, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 679.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 680.
 It's the bottom end--MR. PARTEE. 16 percent, ha, ha, ha.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

While there is laughter indicated by "ha, ha, ha," there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 681.
MS. TEETERS. It's only been a month since it was there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply describing that a month has passed since something occurred.


Passage number 682.
MR. PARTEE. A lot has happened in a month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that a lot has happened in a month without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 683.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see how anybody can take anyoffense at 10-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent. That is absolutely thetraditional--I'm talking about the outside reader. A Committee membercan, maybe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 684.
MR. PARTEE. That centers it on 13 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Partee is a factual statement that does not imply any disagreement or differing opinions.


Passage number 685.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's centered on where we are, which iswhat we've been doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the focus is on the current state or location and the actions taken.


Passage number 686.
-63-11/17/81MR. WALLICH. Well, then it is, what--2-1/2 points below thediscount rate. That must mean that there's practically onlyfrictional borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply making a statement about the difference between the discount rate and the current borrowing rate.


Passage number 687.
MR. AXILROD. It's not lower than where the discount rate is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 688.
MR. WALLICH. Then it's very unstable already.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Wallich without any opposing views or contradictions being portrayed.


Passage number 689.
MR. FORD. Yes, Henry, but we'll send you a recommendationon the discount rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges Henry's statement and agrees to send a recommendation on the discount rate.


Passage number 690.
MR. BALLES. I've already sent one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is providing information rather than expressing a conflicting opinion or engaging in a debate.


Passage number 691.
MR. WALLICH. That's something one would like to be able todecide while not under the pressure of a collapsing funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a desire to make a decision without pressure.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 692.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that goes to the reserve path, Ithink, not to--. Well, one can argue that we might want to consult ata higher rate. I'd just as soon consult at a higher rate myself. ButI don't think where we put this number is going to affect where thefunds rate goes; it affects where we consult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker initially suggests that the reserve path might be the appropriate course of action, while another speaker argues that consulting at a higher rate could be a better option. This indicates a disagreement or difference of opinion on the matter.


Passage number 693.
MR. WALLICH. Well, that's what I had in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich simply states what he had in mind, without any conflicting views or opinions.


Passage number 694.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, we never consult unless that bottom levelis broken. We never consult just because it drops and touches thenumber and pops back up. I tell you: The funds rate is a little over13 percent now, and if we're breaking 11 percent in a 5-week period,that's really moving down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact and opinion by Mr. Schultz regarding the funds rate and the significance of it dropping below certain levels.


Passage number 695.
MS. TEETERS. We've had informal agreements before to consultbefore we hit the bottom or the top of the range. We could do thatthis time also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Teeters suggests that they have previously made agreements to consult before they reach certain points, and she proposes doing the same thing again this time.


Passage number 696.
MR. WALLICH. We certainly shouldn't wait a week andestablish the average that begins breaking the lower level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement expressing a suggestion or opinion without any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 697.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am sensitive to your point, but we stillhave to put some number in here. In fact, we may consult before weget to that number. That's always an option. We can consult any timewe want to consult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting considering the other person's point but also mentions the possibility of consulting before deciding on a number.


Passage number 698.
MR. BLACK. And you can control that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement. This statement simply states that "you" have the ability to control something.


Passage number 699.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a certain amount of control overthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not express any form of contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker has some level of control over something.


Passage number 700.
MR. WALLICH. Well, do you feel constrained from consultingbefore we reach that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 701.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Not for that reason alone. I onlyfeel constrained in the sense of wanting to consult if there weregenuine confusion over what we should do, whatever these numbers are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not have any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker does not feel constrained for a specific reason and only feels the need to consult in case of genuine confusion.


Passage number 702.
MS. TEETERS. If we had an M1-B target of 7 percent forNovember-December, an M2 target of 11-1/2 or 11-3/4 percent, the fundsrange of 10-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent, and initial borrowings at $400million, does that cover what we've been [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 703.
-64-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am not in favor of thatformulation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses personal disapproval of a formulation without presenting opposing or contradicting viewpoints.


Passage number 704.
 But if everybody else loves that formulation--MR. CORRIGAN. What was that first alternate directivelanguage you had earlier in the meeting about five hours ago. The onethat we didn't have [in front of us].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only includes a question and a request for information.


Passage number 705.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 706.
 It said the Committee had set aside--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the Committee had set aside something related to Chairman Volcker.


Passage number 707.
 It was essentially this, just astraightforward--MR. CORRIGAN. No. There was some nuance in there thatallowed you to keep the 7 percent quarterly number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that there was some nuance in the information that allowed for the 7 percent quarterly number to be maintained.


Passage number 708.
MR. AXILROD. I think it was "a somewhat higher growth ratewould be acceptable and would be consistent with the quarterly targetspreviously [adopted].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a neutral comment made by Mr. Axilrod, expressing his opinion about an acceptable growth rate.


Passage number 709.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It puts in the "higher." It says thelower one won't be acceptable at 7 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the "higher" option will be accepted and that the "lower" one, which is not specified, will not be acceptable at 7 percent.


Passage number 710.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of disagreement or contention. It simply states that Mr. Axilrod responded with "Yes" to a question or statement that is not provided.


Passage number 711.
 It had a second sentence that it could behigher if it was consistent with the quarterly targets or somethinglike that--MR. CORRIGAN. But isn't the presumption clear enough therethat if it's lower, we would respond the same way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a conversation where one person is seeking clarification on a particular point.


Passage number 712.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think so, but that's why I'm notcrazy about it. This one only had 10-1/2 percent for M2 as Mr.Axilrod wrote it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 713.
MS. TEETERS. But is 10-1/2 percent on M2 consistent with 7percent on M1, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response provided by MS. TEETERS suggests that she is seeking clarification or confirmation regarding the consistency between the interest rates of M2 and M1.


Passage number 714.
MR. AXILROD. Well, for the quarter, we thought it would be alittle higher than 10-1/2 percent; it could be 11 percent. But theCommittee's decision was 10 percent or a little higher last time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply explaining that they had initially estimated the quarter to be a little higher than 10-1/2 percent, but the Committee's decision was 10 percent or slightly higher.


Passage number 715.
MS. TEETERS. For the quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 716.
MR. AXILROD. For the quarter. So, it's not inconsistentwith that at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "So, it's not inconsistent with that at all" is simply providing further clarification or agreement with a previous statement.


Passage number 717.
MR. SCHULTZ. We might go with a straight crap shoot and callit 7 and 11.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a possible course of action.


Passage number 718.
MR. PARTEE. That's what I have: 7 percent for M1-B and 11percent for M2 for the remainder of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of numbers without any indication of opposing views or contradictory opinions.


Passage number 719.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's settle this federal fundsrange. All these cosmetics don't amount to a hill of beans in someway, since we explain it all in the [policy record]. Who wants to putthe bottom at 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the federal funds range should be settled and emphasizing that the details can be found in the policy record. The statement about putting the bottom at 11 percent seems to be a question, rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 720.
MR. GRAMLEY. The fed funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states "MR. GRAMLEY. The fed funds rate."


Passage number 721.
-65-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The bottom of the fed funds range. Well,we have a majority there, clearly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions a majority agreeing on the bottom of the fed funds range without indicating any conflicting opinions or opposition.


Passage number 722.
MR. PARTEE. How am I going to [contend] with having aconsultation at 11 percent. Usually I'm against that kind of thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker expresses their concern about having a consultation at a high interest rate, but there is no indication of disagreement or contention with anyone else.


Passage number 723.
MR. CORRIGAN. Why don't you ask who will accept 10-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple question being asked by Mr. Corrigan.


Passage number 724.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the alternative is 10-1/2 percent.Big deal. How many would prefer 10-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The speaker is presenting an alternative option of 10-1/2 percent and questioning how many people would prefer it.


Passage number 725.
MR. PARTEE. I would prefer it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply expresses his preference.


Passage number 726.
MS. TEETERS. Why not 10-1/2 percent with a consultation at11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states possible interest rates (10-1/2 percent and 11 percent) and suggests a consultation for further discussion.


Passage number 727.
MR. BOEHNE. I like Chuck's: Consult at 11 percent; 7percent [for M-1B]; and 10 percent [for M2].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indications of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the preferences or views of Mr. Boehne regarding the percentages for consultation (11 percent), M-1B (7 percent), and M2 (10 percent).


Passage number 728.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only problem I see with 11 percent,which I prefer in fact on the lower end, is where to put the top. A16 percent figure looks a little ridiculous to me.SPEAKER(.). You've got it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal preference for an 11 percent figure, finding it preferable to a 16 percent figure.


Passage number 729.
MS. TEETERS. We can consult at 11; it's the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "We can consult at 11; it's the same thing" does not indicate any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 730.
MR. GRAMLEY. To maintain our credibility in fighting againstinflation at 16 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating the need to maintain credibility in fighting against inflation at 16 percent.


Passage number 731.
\ CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How about 11 to 15 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 732.
MR. WALLICH. How about 11 to 16 and consult at 15.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply suggesting consulting at 15 in the conversation.


Passage number 733.
MR. SCHULTZ. But, Henry, that's symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 734.
 You don't wantto be that--MR. WALLICH. Sometimes we can afford to be symmetrical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 735.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. An 11 to 15 percent range happens to becompletely symmetrical around the present level of 13.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply providing information about a range that is symmetrically centered around a specific level.


Passage number 736.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you want a show of hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a simple question asking for individuals to physically indicate their agreement or preference by raising their hand. There is no room for contention or disagreement in this statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 737.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Is that acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, that is acceptable. However, it would be more helpful if you provide the passage for further evaluation.


Passage number 738.
MR. PARTEE. Acceptable is what you want.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that "acceptable is what you want," which implies agreement.


Passage number 739.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Acceptable at this point. All right.Now, I take it there's agreement that we're going to set a path on the7 percent and we probably won't be moving that discretionarilydownwards very readily because we haven't much room to do so. If itcomes in weak, it will go down by itself starting at a borrowing levelof around $400 million. I think that's where we've been. So, theonly thing that remains is that we can just use this traditionalformat and say 7 percent for M1 and whatever we say for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting information and stating that there seems to be agreement on setting a path for the 7 percent.


Passage number 740.
MR. SCHULTZ. 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "11 percent." It is a straightforward numerical value.


Passage number 741.
-66-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 11 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 742.
MR. KEEHN. Well, when we say 7 percent, is it going to bethe wording that's here of September to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for clarification about the wording.


Passage number 743.
MS. TEETERS. October to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Cannot answer without more context or information about what is being discussed in the passage.


Passage number 744.
MR. KEEHN. Or November and December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions two possible options (November and December) without indicating any disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 745.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can put the phrase that Chuck had infront of it: "The Committee noted the shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase mentioned is simply attributed to the Committee's observation of a shortfall.


Passage number 746.
"MR. PARTEE. The moderate shortfall. It's the only monthwhen we had just a moderate shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement made by someone referring to a specific month with a moderate shortfall.


Passage number 747.
MR. KEEHN. Yes, but I think we talked about November andDecember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage indicates that Mr. Keen agrees with the previous statement about discussing November and December.


Passage number 748.
MR. PARTEE. Say "for the remainder of the year" so that wedon't have to say November to December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a phrase change for convenience and efficiency, not challenging or opposing someone else's view.


Passage number 749.
MR. WALLICH. Did we overshoot on M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question asking whether there was an overshoot on M3.


Passage number 750.
MR. PARTEE. We don't specify M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. Mr. Partee simply states a fact without any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 751.
MR. BLACK. Don't forget bank credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement.


Passage number 752.
MR. WALLICH. A higher aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is a statement made by "Mr. Wallich" and there is no indication of any disagreement or contention within the passage. It is a simple statement of opinion or observation.


Passage number 753.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Committee, after noting a moderateshortfall in M1". Yes, but turn it around.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 754.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd say "a symmetrically moderateshortfall in M1 and an overrun in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement about the potential mismatch between M1 and M2.


Passage number 755.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we didn't have an overrun in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply denies the presence of an overrun in M2.


Passage number 756.
MR. PARTEE. No, we didn't. We expected 12.9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply states a fact.


Passage number 757.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the directive said 10 percent forthe quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states the directive, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 758.
MR. GRAMLEY. In the earlier part, in the general paragraphsof the directive, there needs to be some reference to the eliminationof the surcharge. You have a sentence here which is "On October 30the Board of Governors announced a reduction in the Federal Reservebasic discount rate from 14 to 13 percent." I would think we'd alsowant to add that "on November 16 the Board announced the eliminationof the surcharge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is suggesting an addition to the text, specifically mentioning the elimination of the surcharge on November 16.


Passage number 759.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm glad somebody reads that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses satisfaction and appreciation for someone reading something.


Passage number 760.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, without raising any furtherproblems for the Committee, with Governor Partee's addition of "afternoting the shortfall" does the Committee want to say after the 7percent "or somewhat more".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a suggestion made by Governor Partee and asking for the committee's input.


Passage number 761.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I don't think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The statement is not a claim or argument that can be agreed or disagreed with, as it only expresses a personal opinion or uncertainty.


Passage number 762.
-67-11/17/81MR. PARTEE. I just said "about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement indicated in this passage as it only mentions someone saying "about" without further context.


Passage number 763.
"MR. WALLICH. When we say "somewhat more," does that mean wefreeze the funds rate at that level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a question, and there is no opposing view or conflicting opinion being presented.


Passage number 764.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we want to say "somewhatmore" especially because of what happens if it's somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion and potential consequences without directly challenging or contradicting anything.


Passage number 765.
MS. TEETERS. Why can't we say "about".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or ideas that are in conflict or disagreement with each other.


Passage number 766.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I said "about" 7 and 11 percent. "Around"is all right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply clarifies that using the term "around" to describe the range of 7 and 11 percent is acceptable.


Passage number 767.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This directive will get known as the7 to 11.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate contention or disagreement. It simply states that the directive will be known by a certain name.


Passage number 768.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What the directive will say is: TheCommittee, after noting a moderate shortfall in growth in M1-B inOctober from the target path set at the last meeting,...
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence is simply stating what the directive will say without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 769.
"MR. WALLICH. And the continued high level of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the continued high level of M2.


Passage number 770.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "... seeks behavior of reserve aggregatesconsistent with growth of M1-B from October to December at an annualrate of 7 percent (after allowance for...Now accounts) and with growthin M2 at an annual rate of around 11 percent." And we're at 11 to 15percent on the federal funds range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage is stating the target growth rates for M1-B and M2 without any disagreement or contention evident in the text.


Passage number 771.
MR. WALLICH. I think we're making it needlessly difficult bypointing to M2 as the balancing item that keeps us where we are. Whydon't we just play down M2 in this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing his opinion and suggesting a different approach, but there is no direct disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 772.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is just the way it was the last time.They get equal weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 773.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 774.
 Yes, but now we've mentioned the shortfall inone and said nothing about the other except--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other was within the target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention between two parties. It is simply stating that the shortfall in one aspect has been mentioned, but nothing has been said about the other aspect except that it was within the target.


Passage number 775.
MR. PARTEE. We were expecting apparently a higher Octobernumber than we got by a couple of points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 776.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were expecting a higher number thanwhat we got and we were 0.7 below the figure we mentioned in thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply reflects a comparison between the expected number and the actual number mentioned in the directive.


Passage number 777.
MR. PARTEE. It was surprising, considering all saverscertificates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 778.
MR. SCHULTZ. Let's vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the suggestion of voting without providing any context or indication of opposing views.


Passage number 779.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm in favor of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The speaker clearly states that they are in favor of something, indicating agreement rather than disagreement or contention.


Passage number 780.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Altmann called to my attention that we havehad more than one change in the surcharge since the last meeting.We'd have to do more than put in this suggested elimination, so Iwithdraw my suggestion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley simply acknowledges Mr. Altmann's point and decides to withdraw his suggestion based on that information.


Passage number 781.
-68-11/17/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, there's no mention of a surcharge.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is no mention of a surcharge, without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 782.
MS. TEETERS. Why don't we put both of them in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 783.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can delegate to the Secretaryto put in a mention of the surcharge in the appropriate place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage suggests a suggestion or proposal to delegate a task to the Secretary, indicating agreement or consensus rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 784.
MR. PARTEE. How about "eliminated it in two stages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward statement of a suggestion or proposal.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 785.
"MR. KEEHN. Are you dropping from the directive the commentsabout next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Keehn is asking if the comments about next year are being dropped from the directive. This indicates that there may be disagreement or contention about including those comments in the directive.


Passage number 786.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation:


Passage number 787.
MR. PARTEE. Except to the extent that they're in thatparagraph that indicates the preliminary specifications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply making a statement about the preliminary specifications.


Passage number 788.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MS. TEETERS" alone. As it is simply a short phrase, it does not provide enough information to determine if there is any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 789.
 Yes, it does--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is a statement made by Chairman Volcker, so there is no indication of contention or disagreement within the passage itself.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 790.
 Now that we have labored over this thingthat nobody is going to see for six weeks and until it's no longerrelevant any more--MR. SCHULTZ. And will be known as the Federal Reserve crapshoot when it comes out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The use of phrases like "this thing that nobody is going to see for six weeks" and "Federal Reserve crapshoot" suggests a negative opinion or disagreement about the importance or value of the mentioned document.


Passage number 791.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage "MR. ALTMANN." The passage is simply stating a name or title.


