Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 31, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., on Tuesday, March 31, 1981 at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, ChairmanMr. Solomon, Vice ChairmanMr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford, and Winn, Alternate Members ofthe Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Petersen, General CounselMr. Oltman, Deputy General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns, Danforth, R. Davis, Ettin, Keir,Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Smith 1/, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of Governors1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to amend the Authorization forForeign Currency Operations and left following the action to reaffirmthe agreement to "warehouse" foreign currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the individuals present at the meeting.


Passage number 2.
3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A low; it was a high in the numericalsense, a low in reality. That was what--three or four weeks ago now,I suppose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage describes a situation without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 3.
MS. GREENE. Just before the Bundesbank's move, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the timing of the Bundesbank's move.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since then, it has come off that very lowvalley. The market has continued erratic, but I don't think there'sany great judgment that there was much to be done about it. Thetendency was not cumulative in one direction or another. At the sametime, we've entered into some discussions with the Treasury as to whattheir views might be on intervention. They're going to start out, asall new [Administrations] do anyway, by not being very--let me put itthe other way around--by being quite cautious on whether interventionis useful or not. It remains to be seen. I don't think there's anybig question here that a variety of influences have suggested thatintervention under the current circumstances is not serving a terriblyuseful purpose. And there hasn't been any intervention except foryesterday, for what--three weeks or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their own perspective and observations without contradicting or debating any specific claims or viewpoints. They are discussing the market's performance and the cautious approach of the Treasury regarding intervention.


Passage number 5.
MS. GREENE. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Ms. Greene simply agrees with a statement without expressing any contrasting opinion or disagreement.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The markets have been quite erratic on aday-to-day basis, but have shown no particular trend movement in onedirection or another after coming off the valley or the peak,whichever way one puts it. I myself don't see any particular need forany systematic intervention, in the near future in any event. We'llsee what happens in the market, but it has been rather trendless andfeatureless as I see it, though not featureless in the sense thatthere is quite a lot of short-term volatility. But that's the natureof the beast at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is simply describing the current state of the markets and expressing the speaker's perspective on the situation.


Passage number 7.
MS. TEETERS. But you would still expect [the Desk] tointervene on disorderly markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states an expectation that the Desk would intervene on disorderly markets.


Passage number 8.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is a disorderly market. That isalways the question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply posing a question to the reader without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 9.
MS. TEETERS. I realize that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clearly stated disagreements or contentions. It seems to be a neutral statement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement or contention in the passage. The mention of "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" implies a potential debate or differing opinions among individuals regarding this person or their actions. However, without additional context, it is difficult to determine the exact nature of the disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 11.
 No, this is not a--MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker's statement is cut off by Mr. Partee's unintelligible response, indicating a disagreement or interruption in the conversation.


Passage number 12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As with any new Administration, in termsof their own views, they are going to have to test their way inspecific circumstances. We had a circumstance yesterday which wasobviously of a highly exceptional character. But just forgettingabout that aspect--though that's an important aspect--I myself do notsee intervention as serving any particular purpose at the moment. Andwe haven't done any, so we haven't got a test of it. By somemeasures, I guess the market has been disorderly. By measures that wewould have considered appropriate ten years ago, certainly, it hasbeen disorderly. I think there's a question whether it is disorderlyin the present context of things. That there is some inherentvolatility here is, unfortunately, a fact of life. I'm not sure howit will settle down most easily, frankly--with an official presence orwithout.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own views and uncertainties about intervention in the given circumstances. They acknowledge the exceptional nature of the recent event but also question the necessity and effectiveness of intervention. There is no disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented here.


Passage number 13.
3/31/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't have, possibly, a fullhistorical understanding of the policy [that was in effect] before Iwas at the Treasury. During the time I was there, it was understoodthat the Desk had flexibility [to intervene] in relatively modestamounts to counter disorderly markets, using its own judgment, andkeeping both the Treasury and, of course, the Chairman informed. Andit was understood that on larger interventions there would beauthorization. I don't know whether we're moving in a direction nowwhere, even on modest efforts to counter disorderly markets, there hasto be specific authorization from both the Treasury and the Chairman,even in regard just to the use of Federal Reserve resources asdistinct from the joint use of Federal Reserve and Treasury resources.I don't know what the situation was prior to my joining the Treasury.Was it that clean-cut that there had to be specific authorization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have a full understanding of the policy that was in effect before they joined the Treasury and they are unsure if specific authorization was required for interventions in the past.


Passage number 14.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we've gone through every possiblevariant and permutation and combination of this through the years.Sometimes there has been [no intervention] and [that policy] wasmaintained for a considerable period of time. Sometimes there hasbeen intervention with rather specific authorization each time andsometimes there has been a more flexible view. We will try to workthis out a little over the next month or two in terms of consistencywith the Treasury's views. There is no definitive answer to thatquestion at the moment, so far as they're concerned. But as apractical matter, I don't see any urgent requirements at the moment.Now, that can always change on a day-by-day basis, and that is whatwill give us the grist for practical judgments in working this out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no evident contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing different approaches and perspectives on a particular issue and states that there is no definitive answer at the moment. However, they express their confidence in not having any urgent requirements currently.


Passage number 15.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Have there been periods of time,Paul, when there has been modest intervention to counter disorderlymarkets just using Federal Reserve resources.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The question is asking if there have been periods of time when the Federal Reserve has intervened to counter disorderly markets using its own resources.


Passage number 16.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The phrase "Oh, yes" does not indicate any disagreement or contention, rather it could denote agreement or emphasis.


Passage number 17.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the given passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 18.
 Generally in the past--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I said "yes" hastily; I'm sure there havebeen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: misunderstandings or disagreements in the past.


Passage number 19.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes. Generally in the past, until after theearly 1970s, the Treasury didn't have substantial balances of its own.So, most of the intervention was for the Federal Reserve accountexclusively, both in terms of building up very tiny balances and interms of all drawings on the swap lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact about the Treasury's past practices.


Passage number 20.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think one can find every combination inpast history in terms of what has been done. But it has beenexceptional to have the Treasury participate to the extent it hasparticipated in the last four years or so. Nevertheless, the questionhas been a repeated one going back to the earliest days of floating[rates], when I participated from the other side [at the Treasury].Should intervention be joint, separate, or should the Treasury do itin the first instance or should we do it in the first instance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It discusses the history and different options for intervention, but there is no disagreement expressed.


Passage number 21.
MR. BALLES. You started all this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage mentions that someone named Mr. Balles started something, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 22.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. John Balles raised this question of astudy. Let me suggest a procedure, if it's satisfactory. I'm not3/31/81sure whether you all are aware that some of these things were touchedupon in a System study, the results of which were sent out a fewmonths ago. Why don't you just say a word or two about that, Mr.Truman. Describe the nature of that study and its limitations forthis purpose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a question raised by John Balles and suggesting a procedure to address it. There is a mention of a study and a request for Mr. Truman to provide some information about it, but there is no indication of contradiction or debate.


Passage number 23.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, the study was actually done in connectionwith the special System objectives for the calendar year 1979. [Theintent] was to encourage economists within the System to look again atthe floating exchange rate regime and how it had been functioning.Although there was some talk of encouraging staffs at the variousBanks and the Board to identify a broad range of issues, there wasn'tan attempt, as is often true in such a case, to arrive at a singleconclusion. The result was that a large numbers of papers--I thinknumbering in the 40s--were prepared by various people, and they weresummarized in the paper that was circulated to you earlier this year.One important section of that paper, in this context, had to do withthe question of exchange rate determination. I would argue from aneconomic point of view that one has to resolve that issue in one'smind before one resolves questions about the effectiveness ofintervention. I think it's fair to say, based on the paper--and infact the concluding section says this--that the jury is still out inthe sense that it is not entirely clear in purely economic terms whatthe effectiveness of intervention would be. You will find, though,among economists within the System, that both views are supported.And there are lengthy articulations of what assumptions they makeabout the substitutability of assets denominated in differentcurrencies. The paper was put together by Jeff Shafer and Joanna Grayand Mike Keran and was in a form a little different than often isdone; it was issued subsequently as a discussion paper by the Boardstaff. But it might be instructive. In fact, one of the reasons whywe put together the paper was that it did present a reasonable reviewor survey on these topics without trying to come to a detailedconclusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the process and results of a study on the floating exchange rate regime and the effectiveness of intervention.


Passage number 24.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is extremely difficult to identify anypeculiar results from intervention per se economically. Interventionserves a number of purposes, some of which are inherentlyimmeasurable, such as cooperating with a foreign central bank andmaintaining some spirit of harmony in markets, and some of which moredirectly affect markets, such as a psychological objective as to theintentions of the government in combination with or apart from otherelements of an economic program. Against that background, what Iwould suggest is that you take a look at that work, which has alreadybeen done. And we can consider next time, having looked at that andrefreshed our minds about what has been done, whether we can identifymore precisely what additional work, if any, might be desirable. Ifthat's acceptable, we'll have a little discussion of it at the nextmeeting in that context. It may be that there are things to be lookedat and we should have a go at it again; or we may conclude that thereisn't much more to be done. But those studies are not fresh in mymind, to say the least. In fact, I would say I have not read them andsome of the rest of you may be in that same position.We have to ratify the transactions, if we're finished withthis topic. Do we have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply discussing the difficulties of identifying the results of intervention and suggesting that the group should review existing studies before deciding on any further action.


Passage number 25.
MR. PARTEE. So move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It appears to be a straightforward statement or request from Mr. Partee.


Passage number 26.
3/31/81MR. BOEHNE. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states the date and the name of the person speaking without any conflicting opinions or differing views.


Passage number 27.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Do you have anyrecommendations, Ms. Greene.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Without objection" indicates that there is agreement or consensus among the people present. The question asking for recommendations does not imply disagreement either.


Passage number 28.
MS. GREENE. [Recommendation--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. GREENE is simply stating her recommendation and directing the reader to refer to the Appendix for further information.


Passage number 29.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was that concluding comment. I amafraid my attention wandered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion or lack of understanding about a concluding comment.


Passage number 30.
MS. GREENE. It was that we do not yet know whether theRiksbank will request us to renew the increase [in their swap linethat was enacted last year]. In the event that they do, we probablywill hear about it before the next FOMC meeting and we would like tobe able at that time to recommend by wire that the renewal beapproved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 31.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can take an action, if we wantto. We can't wait until our next meeting, which comes [after] theexpiration of the [increase in the] line. I don't know that this is abig issue; but I can just as easily wait and see whether they requesta renewal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the possibility of taking action and acknowledges that they can't wait until the next meeting to address the issue. They also express uncertainty about whether it is a significant issue and suggest waiting to see if a request for renewal is made.


Passage number 32.
MS. GREENE. We thought they might wish to talk about it atthe time they repay. That is the reason we brought it up at thistime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Greene is simply stating the reason why they brought up the topic.


Passage number 33.
MS. TEETERS. When are they scheduled to repay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 34.
MS. GREENE. The 23rd of April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as only a fragment is provided, which does not contain enough information.


Passage number 35.
MR. WALLICH. If we renew, does this mean that the implicittakeout from some further Euro-borrowing is pushed farther away intime.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward question without any disagreement or conflicting views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 36.
MS. GREENE. I fully expect that they will repay the drawing.The question is, if there's an increase in the arrangement, whetherthat should also be renewed. The reason for bringing it up now,although they are two separate items, is that when we're talking tothem about the repayment, we expect that they will ask for an initialreaction as to whether or not they could renew the increase in theline as well.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Ms. Greene states that she fully expects the repayment of the drawing, but raises the question of whether the increase in the arrangement should also be renewed. This implies that there are different opinions or opposing views on whether the increase should be renewed.


Passage number 37.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would think we could defer action onthis, but if there's any expression of opinion that would be helpfulin guiding conversations with the Riksbank, we might have such anexpression of opinion at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests that action can be deferred and asks for any helpful opinions to guide conversations with the Riksbank.


Passage number 38.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, Mr. Chairman, everythingconsidered, I think it would be appropriate for us to agree to[extending] the increase if they request it. They are a responsiblecentral bank and I think it would be a little strange--we'd have tohave a good reason and I can't think of what reason we would offer--torefuse such a modest increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement and support for extending the increase if requested by a responsible central bank. They also mention that they cannot think of any reason to refuse such a modest increase.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The total amount of the line is what now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement simply describes the total amount of the line without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 40.
-5-3/31/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. $300 million; the temporary increaseis $200 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a numerical value without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 41.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's $300 million, so it goes up to $500million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement. It simply states the amount of money, which is $300 million, and mentions that it can go up to $500 million.


Passage number 42.
 As I remember, when that line was increased last year therewere some pretty clear understandings that it would be used--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As bridge money.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates a clear understanding that the increased line of money would be used as bridge money. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 43.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --as bridge money to a financing, which ineffect is what they did, or perhaps for other contingencies of thatsort. But the obvious [purpose] was as a bridge financing to a marketfinancing or to an IMF drawing, which was in the picture recurrentlywith respect to Sweden. Is that still in the picture, or do they feelso confident now that they're not thinking of IMF drawings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is asking a question about whether the possibility of IMF drawings is still being considered by Sweden or if they feel confident enough to not pursue such options.


Passage number 44.
MS. GREENE. I think that's something, if we are cooperativewith them, that we could remind them about, if the situation sorequired.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating an opinion about reminding someone about something in a cooperative manner.


Passage number 45.
MR. TRUMAN. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provides no information regarding any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 46.
 Chairman, before the actions in January,there were some suggestions--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it strikes me that there are anumber of reasons why, in fact, we should not make a decision rightnow. We can have some discussion and see what the attitude is towardthese things. Assuming the attitude is favorable--and my inclinationwould be like Mr. Solomon's that we have the probability of a renewal[request] here--we don't have to take the formal action. We have tosee the way they will present it. And we can take the action at thenext meeting if it seems appropriate then, assuming they do requestit. Any objection to that.SPEAKER(.). No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting waiting to make a decision and asks if there are any objections, to which the response is "no."


Passage number 47.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If not, of course, we will conductourselves accordingly. Since we're on the subject of the foreignissues, we might as well jump to the amendments to the authorizationfor foreign currency operations and the renewal of the directives,which are standard material. The only [proposed] change involves whatis essentially a cleaning up of the language in the authorization forforeign currency operations. Do you want to describe that, Mr.Truman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is providing information and discussing the proposed change in the language of the authorization for foreign currency operations.


Passage number 48.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, part of the changes are just a cleaningup. The one issue that the Committee might want to discuss is thequestion you have asked the staff to address of whether we should nowincorporate the informal limits on System [foreign currency] balancesinto the formal instruments. We looked at the question and wesuggested a way in which that could be done, but we also suggestedthat, on balance, we didn't think it was a good idea. Therefore, werecommended that any formal limit with respect to the System's overallopen position be the limit that now exists. And in that connection,we suggested as a technical adjustment that the two numbers that now-6-3/31/81appear in the authorization--one number is a footnote and one numberis in the text, with the one [in the footnote] being eight times thesize of the other--be combined to one number in the text and that thefootnote be dropped.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker mentions that the staff suggested a way to incorporate informal limits on System balances into formal instruments, but the speaker also states that they do not think it is a good idea. They then recommend that the existing limit be maintained and suggest a technical adjustment to combine two numbers into one. There is no mention of any opposing viewpoint or disagreement.


Passage number 49.
 Assuming the Committee accepts the propositionthat the informal limits be retained, we suggested that we might beable to simplify the presentation of those informal limits so thatthere's one overall number with three subnumbers rather than the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a bit lost. What specifically, areyou proposing. It's on what page of what memorandum.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges being lost and simply requests clarification on the proposal's details and location in the memorandum.


Passage number 50.
MR. TRUMAN. The memorandum from the Secretary is dated March24th. The first recommendation, on the first page, is that the formallimit on the overall open position be encompassed in the limit [notedin the text]. The second recommendation, on page 2, is that thenumber be moved from the footnote to the text. Those are thesubstantive recommendations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating two recommendations from a memorandum without expressing any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We now have an $8 billion limit on ouropen position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a factual statement about the limit on the open position without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 52.
MR. PARTEE. In a footnote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 53.
MR. TRUMAN. But it's in a footnote, and the number in thetext is $1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about there being a footnote with a number of $1 billion in the text.


Passage number 54.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your recommendation is to move the $8billion from the footnote to the text.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 55.
MR. TRUMAN. That's earth-shaking, I know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This statement by Mr. Truman is simply expressing his awareness of the significance or impact of something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 56.
MR. GUFFEY. And change the $8 billion to $5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests changing the amount from $8 billion to $5 billion, indicating a disagreement or alternative viewpoint regarding the initial amount.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 57.
MR. AXILROD. We also suggest the possibility of changing the$8 billion to $5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The suggestion of changing the funding amount from $8 billion to $5 billion indicates a disagreement or contention about the proposed financial allocation. It suggests a difference in opinion on how much funding should be allocated for a particular purpose.


Passage number 58.
MR. GUFFEY. Right. That's in the text.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 59.
MR. AXILROD. It would give the Committee more flexibility indecisionmaking.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that giving the Committee more flexibility in decision-making would be beneficial without any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 60.
MR. PARTEE. What is the open position now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward question asking about an open position.


Passage number 61.
MR. TRUMAN. It's $3.2 billion as I remember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presented as a recollection from Mr. Truman without any conflicting opinions or opposing views mentioned.


Passage number 62.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make sure I am clear on this.The substantive proposal is nothing more than moving an $8 billionlimit, which is now in a footnote, to the text.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is a statement providing clarification and understanding of a proposal.


Passage number 63.
MR. TRUMAN. Right. But the substantive proposal withrespect to your charge to the staff was not to incorporate theinformal limits into the formal documents. That may require apositive decision, too, or a negative decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that a positive or negative decision may be required for incorporating the informal limits into the formal documents.


Passage number 64.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the total position, which is inthe document in the footnote, is $8 billion. That in some sensegoverns the total open position, and we would put that up in the text.-7-3/31/81The informal limits on the individual currencies we would not put inthe directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is discussing the total position and informal limits on individual currencies, but there is no clear contention or disagreement expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 65.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you rewrote them slightly, didn't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "But you rewrote them slightly, didn't you" suggests that the speaker believes the listener made changes to something, emphasizing a difference in perception or understanding.


Passage number 66.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 67.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where do the informal limits appear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking where the informal limits appear.


Passage number 68.
MR. TRUMAN. They don't appear anywhere; that's the issuethat we addressed. They appear in the notes or the records of theDesk [and the Secretariat], which I think is the proper way to do it,after having listened to the informed discussion of the Committee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 69.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how were they appearing in the notesthat is different from the way they now appear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement or contention in the passage. The author is questioning or challenging the appearance of the notes and suggesting that there is a difference between how they appeared before and how they appear now.


Passage number 70.
MR. TRUMAN. That is listed on page 3 of the memorandum. Wewould suggest that the informal limit, as the Desk has it, be set at$4-1/4 billion, with sublimits of up to $2-3/4 billion in marks, $1billion in yen, and $1/2 billion in all other currencies. That wouldjust mean that subsequently, if the Committee in its discussion saidthat it wanted to raise those informal limits, any time it raised oneof the three components that would automatically raise the total. Itwould save some time; it's a somewhat simplified procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is describing a suggestion and explaining a simplified procedure.


Passage number 71.
MR. WALLICH. Items 1-A and 1-B are the alternatives; we cando B while also doing A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that alternatives 1-A and 1-B can both be done simultaneously.


Passage number 72.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, they are part of the basic recommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "Yes, they are part of the basic recommendation."


Passage number 73.
MR. WALLICH. But 1-C would be a different procedure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 74.
MR. TRUMAN. It is an alternative, which we do not recommend.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply states that there is an alternative option being discussed but it is not recommended. There is no mention of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 75.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, I guess I understand this. Letme repeat it. We have two proposals, basically. One is to move the$8 billion from a footnote to the formal text. Is this in thedirective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply restating and summarizing the information given about the two proposals.


Passage number 76.
MR. TRUMAN. The authorization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Truman, is simply stating that authorization was given for a certain action.


Passage number 77.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Authorization. The other is not to put anindividual currency limit in the formal authorization. We are nowconfirming an informal understanding, stated a somewhat different way,that says the total limit on the balances is $4-1/4 billion, the sameas the present limitation, of which the limits are $2750 million inmarks, $1 billion in yen, and $500 million in all other currencies.That is the same as we have now, expressed a little more felicitously.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is not expressing disagreement or contention. It is simply providing information about authorization and outlining the currency limits in a more refined manner.


Passage number 78.
MR. TRUMAN. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contradictory or conflicting statements. It simply states "Mr. Truman" without presenting any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 79.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What gets published: the $8 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage simply states a fact about what gets published, without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 80.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The $8 billion is the only thing that ispublished.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about a specific amount of money being the only thing that is published. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 81.
3/31/81MR. TRUMAN. That is the number that is now published. Boththe $1 billion in the text and the $8 billion in the footnote are nowpublished. So, nothing is changed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides factual information without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way it is now, the authorization isfor $1 billion and then there is a footnote that says, in effect,except the Committee decided on $8 billion. So the $8 billion ismoved up to replace the $1 billion. Let's just focus on that one fora moment. Is that acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 83.
MS. TEETERS. Is the $8 billion regardless of signs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 84.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 85.
MS. TEETERS. And the $4-1/4 billion is a plus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement apparent in the passage. MS. Teeters is stating that the $4-1/4 billion is a positive aspect.


Passage number 86.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The $8 billion would mean that if we werelong $4 billion in one currency and short $4 billion in another, thenet is not zero but $8 billion. It covers our overall exposure. Isthat acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and asking for an opinion on the acceptability of the situation.


Passage number 87.
MR. GUFFEY. There is another part of the recommendation, andthat is that rather than put $8 billion in the text, we would put $5billion; it retains the language that's now in the text with respectto the Committee's authorization.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a part of the recommendation without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 88.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can put any number in there we want to.We got to $8 billion during the '78 operation, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they were able to reach $8 billion during the '78 operation.


Passage number 89.
MR. TRUMAN. It was raised, I think, by $2 or $3 billion inDecember of 1978 and that limit has been there ever since. We nevergot there, but we came close.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the increase in the limit.


Passage number 90.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, to go at it another way, if I understandthe recommendation, it would be to go to $8 billion in the text anddelete the language that would permit the Committee to increase it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Guffey is simply explaining his understanding of a recommendation and suggesting a change.


Passage number 91.
MR. TRUMAN. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage shows a straightforward statement from Mr. Truman with no indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 92.
MR. AXILROD. We didn't assume the Committee neededpermission.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is stating that they did not assume the Committee needed permission, implying that there may be conflicting views or differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 93.
MR. TRUMAN. The reason for the proposal that that languagebe deleted is that when this document was last thoroughly overhauled,there was an express authorization with respect to the old Swiss francdebt. And the express authorization said to treat that debt, whichwas part of the open position, outside of the $1 billion limit. Thatwas the reason for the language that we now suggest be deleted. It'snot that we're trying to reduce your flexibility.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 94.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure how that language got inthere, but it seems clear that the Committee can always change this toput in whatever number it wants to put in, either larger or smaller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a lack of certainty about how certain language was included in a document and acknowledges that the Committee has the power to change the number mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 95.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, it's a good suggestion.It's strictly procedural. [But] I think it would be a mistake tochange the number; the markets might read something into that if wewere to change the number. I see no reason at this point,3/31/81particularly with all the discussion in the markets about a policyshift in the Treasury in regard to intervention, for us to feed that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, the speaker disagrees with changing the number and argues that it could be misinterpreted by the markets.


Passage number 96.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can make the substantivedecision, but I think we have to have a reason for making it. If wewant to reduce it, we can reduce it. But if there is a strong feelingabout not suggesting a policy change here, or explaining what we aredoing, the straightforward thing is just to do the $8 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing the possibility of making a decision and stating that if there is a strong feeling against suggesting a policy change, then the straightforward thing to do is to go with the $8 billion.


Passage number 97.
MR. PARTEE. But certainly we need to have some reason. Idon't know why we have $8 billion, but I don't know why we wouldchange it to $5 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the reasoning behind changing the amount from $8 billion to $5 billion, indicating a lack of understanding rather than engaging in an argument or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 98.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we had $8 billion becausethat was the guess of what might have been necessary at the time ofthe '78 operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is potential disagreement in the passage because the speaker's assertion that they had $8 billion is based on their own belief or opinion, rather than being a fact that can be objectively confirmed. The use of the phrase "I think" implies a subjective judgment.


Passage number 99.
MR. PARTEE. I think it was a building up of several things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents Mr. Partee's opinion.


Passage number 100.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, in December of '78, [our open position]went up to $5-1/2 billion at the end of year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the increase in the open position.


Passage number 101.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had increased swap lines at that pointand so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states a fact ("We had increased swap lines"), and the phrase "and so forth" suggests that there are additional unspecified details or actions related to the subject. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this statement.


Passage number 102.
MR. TRUMAN. I think it had previously been $5 billion and itwas raised by enough so that, during that environment, the Committeewouldn't have to adjust it every three weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the previous amount of $5 billion being raised to a higher amount. There is no indication of disagreement or conflict in this statement.


Passage number 103.
MR. PARTEE. So it is whatever is needed to keep fromimpeding any operations we'd like to undertake. It's a great limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply stating a fact without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 104.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The more meaningful limits are theinformal limits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the more meaningful limits are the informal ones without presenting any conflicting points of view.


Passage number 105.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is $8 billion acceptable.SPEAKER(.). Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 106.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will have $8billion. Now, this other issue, if I understand it correctly, is theway it is recorded in the notes. Again, there's no substantivedifference. It would be recorded in the notes slightly differently,in a simpler way, which is what gave rise to the discussion. There isa straightforward limitation on how much in total we can have and howmuch of that total can be in marks, how much in yen, how much ineverything else. And it's exactly where we are now in substance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining different aspects of a financial issue, stating the facts and providing clarification.


Passage number 107.
MR. CORRIGAN. Is it exactly where we are now. I thoughtthat under the way we operate now, if we changed one component, wedidn't necessarily change the total.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification or confirmation about a process.


Passage number 108.
 Whereas this contemplates thatif you went to--MR. TRUMAN. Well, in effect, yes, we've been doing it thatway. That was the source of the confusion during the discussion inDecember, though, and that's why we suggested that we change it thisway. The only thing that has been changed recently has been the marktotal. But since we had an overall limit, every time $1/2 billion or-10-3/31/81$1 billion was added to the mark total we had to push everything elseup, especially since we were holding, and still are holding, about$250 million worth of all the other currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a situation and discussing a suggested change, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 109.
MR. CORRIGAN. But the presumption here would be that there'san automatic dollar-for-dollar lifting in the total.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply stating his presumption or assumption.


Passage number 110.
MR. WALLICH. Well, these currencies aren't substitutesnecessarily. So, if there's a reason for raising one, that's noreason to reduce another if that were to be the consequence of havinga ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Wallich is explaining that if there is a reason for raising one currency, it does not necessarily mean that another currency should be reduced. There is no contention or disagreement presented in this statement.


Passage number 111.
MR. AXILROD. But it's conceivable, if the Committee wished,that it could reduce the yen limit and raise the [mark or the othercurrencies limit]. It's not impossible to substitute among thosethings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a hypothetical scenario where the Committee could potentially make adjustments to the yen limit and the limit for other currencies.


Passage number 112.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions "MR. TRUMAN" without providing any additional information or context.


Passage number 113.
 Right, but it would be separately--MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that something will be done separately.


Passage number 114.
 But then the understanding would be, barringan express decision that way--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much do we have now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "barring an express decision" suggests a hypothetical situation or potential exception, but it does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints. The second part of the passage is a question seeking the current amount, which does not involve contention or disagreement either.


Passage number 115.
MR. TRUMAN. As Gretchen said, in marks we have $2566million, or almost $2.6 billion. We have $399 million of yen, and$260 million of everything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The information provided by Mr. Truman is simply stating the amounts of money in different currencies.


Passage number 116.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, if we approve this, it implies aleeway of approximately $200 million in marks, $600 million in yen,and $240 million in everything else.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating the approval of a certain amount in different currencies.


Passage number 117.
MR. SCHULTZ. I thought we had more Swiss francs than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz is simply stating his thought about the amount of Swiss francs they have.


Passage number 118.
MR. TRUMAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Truman, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 119.
 No, it's $257 million or something like that ofSwiss francs and the rest of it is--MR. SCHULTZ. Where did I get the idea that we had more thanthat because we have a Carter bond.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a simple statement of a fact or clarification.


Passage number 120.
MR. TRUMAN. We, the United States, do; we, the System, donot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that the United States has something, while the system does not. This does not indicate any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 121.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the Treasury.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "That's the Treasury" does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the subject mentioned, without any conflicting opinions or opposing views being presented.


Passage number 122.
MR. SCHULTZ. Oh, I see; we've already sent it over. Webought it for them. The total position we have in Swiss francs is alittle over $1 billion, is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 123.
MR. TRUMAN. The United States has $1.3 billion. It's $1.4billion, using the historical rates, of which we have $250 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage is stating a factual figure about the amount of money the United States has, without any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 124.
MR. SCHULTZ. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 125.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The substance of what we're saying here isthat these numbers are not changed from what we now have, but thereisn't much room for increasing mark balances and there isn't much room-11-3/31/81for increasing other balances. There is a fair amount of room forincreasing yen balances, but we have no intention of doing so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there is not much room for increasing mark balances and other balances, but there is room for increasing yen balances. It also mentions that there is no intention to increase yen balances. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage.


Passage number 126.
MR. BLACK. But we're going to say that a lot better than wewere saying it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement expressing optimism or confidence in improvement.


Passage number 127.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says it more straightforwardly. That'sright. But there isn't a lot of room here, actually, in these currentinformal limits for increasing [our holdings of] anything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there is not much room for increasing holdings of anything within the current informal limits.


Passage number 128.
MR. TRUMAN. Actually, my figures are absent the $74.4million we sold yesterday. My figures don't include that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the figures not including a specific amount.


Passage number 129.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we have a little more room forincreasing marks, having sold some yesterday. Is that acceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply mentioning that they have more room for increasing marks because they have sold some items the day before. The question at the end is asking if this situation is acceptable.


Passage number 130.
MR. PARTEE. Sounds fine.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee's response indicates that he agrees with or approves of whatever was said previously.


Passage number 131.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was there anything else. [Next] we haveparagraph 3 and paragraph 5. This is an attempt to have morestraightforward wording again, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a question followed by a statement about paragraphs 3 and 5, implying an attempt at using more straightforward wording.


Passage number 132.
MR. TRUMAN. Right, in paragraph 3. Paragraph 5 deals withthe fact that we now have a broader range of things that we invest in.Paragraph 6 reflects the fact that we no longer send out a daily callto the members of the Subcommittee. To reduce paperwork some time agowe combined that with the 2:30 call that goes to all members of theCommittee along with the Manager's regular reports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage mainly provides information about different paragraphs and changes in communication methods. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 133.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think any of these changes issubstantive. One purpose of the change in paragraph 5, at least inpart, is that we now have authority to invest in foreign governmentsecurities and, in effect, we are limiting that and making clear thatthese [investments] are to be in liquid form. Are these allacceptable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating his opinion that the changes mentioned are not substantive but does not present any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 134.
MS. TEETERS. Wasn't there some question as to whether wewere going to put the informal limits directly in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking if there was any question or doubt about including the informal limits in the directive.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume that we made the decisionnot to, in accepting the other alternative and these language changes.Hearing no dissent, I guess we need a motion. This is the formal[authorization], isn't it.SPEAKER(.). Yes. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

In the passage, there is no indication of contention or disagreement. The speaker assumes a decision was made and asks for a motion without any dissent being heard. The response "Yes. So moved." further indicates agreement and consensus.


Passage number 136.
MS. TEETERS. Seconded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Seconded" simply means that someone else agrees with or supports Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 137.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will adopt those.One other issue in this area is warehousing. Mr. Truman, are yougoing to comment on warehousing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 138.
MR. TRUMAN. We have had this agreement, the current one,formally since January 1977. The limit on warehousing foreigncurrencies for the Treasury and the Exchange Stabilization Fund is now$5 billion. The total that is now in use under that arrangement is alittle over $4 billion. The Treasury would just as soon renew theauthority. They may well be using some of those balances over the-12-3/31/81course of the next year to repay some of the Carter notes that comedue over the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply provides information about the current agreement and the Treasury's plans to renew it and use some of the balances to repay certain notes.


Passage number 139.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are recommending no change here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is providing a recommendation without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 140.
MR. TRUMAN. No change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states "No change," indicating that there is no need to make any alterations or corrections.


Passage number 141.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This [issue] comes up every year as towhether we want to continue it. There's no change [proposed]. It isbeing used to the extent of over $4 billion against the $5 billionauthorization. Do we have a motion on this one.SPEAKER(.). You have a motion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states that the issue comes up every year and asks if there is a motion. There is no indication of any disagreement or argument between individuals.


Passage number 142.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without dissent, we will approve therenewal of the warehousing [agreement]. Mr. Altmann tells me we haveto approve one other thing here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 143.
MR. ALTMANN. We need approval of the foreign currencydirective and the procedural instructions with respect to foreigncurrency operations in which no changes have been proposed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a need for approval of a foreign currency directive and procedural instructions.


Passage number 144.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are the basic authority for theforeign currency operations. There are no changes. They are justreviewed every year and accepted or not accepted. Obviously, changescan be proposed, but there are no changes being proposed by the staff.This is the basic [directive] for foreign currency operations and theaccompanying procedural [instructions]. They have been in effect [intheir present form] for three or four years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It provides a straightforward explanation about the basic authority and lack of proposed changes in foreign currency operations.


Passage number 145.
MR. WALLICH. It is noteworthy that any change inintervention policy can be accommodated within this document, nomatter what we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 146.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's very appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement "That's very appropriate" is a positive and agreeable response.


Passage number 147.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will renew theforeign currency directive and the procedural instructions. Thatconcludes all the foreign-related matters. We did ratify thetransactions, did we not. I think we are finished with the foreignside. We will go now to Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging that they will renew the foreign currency directive and the procedural instructions and stating that they have concluded all the foreign-related matters. They then ask if the transactions were ratified before stating that they believe they are finished with the foreign side. The mention of Mr. Sternlight at the end indicates a change of topic or next item on the agenda, but it does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 148.
MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement implied in the passage. The use of the words "see Appendix" suggests that there is additional information or evidence provided in the Appendix that may contradict or challenge Mr. Sternlight's statement.


Passage number 149.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage as it only mentions the name "Governor Partee." Further context is needed to make a judgment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 150.
MR. PARTEE. Peter, going back to your comments on the pathfor nonborrowed reserves: Did I understand you to say that youconsidered the reduction in the path that was agreed to roughly at thetime of that telephone conference call to be a temporary reduction andthat in the most recent 4-week period you are back to the previouspath.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates a disagreement or contention as Mr. Partee questions Peter's statement about the reduction in the path for nonborrowed reserves.


Passage number 151.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That is correct, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. Mr. Sternlight affirms that the statement is correct.


Passage number 152.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I hadn't understood that that was going tohappen. I can see how that would be an interpretation, but this is-13-3/31/81the first I have heard of that--that it was a temporary reduction andthen the path was restored.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply expresses surprise and indicates that they were not previously aware of the information mentioned.


Passage number 153.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure that's quite right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or doubt about the statement being made.


Passage number 154.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's why I asked the question. Peterseems to think so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is simply clarifying his question and stating that Peter seems to think the same way.


Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We set the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence simply states a decision or plan that was made without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 156.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That's my understanding of what was done.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding of what was done.


Passage number 157.
MR. AXILROD. That is exactly what was done after theFebruary 24th call. The borrowing level in the last 2 weeks of thefirst 4 weeks of the 8-week interval--I don't know what it was in the3rd week, but it was very low in the 4th week--would have been zero.It was understood after that call that half the adjustment would bemade to keep it at around $1 billion. And in the next 4-week period,we reverted to the original path, which itself implied borrowing ofaround $1 or $1.1 billion at that time. I thought that was made clearat the time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 158.
MR. PARTEE. It just shows how tricky this whole thing is; Ihadn't understood it. I think we have to be very clear in terms ofwhat the understandings are. Nothing happened adversely as a resultof it, but I thought we had made a downward adjustment in the paththat [would not be changed] until the Committee reconsidered thematter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement from MR. PARTEE expressing his understanding and opinion about the situation.


Passage number 159.
MR. AXILROD. Well, if we had made the same adjustmentdownward in the path that we made in that two weeks, it would haveimplied borrowing rising to a considerable amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact about borrowing rising to a considerable amount if a certain adjustment downward was made. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 160.
MR. PARTEE. Well, this has explained something to me. Infact, I just asked yesterday: Why is the market acting the way it is.Well, it's acting that way because we have reverted to the [original]path. I had never understood that. I might have expected the rapidgrowth in money of the last month or so to have brought some tightnessin the market and it hasn't brought very much. Now I know why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding and realization about the market's behavior.


Passage number 161.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage mentioned "Mr. Axilrod," but did not provide any information or context about him. Therefore, there is no contention or disagreement indicated in the passage.


Passage number 162.
 Yes, because in effect the Committee is stillunder its path that it adopted--MR. PARTEE. At the last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement, "MR. PARTEE. At the last meeting," does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is simply the continuation of a narrative without introducing any conflicting ideas or opposing opinions.


Passage number 163.
MR. AXILROD. --at the last meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states that Mr. Axilrod was present at the last meeting without mentioning any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 164.
MR. PARTEE. But not as amended in the telephone conference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 165.
MR. AXILROD. Our interpretation of that amendment was thatit applied to the first 4-week interval. The second 4-week intervalwas leading to borrowing that seemed likely to bring the federal fundsrate back up to the 15 percent lower limit, so that no furtheradjustments were necessary one way or the other to bring to theCommittee's attention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their interpretation of the amendment and how it applies to the specific intervals.


Passage number 166.
MR. CORRIGAN. What did borrowings average in that secondfour weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 167.
-14-3/31/81MR. AXILROD. They were a little under $900 million, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a fact about the amount of money, without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 168.
MR. STERNLIGHT. About $900 million. This week they arerunning higher, and the average may move up some this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about the current value of something.


Passage number 169.
 Myrecollection of that would be that there was flexibility, [based on]the Committee's decision, to have made some further adjustment if ithad proved necessary to keep--MR. PARTEE. On the down side. Yes, I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The statement made by Mr. Partee simply agrees with the previous statement.


Passage number 170.
MR. STERNLIGHT. -- the funds rate from tending to slide offbelow 15 percent; but as it was shading up, it didn't [provenecessary].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the funds rate not sliding below 15 percent because it was shading up.


Passage number 171.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am a bit confused at this point. Maybethe way to state it is this: That I didn't realize you were back onthe original nonborrowed reserve path. Well, that's right. Myunderstanding is the same as yours, but I suppose you could say thatthis may be the source of the confusion. With total reserves runninglow, you might have raised that path and you didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion about a situation but agrees with the other person's understanding.


Passage number 172.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right. Total reserves have beenrunning well below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply confirming the information stated.


Passage number 173.
MR. PARTEE. That's an additional or separate conceptualadjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Partee is adding or suggesting an additional or separate conceptual adjustment. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention among the speakers.


Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [An adjustment] was not made which mightin other circumstances have been made. Maybe that's it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply discusses the possibility of an adjustment that was not made, without any conflicting opinions or opposing views expressed. The phrase "maybe that's it" suggests a possible explanation or conclusion, but it does not indicate any disagreement.


Passage number 175.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 176.
 Even though we didn't explicitlydiscuss a return to path in the second 4-week period, it wasformulated the way Peter suggested, and Steve also, that theflexibility was for as long as necessary and that when it was nolonger necessary in terms of the fed funds rate, then it justautomatically made--MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, but I'm quite surethat it was pointed out to the Committee at the time that one of thereasons for making the adjustment to keep borrowing at $1 billion wasthat looking ahead to the next 4-week interval, it was apparent at thetime of the February 24 call that, unless something weird happened,borrowing--given an adherence to the nonborrowed path--would move up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses the formulation and reasons behind a decision involving the fed funds rate and borrowing.


Passage number 177.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was certainly a factor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 178.
MR. PARTEE. But it didn't move up much. Is that right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact and seeking clarification.


Passage number 179.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it moved up. I don't know what theaverage is going to end up being; it will be something like $900million or maybe a little higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the average will be around $900 million or a little higher, without any evidence of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 180.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We were looking at about $900 million lastFriday as the average borrowing in the second 4-week period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact or information.


Passage number 181.
MR. WALLICH. Essentially, we seem to have targeted on thefunds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a conclusion or observation.


Passage number 182.
-15-3/31/81MR. AXILROD. I'd say we have targeted on the nonborrowedpath; we had to in the last four weeks. We adjusted the nonborrowedpath for the first four weeks downward in order to keep borrowing inline with how it appeared to be evolving. That's how I would put it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a decision that was made and how they would describe it.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 183.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me be clear about the funds rate.This is my interpretation, obviously. We made a decision on the 24thor whenever it was which, in my judgment, overrode the funds rate. Wesaid: This is the way we are going to set the borrowing path. Now,there may be some fogginess, and I can't put myself back there. Oncehaving set the borrowing path there, the federal funds rate came outwhere it came out regardless of where the limits were on the federalfunds rate. The path was reset. The only question is: reset fromwhat to what. It was reset, based upon some judgment of what theaggregates in total were doing combined, I'm sure, with some feelingin the mind of Committee members--and each one probably had a slightlydifferent feeling--as to the implications for interest rates. But,once having made that decision, the federal funds rate was no longerrelevant. We had our consultation when it moved below 15 percent.The result of the consultation was to set a certain nonborrowedreserve path, and the federal funds rate then fell out regardless ofthe 15 to 20 percent limit. And, in fact, it ran below 15 percentalmost all that time. That was of no concern to me because in my mindthe Committee had made a judgment that it would be overridden.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting that there may have been differing opinions among Committee members about the implications for interest rates and that each member may have had a slightly different feeling about this. This suggests that there may have been disagreement or contention within the Committee.


Passage number 184.
MR. WALLICH. What I meant to say is that we targeted onborrowed reserves, which is very similar to targeting on the fundsrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying their previous statement, indicating that targeting on borrowed reserves is similar to targeting on the funds rate.


Passage number 185.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We always target on borrowed reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a fact without any opposing viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 186.
MR. WALLICH. Well, that's why we always target on the fundsrate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is expressing a statement or opinion about targeting the funds rate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 187.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's true. I don't agreewith that at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement "I don't think that's true. I don't agree with that at all" indicates a disagreement with a previous statement or belief.


Passage number 188.
MR. AXILROD. The reason borrowing dropped below the $1billion we thought it would be at the time of the February 24th[telephone] meeting and [the assumption of] $1 billion we set for thenext two weeks was that in the next four weeks required reservesturned out to be weaker than was thought at that time. So, borrowingdropped and the funds rate dropped. If required reserves had beenwhat we expected at the time of the conference call, borrowing wouldhave stayed at about $1 billion. In the event, borrowing has comeback up in the last couple of weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing explanation and stating facts about the drop and increase in borrowing and the reasons behind it. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 189.
MR. WALLICH. We start by [making a borrowing assumption] inthis way; subsequently [the actual level of borrowing and thus] thefunds rate [are] free to move.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply outlines a specific approach or assumption being made and explains the subsequent actions that can be taken based on that assumption.


Passage number 190.
 To make the place for that--MR. AXILROD. I'm trying to say we're adhering to thenonborrowed path and borrowing is fluctuating.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the person is adhering to a nonborrowed path and that borrowing is fluctuating.


Passage number 191.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 192.
MR. ROOS. I'd like to address this question to Peter or toSteve. As one whose brain is not as facile as many of yours, when I-16-3/31/81sense this confusion among so many of you, would there be an easier orsimpler way of conducting this to be more effective and less complex.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own perspective and seeking clarification or suggestions from others.


Passage number 193.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe I didn't report on it clearly enough.I don't see a simpler way of accomplishing the Committee's objectives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion about the best way to accomplish the objectives of the Committee.


Passage number 194.
MR. ROOS. A total reserves operation wouldn't help.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement presented does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a declarative statement with no opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 195.
MR. PARTEE. No, because still the question would be whetherwe were reducing it temporarily or reducing it for the whole period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is stating that the question at hand is whether they were reducing something temporarily or for the whole period, indicating a question of duration rather than disagreement.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The confusion here arises, in my mindanyway, [in that] I had kind of forgotten what the implicit path wasfor the next 4-week period. We certainly lowered the nonborrowedreserve path for whatever period of time was left in the then currentperiod being used for operational purposes. That's clear. It wasdone against the background of a high M2 figure and the relatively lowM1 figure at the time, and whatever judgments various members of theCommittee had in their minds as to what was going on in the moneymarkets. I did not remember that the new path was exactly the same asthe old path. That may be true. In any event, we forewent what couldhave been a possible increase in that path when [borrowing was]running low. I think that was implicit in the decision. And Irepeat: Once having made that decision, it was my conclusion or myinterpretation of that decision that the federal funds rate limit wasno longer binding. It's never binding in the way we formally setforth the directive, but we had an inconsistency, we had aconsultation, and we reset the reserve path. Whatever happened to thefederal funds from then on happened to the federal funds rate in thelight of that path, barring any further consultation, which we did nothave.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation of their thought process and understanding of a decision that was made, without expressing any opposition or disagreement with others.


Passage number 197.
MR. BOEHNE. Maybe we ought to have more confusion, because Ithink things turned out pretty well over the last six weeks. It seemsto me that we did follow the spirit of the new procedure without beingmechanical. There was some judgment involved, and interest ratesdropped; there was an adjustment to demand factors, but we avoided afree fall in interest rates, it seems to me. This is about the way Ithink we would have wanted things to come out, if we could have[planned it].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, is expressing his satisfaction with how things turned out and believes that the new procedure was followed successfully without any negative consequences. There is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting opinions in the passage.


Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't disagree with that. We made thejudgment in the reserve path. I think what is different and what willappear a little different to the market when this decision ispublished is that previously when we ran into the federal fundsconstraint, we said something about the federal funds constraint perse. This time we didn't say it openly; we said it implicitly, in myjudgment. And the implicit judgment was reflected in the fact thatfor at least two weeks or maybe three weeks--I don't remember exactly-- the rate was clearly below the 15 percent limit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a decision and providing some context for it.


Passage number 199.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, one week it was 13-1/2 percent onaverage. Another week it was just a hair below [15 percent].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Sternlight is simply stating two different percentages for two different weeks without any indication of disagreement or debate.


Passage number 200.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just a little below. So, one week it wasway down and in only one other week was it below.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a fact about the level being below in two different weeks.


Passage number 201.
-17-3/31/81MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The given information, "-17-3/31/81MR. ROOS," is simply a date and a name.


Passage number 202.
 You mentioned the events of the period, drainingreserves because of the--MR. STERNLIGHT. Just before that February 24 telephonediscussion, President Roos, when the funds rate was flirting with thelower bound--it was tending to drop down to 15 percent or lower--therewas one day when our projection suggested that maybe we should bedraining a little, but because the funds rate was dropping below 15percent we drained a fairly sizable amount, more than we would havedone just on the reserve numbers alone. I think that was a Friday;the following Monday, when the projection showed no need to drain,funds ran below 15 percent and we did drain that day. I'd say therewere those two occasions when we were guided by the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There doesn't seem to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing factual information about certain actions that were taken based on the funds rate.


Passage number 203.
MR. ROOS. That was a time when we were concerned aboutreserves growing too slowly, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states a fact about a previous concern regarding reserves growing too slowly.


Passage number 204.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, reserves had been growing slowly but,also, the Committee had not held its telephone consultation. Afterthat, as the Chairman said, the funds rate did not constrain us and itdropped down a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing information about reserves and the Committee's telephone consultation without expressing a disagreement or opposing viewpoint.


Passage number 205.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At this point, there is no floor tothe fed funds rate. And it seems to me that in the future, if wecontinue with this operation, every time there's a telephoneconsultation and a decision is made to change the nonborrowed reservepath--ignoring the floor or ceiling as the case may be--then for therest of the intermeeting period we are operating without a floor orwithout a ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact and providing their own interpretation of the situation. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 206.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could arrive at a different decision.I think that was the decision we arrived at [in this case].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the possibility of arriving at a different decision but confirms that the decision being referred to is the one they arrived at in this particular case.


Passage number 207.
MR. PARTEE. We could do both, I think: reset our path andreset a floor or a ceiling. We just didn't want to reduce that floor,that's all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that both resetting the path and resetting a floor or a ceiling could be done, but clarifies that they did not want to reduce the floor.


Passage number 208.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I was a little confusedimmediately after the meeting until I talked with Paul a couple dayslater because during the consultation Paul had said--and everybodywent along--that he wouldn't be particularly disturbed if the fundsrate went as low as, say, even 14 percent and then there might ormight not be a need for another consultation. And yet we wererequired to add reserves when it was down to about 13-1/2 or 13-7/8percent. So, I was thinking that maybe we had a kind of rough floorset around 14 percent. But then I realized, after talking to him,that the way he was interpreting this was that we basically didn'thave a floor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is initially confused by Paul's statement, but after talking to him, they realize that there is actually no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 209.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say that if I had thought the fundsrate was declining way down and was going to stay down, obviously, wecould have had another consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a hypothetical scenario regarding the funds rate.


Passage number 210.
 But I didn't feel that wasnecessary in the--MR. PARTEE. You thought it was very temporary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion or perception without contradicting or engaging with someone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 211.
MR. SCHULTZ. It's also important to clarify that there wasnothing mechanical here. Just because the funds rate dropped below 15-18-3/31/81percent didn't mean that automatically the Desk was going to drainreserves. They look at the projections, both the Board and New Yorkprojections, and they look at the funds rate as an indication of whatthe conditions are in the market. And if the rate falls below 15percent, then the market is saying that things are easier than theprojections would seem to suggest. So, it's important that maybethere was the sense that 15 percent was regarded as an absolute floorby the Desk and the minute it went below that, then an automaticresponse would be triggered. That is not the case. That's not theway the fed funds rate is being used at this point in time. It is aconsultation point; it is not a mechanical thing on which we target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply explaining how the funds rate is used as an indication of market conditions and that it is not a mechanical trigger for action.


Passage number 212.
MR. WALLICH. We also now use the term "taken over a periodof time," which indicates that there is that flexibility you speak of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It explains the use of the term "taken over a period of time" and acknowledges that it reflects the flexibility mentioned earlier.


Passage number 213.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 214.
MR. CORRIGAN. I was obviously one who was thoroughlyconfused in this second four-week period. Is it not true, despite allof this, none of which I disagree with, that had we not adjusted thenonborrowed path back to where it was the probabilities are that thefunds rate would have been down over that three-week period, anyway--just as a behavioral thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It expresses personal confusion and provides a hypothetical scenario, but it does not involve any conflicting ideas or arguments.


Passage number 215.
MR. STERNLIGHT. You're talking about the second four weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It simply states that someone named Mr. Sternlight is discussing the second four weeks.


Passage number 216.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 217.
 Had we not readjusted the path back--MR. STERNLIGHT. We didn't readjust it back because we hadnever really adjusted that second four-week part of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact about the path not being readjusted.


Passage number 218.
MR. AXILROD. I'm not sure what would have happened if theCommittee hadn't met on February 24th and said it was all right tolower the nonborrowed path for the last two weeks of the first four-week period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 219.
MR. CORRIGAN. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Okay, Mr. Corrigan" indicates a neutral response or acknowledgement.


Passage number 220.
MR. AXILROD. The funds rate would have dropped to, say, 2 or3 percent in that two-week period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It presents a hypothetical scenario about the funds rate dropping to 2 or 3 percent in a two-week period.


Passage number 221.
MR. CORRIGAN. That I have no problem with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan states that he has no problem with something, indicating agreement or lack of contention.


Passage number 222.
MR. AXILROD. And then looking at the projections of depositsand required reserves, our numbers would have suggested that adheringto the nonborrowed path going into the next four-week period wouldhave brought the funds rate back up to 13 or 14 percent at that time,because borrowing at the time of that February 24th meeting wasprojected at $937 million precisely. So, if the adjustment hadn'tbeen made and we had just followed the nonborrowed path constructedfor the first four weeks [in the] second four weeks, funds would havedropped to around 2 percent and then moved back up to on the order of14 percent. What the Committee's action effectively did was to stopthat drop down to around 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing an explanation of the impact of the Committee's action on the funds rate, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 223.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the Committee's action did twothings. I'd just forgotten all the details here. It did what youjust said and it forestalled what might have been a judgmental-19-3/31/81increase in nonborrowed reserves to take account of the shortfall intotal reserves.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents the speaker's opinion and statement of facts without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 224.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. Well, I was assuming that all throughthat period normal procedures would have meant raising nonborrowedreserves even further. And, of course, I would just assume that thatwas forestalled by the Committee's action.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating their assumption about a certain situation and suggesting that their assumption was not realized due to the Committee's action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 225.
MR. CORRIGAN. Let me ask my question differently. For that2-week period at the end of the first four weeks, I understandperfectly what was done and why it was done. I, too, have been underthe assumption, obviously erroneous, that the path that youestablished for the last two weeks of the first 4-week period was thesame one you were going to stay on for the second four weeks as awhole. My question is: Had that been done, would we still have seenin that roughly 3-week period the funds rate below the original 15percent floor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, expresses his assumption that the path established for the last two weeks of the first 4-week period would be continued for the second four weeks as a whole. However, there seems to be a difference in understanding between Mr. Corrigan and the person he is questioning, as indicated by his statement "obviously erroneous." This suggests that there is contention or disagreement in their understanding of the situation.


Passage number 226.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it might have been to a lesserdegree. I can't say for sure exactly where it would have been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Sternlight, is simply expressing uncertainty about the extent of something, without any contradictory opinions or arguments being presented.


Passage number 227.
MR. PARTEE. We would have had $200 million more borrowing, Iguess, throughout that second four weeks than we in fact had.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee regarding a hypothetical scenario of having $200 million more borrowing.


Passage number 228.
MR. STERNLIGHT. About $160 million [more] of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the amount of borrowing.


Passage number 229.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm sorry. I'm not misunderstanding yourquestion, Jerry, [but] I can't put the question in that framework.The way my mind works on this, there's something I'm missing on that.That path in the last two weeks was simply to keep borrowing at $1.1billion for a two-week period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod simply expresses his inability to answer the question in a certain way, without any disagreement or contention expressed.


Passage number 230.
MR. CORRIGAN. I thought it was a new path for six weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 231.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, no. I'm sorry, there must have beensomething lacking in our communication with the Committee at thattime, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod is apologizing for a possible lack of communication.


Passage number 232.
 No, that was not--MR. CORRIGAN. That's all my question is. I thought it wasfor six weeks. And my question is: Had it been for six weeks as awhole, would we have had more borrowing and presumably a somewhathigher funds rate. And Governor Partee's and Peter's answer are thesame.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply restating a previous question and acknowledging that the answers given by Governor Partee and Peter are the same.


Passage number 233.
MR. AXILROD. The question would have arisen as we looked atit, going into the next four-week period. Holding the path that wehad originally constructed after the Committee meeting, if it lookedas if borrowing was going to have to be very low again, then thepolicy decision for the Committee would have arisen.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining a hypothetical situation and how a policy decision would have arisen based on certain conditions.


Passage number 234.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think we're saying the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the passage, Mr. Corrigan states that he believes they are saying the same thing. This indicates an agreement or understanding between the parties involved.


Passage number 235.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no provided passage, it is not possible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 236.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, I just want to go on record to say that Ididn't understand either, and that may not be unusual. I understoodthe same thing that Jerry Corrigan just explained. When we droppedthe nonborrowed path, I thought it was for the remaining weeks in the-20-3/31/81period before the next FOMC meeting, which would have been five or sixweeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Guffey and Jerry Corrigan seem to be expressing agreement in their understanding of dropping the nonborrowed path.


Passage number 237.
MR. AXILROD. It would have been six at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a straightforward statement of fact.


Passage number 238.
MR. GUFFEY. Further, there was a misunderstanding on my partthat when we took the action that the federal funds lower bound was nolonger a constraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a misunderstanding on the part of Mr. Guffey regarding the federal funds lower bound.


Passage number 239.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "That's right" does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple affirmation or agreement with a previous statement or assertion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 240.
MR. GUFFEY. I have no recollection of any discussion, eitherinferred or otherwise, indicating that to be true other than, Ibelieve, Mr. Chairman, you stated--and I may have asked on thetelephone what you meant by reaching the lower end--that the federalfunds rate would be something below 15 percent. I asked what area youwere speaking of and you would not be pinned down, as I recall. Butit was also fairly clear to me at that time, apparently erroneously,that as we moved into the remaining weeks of the period the 15 percentwould still be a constraint or a consultation would have taken place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This can be seen in the phrases such as "I have no recollection of any discussion", "apparently erroneously" and "you would not be pinned down", which suggest a disagreement or differing perspectives on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 241.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is an interpretation that oughtto be cleared up because my interpretation, as I stated it, was thatthe directive literally says that we will consult if these things areinconsistent. We consulted. And my assumption was that the decisionwas made and we recognized that we were flirting with 15 percent andit might go below. I think that much was explicit. And, therefore,the new reserve path was controlling. Now, that does not say as anexercise of judgment that if the rate had really gone down, we wouldnot have had another consultation. We would have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining their own interpretation of a directive and expressing their assumption about a decision that was made. They mention that another consultation would have occurred if the rate had gone down further, but there is no disagreement or contradiction presented.


Passage number 242.
MR. MORRIS. I think I'm right, Steve, in saying that theCommittee actually got a lower nonborrowed path in the second 4-weekperiod because, in the absence of the [telephone] meeting, you wouldhave been required to raise the nonborrowed path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply stating his opinion and clarifying a point.


Passage number 243.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, absolutely. Sure, we would have beenrequired to raise it the first four weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 244.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably the source of theconfusion: What you would have done in the absence of that[consultation]. I had forgotten, but technically it seems to be thecase that the path was set just where it would have been settentatively four weeks earlier. But the issue just ordinarily arisesas a matter of discretion. If total reserves are running [off]enough, we raise it. We didn't do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply providing an explanation or clarification on a certain matter.


Passage number 245.
MR. AXILROD. We didn't do that in either the first four orthe second four weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that something was not done in the first four or second four weeks. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 246.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope this has clarified things a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their hope that they have provided clarification, indicating a potential resolution or understanding.


Passage number 247.
MR. AXILROD. I hope it's clear. I tried to explain in theBluebook that the sharp drop in nonborrowed reserves in February, whentotal reserves also declined about the same amount, reflected theadjustment made in lowering the path below where it had originallybeen set. And the rise then in March kind of offsets that, because we-21-3/31/81lowered it and kept the March levels. So, we get a bigger increase inMarch. The two months together are about right, so to speak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 248.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's just what you said yesterday when Iasked precisely the same question, but we didn't focus on it this way.So I was still not communicating at that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is acknowledging and reflecting on a previous conversation they had with the other person.


Passage number 249.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod simply confirms that something is correct.


Passage number 250.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions.SPEAKER(.). So move.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that the transactions need to be ratified and then calls for a motion and a second.


Passage number 251.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we shall ratify them.If we could take a moment, just in logical order, we have theauthorization for domestic open market operations to review. This,again, is a routine item for the [annual organization] meeting. Thereis no change proposed. It's the basic authorization for domesticoperations.SPEAKER(.). Move it.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply stating that there has been no objection to ratify the items and then proceeds to discuss the next item on the agenda.


Passage number 252.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion. Without objection, weshall approve it. Maybe we should just slip in this lending issue,too, while you have the table, Mr. Sternlight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests approving a certain discussion and also proposes adding another issue to be discussed. The tone of the passage is cooperative and there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 253.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't have anything to add to the shortmemo that went around on that. We believe that the lending operationto avert delivery failures remains a useful item in the goodfunctioning of the government securities market and, in that sense, isreasonably necessary to its smooth operation and, thus, an aid to theconduct of open market operations. And it's a modest money maker forus. It much more than covers its cost of operation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker seems to be in agreement with the idea that the lending operation is useful and necessary for the smooth operation of the government securities market. They also mention that it is a financial benefit for them.


Passage number 254.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This one seems to be a little less routinethan the others. We do have to justify this in terms of promoting theends of open market operations, I guess, and that is a matter ofjudgment. Mr. Sternlight has so indicated. I'm not sure that this isa business that we should be in, as a matter of routine; it reallyshould have that justification. But we have the authorization andwe've done this for how many years now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 255.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh, 6 or 8 years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a simple response to a question and does not involve any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 256.
MR. MORRIS. Well, if we're going to continue to have $50 to$60 billion deficits, it's going to be an essential tool.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 257.
MR. PARTEE. There would be a greater problem if we didn'thave a deficit. We wouldn't have so many securities available todeliver them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement by Mr. Partee about the availability of securities in relation to the deficit.


Passage number 258.
MR. WALLICH. And eventually own them all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a desire or plan to eventually own all the things mentioned.


Passage number 259.
-22-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think the markets should usethis as too much of a crutch. There is an effort--we charge a penaltyrate on this stuff compared to what the market charges, don't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion that the markets should not rely too heavily on something, without any opposition or conflicting views mentioned.


Passage number 260.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That's right, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 261.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is at least one indication of [ourobjective of] discouraging it and not using it excessively. Do wehave a motion on this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement indicates the objective of discouraging and not using something excessively, but it does not invite any conflicting viewpoints or arguments. It simply presents an objective without any opposition.


Passage number 262.
MR. CORRIGAN. Peter, on the first page of your memorandum,there is a reference to the volume of trading and that it may have putstrains on your automatic clearing mechanism in government securities.Are you talking about our system or are you talking about the Streetsystems there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 263.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I was not referring to the System'sopen market operations but to the volume of traffic through theSystem's clearing mechanism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a clarification made by Mr. Sternlight regarding the subject of their discussion. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 264.
MR. CORRIGAN. No. The clearing mechanism through the Fed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states "No." in response to an unknown statement or question.


Passage number 265.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by Mr. Sternlight's response "Yes" to a question or statement that likely had an opposing viewpoint or contradicted his perspective. However, without further context, it is impossible to determine the exact nature of the disagreement.


Passage number 266.
MR. CORRIGAN. The dealers, then, have never set up any kindof interface of their own with our system to move a lot of stuff outof ours.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about the lack of an interface between the dealers and the system.


Passage number 267.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Sternlight or any argument or disagreement involving him.


Passage number 268.
 No, but in a--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I need a second.SPEAKER(.). Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for a second to support their point or motion.


Passage number 269.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will approve this.I think that is all the authorizations and directives and so forththat have to be approved. So, we can go to the substance of ourdiscussion. Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "Without objection, we will approve this" indicates that there is unanimous agreement among the individuals present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 270.
MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. This can be seen in the use of the phrase "[Statement--see Appendix" which suggests that there is a difference of opinion or conflicting perspectives being discussed.


Passage number 271.
][Coffee break][MR. AXILROD. Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 272.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will just make one preliminary commentmyself: As we focus on these numbers, let us recognize that we arenot [skillful] enough to hit any of them. And we are engaged in anexercise [of assessing] which way the risks go in substantial part,following a period when velocity has been way off from expectations orinterest rates have been way off from expectations, however you wantto state it. In fact, they have both been off from expectations. Isuspect that when we sat here the last time we were all somewhat[expecting], in setting the reserve path, that interest rates weregoing to go up with any of the reserve paths. Instead, they came downby quite a few percentage points, which cast a quite different lighton things as the period progressed. There is nothing we can do to3/31/81eliminate those uncertainties. I just think we ought to be aware ofthem. Who would like to comment. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. The speaker is making a preliminary comment and stating their own opinion about the situation. They are acknowledging uncertainties and suggesting that everyone should be aware of them.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 273.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a comment andask Steve some questions. These figures on adjusted M-1B, of course,are going to be the great guessing game of 1981. There has been a lotof solid analytical work done at the Boston Bank and by the Boardstaff on what happened in earlier periods when NOWs were introducedand so forth. We have some survey data already. We intend to do somemore surveys. Yet I, for one, Steve, end up with a feeling of alittle skepticism about how much we solidly know. I'm told by mystaff, whom I have had looking into this, that if we took at facevalue the survey data that came in from the banks and the S&Ls forJanuary and February and assumed that about the same results prevailedin March that prevailed in February, we'd end up with something like aweighted average for banks and S&Ls together of 82 percent of thesource of NOWs being demand deposits and the balance being non-transaction accounts. That is in a bit of contrast with the bestjudgment of the Board staff. It came out in the Greenbook, forexample, that in January 80 percent of the NOWs came out of demand,and the figure for February and March was 75 percent. Using thefigure that we came up with of an 82 percent weighted average as arough estimate for the first three months of the year--and I don't saythat I have complete certainty on that either--rather than the [Boardstaff] figures I just cited, we would come up with a 5.2 percentannual rate of gain, seasonally adjusted, for M-1B from December toMarch, versus your figure of 3.2 percent. In other words, it would bea full 2 percentage point difference and the level of M-1B would be $2billion higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses skepticism and disagreement with the figures and estimates provided by the Board staff regarding the percentage of NOWs coming from demand deposits. He presents his own estimate, which differs from the staff's figures, and argues that it would result in a higher rate of gain for M-1B.


Passage number 274.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's from January to March or Decemberto March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply stating a range of time, covering either January to March or December to March. It does not present differing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 275.
MR. BALLES. December to March. And we would, in fact, befairly close to the midpoint [of our target]. It's just a word ofcaution that, from my standpoint at least, I would feel a little saferif this Committee for its own deliberations had in mind a range ofpossible outcomes rather than a pinpoint figure, because at least atthis point in time, I don't feel we have enough information to have asolid figure that's measurable to the extent we do for a lot ofeconomic statistics and so forth. Having expressed my misgivings, Iam turning to you, Steve, to see if you can reassure me or tell methat things are better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing caution and uncertainty but does not directly disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 276.
MR. AXILROD. Since I don't know the method of calculationused by your staff, I certainly can't do much reassuring. Thepercentages we took were based on the surveys from banks. We askedwhat percent came from demand deposits and what came from otheraccounts. We got similar percentages out of the Michigan survey ofconsumer attitudes. For the S&Ls we took the percentages that theHome Loan Bank people told us came out of their own accounts versuswhat came from other institutions. The amount that came from otherinstitutions we divided up in the same way as on the banks' reportsand we rounded a little. We came to 80 percent for the first monthand then 75 percent for the next two months. I'm not sure of theexact number, but I think it probably came out at something like 76 or77 percent. Probably the best thing to do is for us simply to send tothe Committee a note on the exact calculation method we used, and then-24-3/31/81it would be verifiable against how other people might like to viewexactly the same data.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage is simply explaining the method of calculation used by Mr. Axilrod's staff. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 277.
MR. BALLES. Maybe I could pinpoint this a bit more. Is myunderstanding correct--I got this from somewhere--that youjudgmentally shaded down somewhat the survey data that came in fromthe institutions, at least for January if not February, in terms ofthe percent they reported as coming from demand deposits.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is stating a question or request for clarification, rather than expressing opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 278.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm not certain of that, PresidentBalles. I know that we tried to make allowance for the fact that thesample we used was wrong--well, not wrong, but it had more large banksrelative to small banks than there are in the nation as a whole. So,therefore, we tried to weight it so that we gave more weight to smallbanks [in the survey], in line with their role in the nation as awhole. We didn't simply average it, so to speak, which would haveresulted in a higher number because the sample had fewer small banksrelative to large banks than is true nationally. Now, that could be adifference. I don't know whether, in fact, it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 279.
MR. BALLES. The only other comment I wanted to make on this,Mr. Chairman, is that some of these fine and really well-designedanalytical studies that were done, say, with respect to the NewEngland experience, lead to a conclusion that probably about two-thirds of the source of NOWs was demand deposits and the rest was fromsavings and so forth. We have a feeling that that might not beapplicable to the United States as a whole in 1981. We see that avery large number of respondents to the surveys, contrary to what Iunderstand was the case in New England, are permitting minimumbalances to be held in various forms of savings instruments, such aspassbook accounts, money market certificates, the 30-month smallsavers certificate, etc. At least in the West, the largest banks andthe largest S&Ls, in fact, are permitting those so-called minimumbalance requirements for NOWs to be held in savings instruments, whichI understand contrasts somewhat, Frank, with what had been theexperience in New England. If that practice should prevail as wecontinue to keep this under observation during the rest of the year,it might lead to a greater proportion of NOWs coming out of demanddeposits and less out of savings. So, there is the possibility thatthe present methodology could be understating the adjusted growth inM-1B. But I think that needs some more study.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents different perspectives and information that could lead to disagreement or contention regarding the methodology and findings related to the growth in M-1B.


Passage number 280.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think your comments are very welltaken in the vein that there is uncertainty here, which I doubt we canresolve completely, but we've got to keep looking at it. I think wejust have to recognize that there is a band of uncertainty. And inthat connection, we assumed in the target for the actual figures, theequivalent target, that this would pretty quickly go down to two-thirds, didn't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the uncertainty and suggests the need to continue investigating the issue. They also mention the assumption made in regards to the target figures.


Passage number 281.
MR. AXILROD. Well, but we changed that assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod simply states that the assumption was changed, without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 282.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have. We haven't published a new one.The question is when we should indicate that there is a new targetequivalent for the actual figures, if we change that assumption.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is discussing a question regarding indicating a new target or equivalent for the actual figures, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement expressed in the given statement.


Passage number 283.
-25-3/31/81MR. AXILROD. We have postponed that two-thirds because thelatest data coming in suggest that [proportion from demand deposits]remains very high, and we have stayed with the same [assumption].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the latest data and the decision that has been made based on that data.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But at some point we will have to changethat other target, won't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing views or arguments. It is simply questioning whether there will be a need to change a certain target in the future.


Passage number 285.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. But we haven't. For surewe would do it around midyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information or confirming a statement.


Passage number 286.
 But whether we would want to do itbefore then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I might want to do it before then ifI thought it became big enough so that it was really significant.It's the other side of saying that this adjusted figure may understatewhat actually has been going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion without contradicting or opposing any point made previously.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 287.
MR. BALLES. I can only speculate that the extraordinaryincrease in velocity of M-1B, as reported based on the adjustedfigures, could not have been so big if the adjusted figures shouldhave been adjusted higher. We get those sorts of interactions goingon. So I, for one, just have to express some skepticism. All I'mdoing is trying to find out how solidly we know what the adjustedresults are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles expresses skepticism and questions the validity of the adjusted results. He suggests that if the adjusted figures were higher, the increase in velocity would not have been as significant.


Passage number 288.
 And, if anything, I have a hunch--and that's all it is--that perhaps we should be addressing--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The answer, of course, is not verysolidly, which is a matter of curiosity. It may affect how peoplethink, if people were suspicious of this estimate we made of 75 to 80percent, depending upon what month. If you had to guess, is it thegeneral feeling that that percentage sounds too low, which is what youare suggesting, John.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is expressing their own hunch and curiosity without contradicting or arguing against any other ideas or opinions.


Passage number 289.
MR. BALLES. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 290.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, we did a more comprehensive survey ofinstitutions up in the Ninth District. While it wasn't a big survey,it was done very carefully; we did in-depth interviews with theaccounting officers and all the rest. We are finding the same thingMr. Balles was suggesting, including that for large numbers of theseaccounts the kicker is in what they call a "hostage" account, asavings account. And, therefore, there is no minimum balance to speakof at all in the NOW account itself. I'll send that to you, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is simply stating the results of a survey and confirming the findings of Mr. Balles.


Passage number 291.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will never resolve this because, evenif we did it very accurately for this early period, which we can't, wejust don't know how it affects the behavior from then on. And nobanker can tell us because he doesn't know either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing uncertainty and agreeing that the resolution is not possible due to the lack of accurate information and understanding about the future behavior. It emphasizes that neither the speaker nor a banker can provide the answer.


Passage number 292.
MR. MORRIS. I assume the purpose of this scheme is to reducereserve requirements.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement made by Mr. Morris is a simple assumption about the purpose of a scheme, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 293.
MR. FORD. Sure. They want to keep the money in the bank butin the form of an account that has the lower reserve requirements.That's why some of them, I'm told, are continuing the ATS approach,which one would have thought would have been outmoded.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 294.
-26-3/31/81MR. BLACK. Well, a lot of them are not even offering NOWsbut are sticking with ATS accounts because that stays in for that veryreason.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states that many people continue to use ATS accounts instead of NOW accounts.


Passage number 295.
MR. FORD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 296.
 So, from the [market] I think what you are hearinghere is--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The ATS account ought to work the otherway. I would think the inclination would then be just to call thesavings account an ATS account, which means it's all--or a largeportion of it--coming out of savings accounts. It's very difficult.Well, Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own thoughts and speculations on how the ATS account should work, but there is no direct opposition or disagreement with anyone else's viewpoint.


Passage number 297.
MR. FORD. I wanted to ask one question, in the same vein asJohn's about how some of the technical work was done, on this issuethat has been raised by some of the money market gurus about theseasonal adjustment: As I understand it, for the first quarter of theyear it would not have made a lot of difference in the adjustments youmade for December through March, but looking ahead to the next quarterof the year, there might be some problems with the big seasonaladjustment. I would like to hear, Steve, how you factored that intoyour projections and whether we are facing the possibility of any bigsurprises just due to the fact that we haven't yet been able todevelop an appropriate seasonal adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question posed by Mr. Ford, seeking clarification and information from Steve.


Passage number 298.
MR. AXILROD. We will be putting out the revised seasonals inMay. They are delayed this year because last year was so exceptionalthat we didn't feel we could run an ordinary X-11 and we were tryingto do some modeling to abstract from the credit control program, whichis a one-time event. But as a temporary ad hoc measure, we werethinking that what we should do is to take 80 percent or 75 percent,whatever the number is, of the other checkable deposit increase abovetrend in 1981 and put it back into demand deposits when we seasonallyadjust. So we would not be adding it in unadjusted; and that's whatthe market is focusing on. I asked the fellows back in January, rightafter the first week was so big, to keep track of a series on that tosee what difference it made. And as you suggest, it doesn't make asubstantial amount of difference in January, February, and March. Thegrowth rate in January, as we do it now, was 2.9 percent; if we hadthrown the demand deposits back in, it would have been 2.0 percent.This would be partially but not entirely offset in February; where wehave now a -2.3 percent, it would have been zero. And then in March,it doesn't happen to make any difference. You are quite right thatwhen the seasonal factors get large in April, May, and June, it makesmore of a difference. On our current estimates of the distribution ofOCDs between savings and demand, it would lower the growth rate forApril, and I'm going to round, by 2-1/2 percentage points. The growthrate adjusted "properly" would be lowered by about 2-1/2 percentagepoints. In May it would be raised by 3-1/2 percentage points and forJune it would be lowered by 2-1/2 percentage points. So, they're notquite offsetting, but that would be the relationship. We havepresented the targets as we're [making these calculations] now. If wehad presented them in these other terms, instead of 6 percent, let'ssay, for April, May, and June, we would have presented underalternative B something like 3-1/2, 9-1/2, and 3-1/2 percent. Aprilwould have been low, May high, and June low. But we are presentingthem on something like a straight 6 percent if you take alternative B.And as long as we measure against the target in a way consistent with-27-3/31/81how the target is set, I don't think we have troubles. We don'tintend to measure it in an inconsistent way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining a proposed adjustment to the seasonal adjustment process and discussing the potential impact on growth rates.


Passage number 299.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me what you are saying, if Iunderstand you correctly, is that one can pick any one of thesealternatives and seasonally adjust it the other way, which seems moresensible to me, and the growth would be bigger.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their understanding of what the other person is saying and agreeing with it.


Passage number 300.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the given passage without any context or information about the content of the passage.


Passage number 301.
 The growth would be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bigger or smaller.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is presenting two options without expressing any preference or disagreement.


Passage number 302.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the growth would be somewhat smaller, theway it works out on these figures. The growth, by the way, fromJanuary to June evens out entirely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that the growth would be somewhat smaller and explaining how it evens out from January to June.


Passage number 303.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be smaller in April, bigger inMay, and smaller in June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement is simply describing a pattern or sequence of sizes over time. There is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 304.
MR. AXILROD. The numbers I gave add up to 16-1/2 percent theother way and to a little under 18 percent the way we are doing itcurrently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or indicators of disagreement or contention. It simply presents two different percentages based on different calculations.


Passage number 305.
MR. MORRIS. Well, it's still smaller than the average noisefactor in it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or observation about the size of the "noisefactor" in question.


Passage number 306.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right. Also, we think theseasonal is going to change in any [event]. And that isn't done yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact or opinion about the changing of seasons without any contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 307.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it bothers me a little, because itjust seems conceptually that we should seasonally adjust these things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal opinion about wanting to seasonally adjust something, but there is no disagreement or conflicting point of view mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 308.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, that's right. Given the size of theshifts, we should. But this is very ad hoc. We don't know because wedon't know how the OCD series is going to behave once [the shiftshave] happened. This is just putting back into demand deposits whatwas shifted out. But once it is shifted out, combined with somesavings deposits, it bears interest. Given that interest payments aremade, we don't know that the seasonal behavior is going to be thesame.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker indicates uncertainty and disagreement about the future behavior of the OCD series after the shifts have happened. They suggest that the seasonal behavior may not be the same as before due to the introduction of interest payments.


Passage number 309.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know you don't know. But as a firstapproximation I would think it would be more like the demand depositseasonal than no seasonal at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas. It is only providing a hypothetical comparison between two types of deposits.


Passage number 310.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I think [that's true of] the shift. Butotherwise I doubt it. When interest rates fall, I don't know what isgoing to happen to these accounts. Their behavior is going to be verydifferent, I'm convinced, than demand deposits. We might be able toget the cyclical movement out, but it's going to be something of aproblem. But we intend in May to get this all corrected. As of themoment, we are operating in this way. And I don't think the Committeeis being misled as long as we set the target and measure against it ina consistent way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing personal doubts and concerns about the behavior of accounts and their response to interest rate fluctuations, but there is no opposition or disagreement with anyone else's opinions or statements.


Passage number 311.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This is because the passage only mentions the name "Mr. Schultz" and does not provide any additional information or context that could indicate contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 312.
-28-3/31/81MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Balles talked about a range of possibleoutcomes. It's rather important to think along those lines because,at this point, it's easy to parade the horribles. In spite of mygreat respect for Mr. Kichline, I think his forecast is not likely tocome to pass. If you look at what he has for budget deficits--$85billion [in 1981 and $94 billion] in 1982--and then look where he endsup with his GNP forecast, which is for very sluggish growth, I thinkthe proper assumption is that we have very high interest rates duringthat period. From my discussions with bankers around the country, Ijust don't think the real world is going to operate that way. I getthe feeling that they're pretty concerned about the financialcondition of a lot of corporations out there, and I just don't think alot of companies can stand that kind of environment for that length oftime. I don't know what it's going to be like, but I doubt that it'sgoing to be like that forecast. Take two possibilities. One is thatthis M2 growth is more meaningful and that we get tax cuts thissummer, which are going to be very expansionary. We [could] get anenormous surge in money growth in the last half of the year and veryhigh interest rates, and then get socked like the devil in 1982. Ortake the other way around that we are going to have a much weakereconomy short term than now appears likely, so [money] growth is goingto be much slower. Add to the whole problem what the House BankingCommittee said--I was struck by this--which was that they could acceptthe upper end of the target ranges for monetary growth for 1981provided that budget and other fiscal policies offset the highunemployment effects that the monetary policy is expected to produce.That seems to me to be a scenario for absolute disaster. If they aregoing to continue to look to us to hold the line, I don't think wehave a choice. We've said what our path is going to be and, if wewere to attempt to ease, it's pretty clear that everybody would thinkwe had let the inflationary cat out of the bag. And it seems to methat interest rates would be even higher under those circumstances.So, I don't think we have a choice; we have to stay on our generalpath here. But the scenarios of what could possibly happen can bepretty wild. So, it's rather crucial at this point to try to retainwhat flexibility we can and to have some range of options because thisis a pretty tough period we are heading into.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage contains disagreement or contention. Mr. Schultz disagrees with Mr. Kichline's forecast and offers alternative scenarios.


Passage number 313.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure where that leaves us.Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "I'm not quite sure where that leaves us" shows uncertainty or confusion, but it does not indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 314.
MR. SCHULTZ. Scared.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "scared" is a statement expressing a feeling, rather than a disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 315.
MR. BLACK. I can't answer that question, Mr. Chairman. Ihad something in mind I wanted to ask and get an answer on. Bill Fordmade the main point I had, but I would add that what really concernsus is the bulge that we ordinarily get in M-1B in April on anunadjusted basis. If the NOW account portion is not somehowseasonally adjusted, that bulge is going to be overstated and thepsychological effects on the market concern us. We were going tosuggest that we try some kind of ad hoc adjustment on that, Steve,along the lines that you were playing with, just to avoid that adverseeffect. We played with it by applying the demand deposit seasonaladjustment to that portion of the NOW accounts that we thought cameout of demand deposits and the savings deposits seasonal adjustment tothe other portion. We estimated that in April, which was the monththat concerned us, it would probably be overstated by about 3-1/2percentage points, and that seemed to be a very bad time for that-29-3/31/81figure to be appearing because we seem to be making some progresstoward our ultimate objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing concerns and suggestions related to the bulge in the M-1B in April and how it could be adjusted to avoid adverse effects.


Passage number 316.
 We were hoping we could do somethingabout that, although--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we seasonally adjusted it, it would be3-1/2 percent higher than if we didn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a hypothetical scenario about the potential increase in a certain percentage if something specific is done (seasonally adjusting it).


Passage number 317.
MR. BLACK. No. If we don't seasonally adjust the NOWportion, the seasonal will pull [it up].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the consequence of not seasonally adjusting the NOW portion.


Passage number 318.
 April has a very highseasonal adjustment factor and if we don't apply that to the NOWaccount portion, then we estimated--this may not be exactly right--MR. PARTEE. It's a build-up for the tax payment, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contentions or disagreements. It is simply providing information and making speculative statements.


Passage number 319.
MR. BLACK. --that it would be overstated by about 3-1/2percent above what it really was in fact, as nearly as we couldestimate at all. I'm well aware that we don't have all theinformation we need for any kind of rigorous seasonal adjustment, butthat one month really concerns us. It doesn't make that muchdifference in what The Wall Street Journal is covering, I don't think.But it could at that particular juncture.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply expressing his concern about a potential overstatement of about 3-1/2 percent, but acknowledges the limitations in estimating and seasonal adjustment. He also mentions that this issue may not have a significant impact on what The Wall Street Journal is covering.


Passage number 320.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to analyze. Please provide the passage in question.


Passage number 321.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I feel that we're really trapped ortripped up by our own procedures. We built in the expectation thatwe've lowered the ranges and yet we make no allowance for base driftin our targets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing frustration with the procedures and is pointing out a discrepancy in the expectations and allowances.


Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say, if I may insert a commentrelevant to base drift, that I look at these targets somewhatdifferently. We look at these cones, which always gives us animpossible problem at the beginning of the year; because the cone isso narrow at the beginning of the year, we're always outside it. Ifwe were to attach this cone to where we, in fact, ended up last year--and we concede that we ended up high last year--and took the targetsfrom the fourth quarter and showed where we wanted to end up thisyear, I think one can argue that we are now about in the middle of therange where we should be. I am sorry that I don't have the picturewith me but we're about in the middle of that channel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining their perspective on how they view the targets and where they believe they are currently positioned in relation to those targets.


Passage number 323.
MR. PARTEE. A longer range, sort of starting off in thebeginning of '80.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a statement of fact or a personal perspective.


Passage number 324.
MR. MORRIS. That's for M-1B, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward question.


Passage number 325.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. We're clearly high on M2 and M3; I'mjust talking about M-1B. In other words, stated another way, we endedup the year high, so having a low quarter brings us back to where weshould be.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 326.
MR. WINN. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply confirms that the previous statement is correct.


Passage number 327.
 That would be my point: We're inthe upper end of the old range even though we're below the range forthe--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or stated another way, we didn't changethe target's slope much. If you just extended that target for lastyear, we'd be at about the middle of it now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing a point or observation and there is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 328.
-30-3/31/81MR. WINN. Well, that again is where we've tripped up. If westart to adjust the aggregates for the transaction part of moneymarket funds, that is clearly one thing. It's not the total moneymarket funds, but we see the transfers going through on our checkclearing operations, so they are being used. Second, we have RPs andEurodollars and one can argue how much of that belongs in the picture.And if we adjust the aggregates on a real M-1B or transaction typebasis, it results in a much higher figure than we're reporting. So,not only have we got our targets out of focus but the bullets [withwhich] we're trying to hit the targets all seem off to me. We reallyhave two major sources of confusion for which I'm afraid we're goingto get beaten over the head no matter what evolves. Add onto that alook at the economic analysis: We have inventory certainly tight orunder control; we have consumers who certainly have behaved farstronger than anybody thought they would, but they're continuing to dothat; we've projected construction expenditures in office buildings,apartment houses, and hotels that really are starting to jump in avery big way; and we have the stimulus from the deficit that'scertainly a pretty big one. And we ought to recall that we've beenprojecting declines since 1979. Now, one of these times we may getthat, but we're not sure we're going to get that. So we're higher inthe range than we think we are. We're much higher if we adjust theaggregates. And we may have a stronger economic picture than we thinkwe are facing. All of these factors give me pause as we start to setour objectives for the next three months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion about the complexities and uncertainties surrounding the adjustment of aggregates and the economic picture. The speaker is expressing their concerns and uncertainties, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 329.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: cannot make up his mind on which restaurant to choose for dinner. He is torn between trying the new sushi place downtown or going to his favorite Italian spot on the corner. He weighs the pros and cons of each option but is still unable to decide.


Passage number 330.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, let me start with a wordon the price outlook. I sense for the first time at least a fewstraws in the wind that are consistent with some backing off oninflationary expectations. I don't think there's much hard evidenceone can point to, but I do get a little flavor of that. It's alsotrue that we could get lucky in terms of the consumer price indextoward the end of this year. Now, if the staff's estimates aboutmortgage rates [are right]--that they're just going to stay high--theypresumably won't be adding. And I think the outlook for food prices,assuming we continue to get some moisture in the Midwest, is a gooddeal better than it was even a few months ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their personal observations and opinions, rather than engaging in a debate or presenting conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 331.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you get some rain in the last fewdays.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply asks whether or not the reader received rain in the last few days. It does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 332.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, some rain is starting to come. And theenergy price outlook, I think, is also distinctly better. So, maybethere's a little ground for optimism there. On the economy, I lookfor a flattening out in the second quarter, but I think the potentialfor strong upward pressures later in the year is very real. And inline with one of Mr. Schultz's two scenarios, I think the potentialfor strong financial pressures in the second half of the year andstrong pressures on money growth is very real. I noticed in Mr.Kichline's forecast, for example, that he has the Treasury borrowingalmost $50 billion, $49.2 billion, in the fourth quarter, which isconsiderably greater than even the $35 billion we had this [quarter].So, I sense that whatever problems we may have now with controllingmoney and interest rates are only going to get worse as the year goesalong, partly because the risks are that the economy is going to bestronger rather than weaker in the second half of the year. And I-31-3/31/81couple that with my sense that M-1B is giving us the wrong signals.On this money market fund thing, for example, we did a littleexercise. It doesn't mean anything, but just as an example: If youtook the growth in money market funds over December to March and justadded in one-tenth of the growth to M-1B, that raises the growth of M-1B for the quarter to 6.2 percent. And that, again, doesn't sayanything about this other matter that Mr. Balles was pointing toearlier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 333.
MR. FORD. How would you rationalize doing that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for an explanation.


Passage number 334.
MR. CORRIGAN. No rationalization. It's just a guess, just anumber. You just take one-tenth of the growth in the money marketfunds phased in at the rate at which they actually grew and add thatinto M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is simply stating his opinion or suggestion without any contradiction or debate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 335.
MR. PARTEE. But you should have taken two-tenths of thedecline in savings accounts and added that in, too. You didn't dothat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is suggesting that something should have been added, indicating a disagreement or difference in opinion.


Passage number 336.
MR. CORRIGAN. Why should I do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not exhibit any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 337.
MR. PARTEE. Because savings accounts are transactionsbalances also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of fact or observation made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 338.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, but they're in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Corrigan.


Passage number 339.
 I don't think itmakes--MR. PARTEE. So are money market funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing an opinion about money market funds.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 340.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, we can dispute that, but I think thisunderstatement of M-1B is very real.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The phrase "Well, we can dispute that" indicates that there is disagreement or contention between the speaker and someone else regarding the understatement of M-1B.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 341.
MR. PARTEE. I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be inferred from the phrase "I don't know," which suggests that Mr. Partee lacks knowledge or opinions on the subject.


Passage number 342.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, whether or not it is, I think it is. Itjust adds further weight to the argument that M-1B is giving us somefalse signals here. When I put it together, in terms of policy, Iwould not be allergic to giving a little more weight to M2 in linewith one of the points that Steve made. Also, the whole [situation],at least in my mind, argues in the direction of doing the best we cannow to keep well within the targets because later on I think it's onlygoing to get harder.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is expressing his opinion and agreeing with the points made by Steve. There is no indication of any opposing views or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 343.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't help with determining whether there is contention or disagreement without the passage that includes Governor Wallich.


Passage number 344.
MR. WALLICH. Looking at the situation that we have, theeconomy is much stronger than we had expected. Once again, we've hada recession predicted that so far hasn't materialized. As a result,the degree of slack in the economy and the pressure on prices andwages are less from excess capacity. The conclusion one is driven tois that our past policies, which we thought were quite restraining,were much less restraining. As for why that should have been, I sharethe views that have been expressed around the table. M-1B is probablymisleading. People are probably treating their money market mutualfunds and other sources of liquidity as at least a factor that allowsthem to use their checking accounts more actively. At the level ofholders of very large liquid assets, bear in mind that the Treasury-32-3/31/81has issued an enormous amount of bills, including cash managementbills, which at least go into L if they don't go into the loweraggregates. While these would be absorbed again as the Treasuryavoids borrowing and people use this liquidity to pay their taxes,nevertheless, there is probably some additional liquidity, and someresidual liquidity will remain. So, if we were to look at thesebroader aggregates, including all short-term assets, we'd probably seea higher degree of expansion. Now, M2 is probably a more relevantguide than M-1B. I don't want to bore you again with my views aboutinterest rates in real terms after tax and why they haven't been veryrestraining.As far as the outlook is concerned, I think there is a senseof unrealism about the Greenbook. It would be nice if things workedout that way with slow, stable growth. We have to bear in mind that[the level of economic activity] is really a little higher alreadythan we thought it would be as a result of the strong first quarter.But the realism of the outlook is undermined by the fact that we useM-1B at 4-1/2 or 4-3/4 percent. I think the chances are that we willbe pushed at least to 6 percent, the upper limit. We have had basedrift raising the whole level of the aggregates over time. So, I findit hard to believe that we'll get quite the same pressures in terms ofrestraint that are seen in the [staff's] outlook. I do see that we'regoing to get strong budgetary pressures. My impression is that therisks are very much on the up side and much less on the down side.That would encourage me now to want to accumulate such reserves ofrestraint as we can. We're lucky in a way to have undershot the[targets], at least with respect to the narrower aggregates. And I'dhusband this reserve. We'll probably be pushed off that point laterin the year. There's no reason to volunteer [to go] in that directionnow. Thank you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is discussing his views and analysis of the economy, but he does not argue or disagree with anyone else.


Passage number 345.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no mention of Governor Teeters in the passage, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement regarding him.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 346.
MS. TEETERS. I would like to remind you that those deficitnumbers are not independent of the forecast. Our projected deficitfor next year is considerably above the Administration's, primarilybecause of a much, much weaker forecast--a 0.5 percent rate of realgrowth rather than 5 percent, and higher unemployment rates andinterest rates. I think we added back in about $18 billion forinterest payments based on our interest rate forecast rather than theAdministration's, and we're losing about $25 billion in deficit perpoint of unemployment, if you compare the 6 percent with 5 percent.So, if Henry's scenario that the risks are on the up side comes true,the size of the deficit will be considerably below what is beingprojected at the present time. As I understand this forecast, thestaff had a great deal of difficulty getting any of the GNP numbers towork out because of the paucity of money. It is a very tightforecast. And the interest rates that would have come out of just amechanical running of the model are considerably higher than what arebeing shown here. So, in contrast to what Henry says, I would thinkthat the risks are on the other side. The consumer is running out ofsteam; the automobile [sales] probably won't last. [Businesses] canslow down investment. I don't feel strongly enough about it to saythat [the risk on] the forecast is on the down side, because I thinkwe have some real demand pressures which are being suppressed, namelyin housing at the present time, which with any sort of readjustmentwould rise.-33-3/31/81This forecast is one of the gloomiest I've ever seen. And itcertainly is gloomier than any forecast that is in the public [arena]now, mainly because of the underlying assumptions about interestrates. I don't particularly want [policy] to let up. On the otherhand, I don't want to screw it down any harder at this point. Itseems to me that the best way to do this is approximately alternativeB because what Fred says about other corporations [is true of thethrifts]. We're going to have impacts on the thrifts. If we keepinterest rates up there, we'll get a lot of emergency reaction intrying to rescue them. A very good study was done here at the Boardon the number of corporations that have had their ratings in the bondmarket downgraded. It's not only surprising, it's fairly widespread.There are going to be a lot of corporations in trouble, and I don'tsee making it any worse for them. I would also point out that we haveM2 misspecified relative to where we've set the M1 measures. We havedecided to keep the M2 target where it was last year, even though thestaff's best estimate was that it would be higher. So we're trying toget M2 into a slot that's inconsistent with M1. And if we just lookat the fact that we're over [our target] on M2, I think that is goingto lead us to actions to depress its growth and depress the M1s [more]than ever. And we've got the money market mutual funds. We have aninterest-sensitive, very interest-sensitive, [component] in the M1measures, and if interest rates begin to drop, we're going to besitting here worrying about the fact that M2 is going down, not thatit's going up--and for [a reason] that's not connected with ourtargets. In terms of the alternatives, I come out for "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters disagrees with Henry's scenario and believes that the risks are on the other side. She also disagrees with the forecast and underlying assumptions about interest rates. She proposes an alternative approach (Option B) and expresses concerns about the impact of high interest rates on corporations and the M2 target.


Passage number 347.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 348.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I have the same sense of disquiet that'sbeing voiced around the table, because somehow everything doesn't seemto hang together. We really can't explain why the economy has been asstrong as it has been over the fall and winter. And not being able toexplain why it has been so strong, we don't have a very firm grasp onwhat it's going to do in the period immediately to come. I think wehave to be pretty flexible and await developments. I have a sense oftrepidation that Fred's expectation is going to work out: That therest of the year will be stronger than we are now anticipating andthat there will be a tendency toward very rapid money growth. I hateto talk about these neat little adjustments of what ought and whatought not to be counted, but just in plain old M-1B terms, as velocityturns around, I think we're going to have very fast growth to contendwith. And the tax cut will [create] some stimulus to the economy and,therefore, a difficult situation for us to contend with as the yeargoes on from the standpoint of our target ranges.Now, I don't think interest rates are so low, as Henry does.Looking at the Bluebook [appendix], you find that the long-termgovernment bond yield is 13 percent, the long-term corporate bondyield is 14 percent, and the long-term mortgage rate is 15-1/2percent. It seems to me that those must all be positive real interestrates by some margin, but they are not, except in the case ofmortgages, having that much effect on behavior. That troubles mebecause I think they will come to have an effect on behavior. Andwhen attitudes shift, then we could find a rather sharp[deterioration] in the [economy]. So, I wouldn't urge deliberatelygoing about raising interest rates, but I think we ought to stick withthe course we've set. I didn't mean to offend Jerry on his money-34-3/31/81market fund calculation, but the fact of the matter is that theturnover of savings accounts is greater than the turnover of moneyfunds. So, if you add some portion of money funds in, you ought toadd some portion of the decline in savings accounts into thecalculation. You'll never reach an end on this because of the greatdifficulty of dealing with these problems.I come out, Mr. Chairman, somehow right where Nancy did. Ithink we just ought to follow alternative B, which is somewhat of amiddle course, and have plenty of room to adjust as we go along in thespring. I like "B" because it doesn't use up our room too rapidly.Our previous experience, you'll recall, is always that things go alongpretty well until we get to a double-digit month--and one will becoming before very long--and then perhaps we'll have to cope with avery low one. I think ["B"] is the way to go. I am troubled by theseasonal adjustment problem. If the April number has something like a3-1/2 percent overstatement, it's not going to be good psychologicallybecause it will probably give us a pretty high April number and willlook bad as it develops. I don't know what to do about it, but weought to think about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses their personal concerns and thoughts but does not engage in any argument or disagreement with others.


Passage number 349.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the other side of that coin is thatif we don't get a high April figure, we really have a much lowernumber than we think we have when we're publishing it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any directly conflicting or opposing viewpoints. It presents two sides of a situation but does not express disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 350.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we might get a very high April figure.How would you handle 15 percent for April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking how to handle a potential 15 percent increase in April.


Passage number 351.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, at 15 percent it's not so bad. We'dknow it's high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply acknowledges that a 15 percent rate is high, but does not present any opposing viewpoints or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 352.
MS. TEETERS. But remember last April we had an estimate atthis time of the year for a very large growth in April because of theenlarged refund. And, in fact, it came in at -14 percent, as Iremember.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It mentions a previous estimate and the actual result without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 353.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, there's tremendous volatility in thatmonth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact, acknowledging the presence of "tremendous volatility" in that specific month.


Passage number 354.
MS. TEETERS. April is just a terrible month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "April is just a terrible month" is simply an opinion expressed by Ms. Teeters. It does not invite any argument or debate.


Passage number 355.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 356.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have listened to all theseconcerns, which seem to be pointed in one direction. But it seems tome that the scenario could be quite different in that the secondquarter could turn out to be much weaker than the staff is projecting,and I'm inclined to think that that will be the case. Not that itwill be a second quarter such as we had last year, where we had a[GNP] drop at a 10 percent annual rate, but that it will be asufficient drop to put us in the situation of having to decide whetherwe are going to follow a monetarist course and let interest rates dropsubstantially or whether we're going to decide that we will do thingsdifferently this year--maintain a relatively high level of rates inthe face of a weak economy and perhaps produce a much poorer thirdquarter than we have projected as well. It seems to me that this isjust as logical a scenario as the ones that have been written so far.The fact is that at the moment we just don't know to which of these to-35-3/31/81attach the higher probability. So, therefore, the staff comes outwith zero, which I think is a commendable position if you have to comeout with a number. But I'm really concerned about facing exactly thesame problem we did last spring.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is expressing his opinion and concern about a potential scenario, but he does not directly disagree or argue against any specific point made by others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 357.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's much easier to disagree with thestaff forecast than to come up with one of your own.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The statement expresses that it is easier to disagree with the staff forecast rather than creating one's own forecast, implying a difference in opinions or conflicting ideas between individuals.


Passage number 358.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't provide the response you're looking for.


Passage number 359.
 It's the statistical--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does this lead you to any particularconclusion among these alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to conclude whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 360.
MR. MORRIS. I think "B" is the one that I would support.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris simply expresses his personal preference for option "B".


Passage number 361.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage based on the information provided.


Passage number 362.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though I agree that there's alot of uncertainty as to how much the second quarter will weaken andhow much increased strength in the real economy there will be in thesecond half of the year, I feel that there's a greater presumption ofstrength in the monetary aggregates. Now, I'm not talking aboutApril, but we're not likely to see the same velocity of circulation,and there are increases in defense spending and tax cuts of some kindcoming long. Therefore, it seems to me that to position ourselves asflexibly as possible, we ought to aim for a return to the bottom endof the range by June rather than to the midpoint. However, eventhough that's alternative B, I think a $1.3 billion borrowingassumption would be just as compatible with that as a $1.5 billionassumption. I'd go on to suggest that to the extent opportunitiesarise for a discretionary adjustment of the nonborrowed reserve pathduring the intermeeting period that we bear in mind the overshootingof M2. If that continues to overshoot in a significant way, thatshould be factored in. Our analysis is that alternative B, even witha $1.3 billion assumption, probably means a rise in the fed funds rateof maybe a point or so from present levels. That's a very roughguess, but we might have something close to the 15 to 17 percentrange. If you take the midpoint, it would be a marginal increase, butI don't think it would be that significant that it would cause a lotof reaction. And that's the best position we can be in; I think itwould be a great mistake to go either to "A" or to "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting their opinion and perspective on the monetary aggregates and the suggested course of action, without arguing or disagreeing with any other point of view.


Passage number 363.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 364.
MR. ROOS. Yes, sir. I would opt for alternative C and Iwould base that on the following rationale: I assume that our primaryobjective is to achieve a start on reducing the rate of inflation wehave had and that there is an effect on inflation of reducing thegrowth of, let's say, M-1B. We had M-1B growth last year at about a7.3 percent rate. A reasonable reduction, if we're able to achieveit, would be from that 7.3 percent to 6 percent growth, let's say, forthe period from February through the end of the year. If we set thepaths for growth as reflected in "C," I think we can achieve that 6percent annual growth. I think we can do it without having animpossibly low rate of output. We project, assuming 6 percent M-1Bgrowth for the year, real GNP of something in the area of 0 to 1percent. That's obviously slow growth, but it's not negative growth.I don't think that we can achieve a fast growth of output and still-36-3/31/81have the necessary degree of monetary restraint to achieve a reductionin inflation. Now, that 6 percent I'm referring to is on anunadjusted basis. We assume--and maybe some would argue-- that NOWaccount flows have almost ceased and that in the period ahead we canuse an unadjusted aggregate and not be in trouble inasmuch as webelieve that the big NOW account change has already occurred. So, tomake a long story short, I think the best way of achieving our targetsand the best way of bringing down M-1B growth as necessary to have asalutary effect on reducing inflation is "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and giving their rationale for choosing alternative C.


Passage number 365.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve, what is the latest on NOW accountgrowth in the last couple of weeks. I forget. Has it come downfurther or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is a simple query about the latest information regarding NOW account growth.


Passage number 366.
MR. AXILROD. Let me get the figure. Here it is. For theweek of the 18th, it's only about $500 million and we're projecting$600 million for the week of the 25th. Our pattern had been that bigincreases occurred in the first couple of weeks and then they sloweddown in the last couple of weeks of the month. In the early part ofthis month, increases had been about $2 billion. I would assume fromhere on out--or early next month--that the increases might be more inthe $1 to $1-1/2 billion range and then come down again. We are at ahigher rate of growth than we expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and making projections based on that information.


Passage number 367.
MR. PARTEE. You are talking about several billion a month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward statement of fact.


Passage number 368.
MR. MORRIS. Actually, Larry, the New England NOW accountexperience would indicate that we are not going to have a completeadjustment to NOW accounts for two years. The idea that the countryis going to adapt to this in a few months just does not jive with theNew England experience. Now, maybe the rest of the country moves alot faster than we do in New England, but I doubt it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their doubt that the rest of the country will adapt to NOW accounts as quickly as the New England region did.


Passage number 369.
MR. SCHULTZ. The fact that we have much higher interestrates now indicates that the adjustment would take place more rapidly.We are seeing shorter lag times in everything.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It presents a statement about higher interest rates indicating a faster adjustment with shorter lag times in everything.


Passage number 370.
MR. MORRIS. Well, it may be more rapidly, but to argue thatthe adjustment is largely over I think is just wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: Although Mr. Morris disagrees with the statement that the adjustment is largely over, there is no mention of contention or disagreement between him and anyone else in the passage. He simply expresses his opinion without engaging in a debate or conflict with others.


Passage number 371.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will see. It would certainlyease our problems if it were over fairly soon. I'm a bit confused bywhat you said, [Larry]. I just want to clarify it. I'm a littlesurprised that you came out for "C." It's against that backgroundthat I ask this. My confusion is what numbers you are using. Thenumbers in the table, as I understand it, are adjusted M1 figures.So, when you talk about 7.3 percent last year, you are talking aboutthe unadjusted figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification on the numbers that were mentioned.


Passage number 372.
MR. ROOS. Yes, I'm talking about the unadjusted figures:4-1/2 percent March to June M-1B on page 7 under alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply referring to a specific set of figures or data.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 373.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that 4-1/2 percent is adjusted.On an unadjusted basis, that means what: 6-1/2 percent or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker suggests that there is an adjustment to a certain percentage, but does not specify the actual adjusted value. They then pose a question regarding the unadjusted basis, implying that there is some uncertainty or disagreement about whether it would be 6-1/2 percent or something else.


Passage number 374.
MR. AXILROD. Last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage provided.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I cannot provide a specific answer as you have not provided a specific passage for analysis. Please provide a passage for me to analyze and I will be happy to assist you.


Passage number 376.
-37-3/31/81MR. AXILROD. 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states a percentage rate of 6 percent without providing any additional context or conflicting information.


Passage number 377.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's only a 1-1/2 point difference now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply stating a numerical difference, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 378.
MR. AXILROD. That's our estimate. That's from March toJune. From February to June it's 2 percentage points different.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating an estimate and a comparison between two time periods.


Passage number 379.
MR. ROOS. In other words, that would give us a 6 percentunadjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward statement providing information without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 380.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And if you talk about 6 percent throughthe year unadjusted, this estimate may be wrong in the amount ofshifting. You may be assuming less shifting but, as we have [now]estimated, it's at the bottom of the range for the unadjusted figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is discussing the possibility of the estimate being wrong in terms of shifting and suggests that the assumption of less shifting may be incorrect. However, there is no conflicting viewpoint presented here.


Passage number 381.
MR. ROOS. I think that's 6 percent from the first quarter of1981 through the period ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact or opinion without any opposing viewpoints or contradictions.


Passage number 382.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Six percent from the first quarter throughthe last quarter, unadjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is providing a statement about a specific statistic (six percent) without any indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 383.
MR. ROOS. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only presents a statement made by Mr. Roos, without any conflicting information or contrasting opinions.


Passage number 384.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would give you slightly less than 6percent for the year then, which is at the bottom of the target thathas been set. I just wanted to make sure that's what you were saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification and confirmation from the person they are addressing.


Passage number 385.
MR. ROOS. That's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response "That's correct" simply affirms the correctness of a statement made by someone else.


Passage number 386.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to come in at the bottom of thetarget range for the year. I just wanted to clarify that. Thatmeans, in terms of the adjusted target, that you would be happy tocome in at 3-1/2 percent or so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification on a specific target range and the other person affirms their agreement.


Passage number 387.
MR. ROOS. Yes, but we have some differences with the degreeof adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that there are some differences in the degree of adjustment.


Passage number 388.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that I understand may be a problem.But it's in that neighborhood, right. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there may be a problem but agrees that the situation is in the same neighborhood or vicinity.


Passage number 389.
MR. BLACK. This futility that we all encounter in trying toforecast the economic outlook is perfectly understandable. Thatreinforces my basic belief that we ought never to lose sight ofsomething that I think we all agree on: That we have to get theseaggregates down over the long run. If we work in that direction, thenwe have an automatic stabilizer in place. And that is something wesometimes forget, I think. If the economy does turn out to bestronger, as it may, then that would tend to exert some kind ofbraking action; and if it turns out to be weaker, which I think youmade a good case for, Frank, then we have an automatic stabilizer onthe down side. So, in choosing our short-run targets, we always oughtto bear in mind the risk involved. We have had three years in whichwe haven't been able to reduce the rate of growth in the aggregates asmuch as we wanted. We came in a little above target last time, sothat leads me to suggest that we ought to resolve the risk by choosinga little lower rate than we otherwise might. And I think around 6percent on an unadjusted basis, as Larry suggested, would be aboutright between February and June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 390.
-38-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The unadjusted basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a numerical value without any conflicting viewpoints or contradictory statements.


Passage number 391.
MR. BLACK. Right. Unadjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple affirmation or agreement by Mr. Black.


Passage number 392.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, you're on "C" basically; I just wantto be [sure].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply seeking confirmation or clarification.


Passage number 393.
MR. BLACK. A little above "C" or between "B" and "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a straightforward statement providing a location reference.


Passage number 394.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Six percent on an unadjusted basis, fromwhat Steve just told me, is equivalent to "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It simply provides information given by Steve.


Passage number 395.
"MR. PARTEE. March to June is shown on the next page here;it's 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of information.


Passage number 396.
MR. BLACK. Yes, I'm talking about February to June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is just a statement made by Mr. Black.


Passage number 397.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're below "C" then, if you'retalking about February [to June].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about where the person falls in relation to the months mentioned.


Passage number 398.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's 7-1/2 percent on "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that suggest contention or disagreement.


Passage number 399.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to clarify where you are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply expresses a desire for clarification.


Passage number 400.
MR. BLACK. Let me get my [Bluebook].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating that he needs to get his Bluebook.


Passage number 401.
MR. FORD. It's on page 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 402.
MR. BLACK. Page 7 is what I'm talking about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not provide enough context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 403.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you're talking adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the lack of conflicting statements or opposing views. The speaker simply responds with "Well, you're talking adjusted", indicating agreement or acceptance of the previous statement.


Passage number 404.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 405.
MR. FORD. They're adjusted. The unadjusted is on page 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 406.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Keep these two pages in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The phrase "keep these two pages in mind" is simply suggesting that the reader should remember or consider the information provided on those pages.


Passage number 407.
MR. FORD. Do you know what they did.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention in this passage. It is a simple question asking for information.


Passage number 408.
 What's causing theconfusion, I think, is that the staff switched what they put inparentheses and what they don't--MR. AXILROD. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of clarification or explanation regarding the confusion caused by the staff switching the use of parentheses.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at the last line on page 8, asI understand it--. It doesn't seem right. Well, we don't look atMarch to June [on a quarterly average basis].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement or contention in the passage. The phrase "It doesn't seem right" suggests that the speaker disagrees with the information presented in the last line on page 8.


Passage number 410.
MR. BLACK. You want to look at February to June or March toJune.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting two different time periods to consider.


Passage number 411.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right. February to June orMarch to June, whichever one you prefer to look at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply presenting two options without any indication of disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 412.
MR. BLACK. Yes, I thought I was in between "B" and "C"[with] the 6 percent on the unadjusted. The unadjusted is at the top,isn't it, and the adjusted is at the bottom. I meant 6 percent on anunadjusted basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black about his understanding of the placement and percentages of adjusted and unadjusted figures.


Passage number 413.
3/31/81MR. BALLES. Vice versa, Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting views or arguments. It appears to be presenting information or initiating a conversation without any disagreement.


Passage number 414.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait a minute. We are saying on anunadjusted basis, February to June produces an adjusted figureconsiderably below "C." We better all try to get this straight in ourminds. I think the confusion is because of the parentheses. The realfigures are in parentheses; the adjusted figures are not. So, if youwere saying 6 percent on the unadjusted figure, you're at only 4percent on the adjusted figure, which is below "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply pointing out a potential confusion or misunderstanding regarding the use of parentheses and how they affect the interpretation of the figures.


Passage number 415.
"MR. BLACK. Well, I did not mean to be below "C." I'mconfused on this. It's devilishly confusing anyway. I thought what Iwas choosing was something between "B" and "C" on M-1B on chart 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing confusion and seeking clarification, but there is no conflict or difference of opinion present.


Passage number 416.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's okay. Those are the adjustedfigures.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the adjusted figures are acceptable.


Passage number 417.
MR. BLACK. Okay. Well, somewhere in between there, erring alittle toward "C" is really what I had in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black expressing his own preference, without any conflicting opinions or arguments presented.


Passage number 418.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "Okay" does not indicate contention or disagreement. It is a neutral affirmation or agreement.


Passage number 419.
MR. BLACK. I [understand] this well periodically and then Iget myself confused. It's tricky business.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges their own confusion and describes the topic as tricky, implying that they find it challenging to understand.


Passage number 420.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's easy to get confused. I think we hadbetter be sure what we have decided before we go on. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their concern and suggesting that it is important for the group to clarify their decisions before proceeding.


Passage number 421.
MR. BOEHNE. I don't think I can add to the confusion, andcertainly I won't try. I think a good plan, when you don't know whatto do or what is going to happen, is to take the middle ground, and itseems to me that "B" captures that about as well as anything. So, Iwould be for "B." I would like to pick up on a point that Nancy made,however. The M2 target that we have is quite unrealistic in the sensethat it's not consistent, at least in the staff's judgment, with theM-1B target. So, I don't think I would be maneuvering M-1B around agood bit to hit an unrealistic M2 target, which is another way ofsaying that I don't think M2 is much of a refuge just because we arehaving trouble knowing what is happening to M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with the idea of taking the middle ground (option "B") and acknowledges a point made by Nancy before offering their own perspective on the issue.


Passage number 422.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage containing "Governor Rice".


Passage number 423.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I recognize, like Governor Wallich,that the economy has turned out to be stronger and has remainedstronger for a longer period than one would have expected.Nevertheless, it's hard to see where the sources of continued strengthwill be. It's hard to see that the saving rate will fall much furtherthan where it is at the present time and, of course, the outlook forgrowth in income does not leave much room for consumers to continue tospend heavily out of income. So, I wouldn't see strength continuingto come from the consumer sector. Again, it's hard to see that therewill be any strong surge in investment spending. So, in contrast tosome of the views that have been expressed around the table, it seemsto me that the staff forecast is certainly as good as any I have seenand probably better than most. For lack of a better forecast, I wouldbase my expectations on the staff forecast.-40-3/31/81In the circumstances, I think we need to preserve ourflexibility and, as has already been expressed, it probably would bestbe preserved by alternative B. I believe that in the circumstances weshould give somewhat more weight to M2. Alternative B would do thatto a degree. Certainly it allows for a gradual return of M-1B to alower range in time. Hopefully, over the period of the year, we willget back closer to the top of the target range. I think the risk ofalternative C is that we may force higher interest rates over time--interest rates higher than are likely to be sustained. And we maythen find ourselves facing a rather sharp fall-off from the peak ratesthat might be reached. So, I think alternative B is the one thatassures us the most flexibility, the most ability to maintainstability, and at the same time maintains a posture of significantrestraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is the opinion of Mr. Rice that the staff forecast is good and that alternative B would be the best option in the given circumstances.


Passage number 424.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided to analyze.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 425.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to thestaff forecast for the economy, I don't know that there's very much todisagree with if you can't come up with a better forecast. But sinceI'm not a professional economist, I guess I can take the liberty ofsuggesting that the forecast in the past has consistently undershotthe actual performance. And queuing off of that history, I wouldbelieve that we may be looking forward in the period ahead to somewhatstronger growth than is evidenced by the staff forecast in theGreenbook. Having said that and then looking at what is described asthe downward shift in demand for money that has been very great in theperiod just passed--and the sub-talk that we'll return to some morenormal level in the period ahead--it suggests that we are going tohave very strong money growth as we move to the second quarter andperhaps into the third quarter. If that's correct, it seems to methat we ought to take what we can get now, and that would suggest atleast "B" and perhaps "C." And since I can't decide between the two,I would take something in between. The borrowing level that has beendescribed in the Bluebook as being consistent with alternative B, andI believe that's $1-1/2 billion, seems a bit high to me. Let me makethe point that there has been some discussion about whether or not M2should be taken into consideration for the period ahead. I'd like tosee it taken into consideration in a sense that it is running veryhigh. And at the time the staff sets the paths for the period aheadand the borrowing level consistent with those paths, M2 should beeither explicitly in the directive or, because of the discussionaround this table, implicitly be taken into consideration and notlowered. Thus, that suggests a bit firmer policy, or closer to "C"than to "B." I would just come out someplace between "B" and "C,"which is about 6 percent from February to June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker disagrees with the staff forecast for the economy and suggests that there may be stronger growth than what is predicted in the Greenbook. The speaker also disagrees with the borrowing level described in the Bluebook and believes it is too high. Additionally, the speaker argues that M2 should be taken into consideration for future paths and borrowing levels, suggesting a firmer policy. Overall, there is disagreement on the forecast, borrowing level, and consideration of M2.


Passage number 426.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was that last comment. It's the lastsentence I need.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 427.
MR. GUFFEY. It's 6 percent if you are looking from Februaryto June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a statement of fact about the interest rate. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 428.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 429.
MR. GUFFEY. M-1B goes to 6 percent and M2 to 12 percent; orif you are looking at March to June, it's about 5-1/2 and 10-1/2percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting two different sets of percentages for M-1B and M2, depending on the time frame being considered. The statement does not involve any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 430.
-41-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a date and addressing someone as "Mr. Balles."


Passage number 431.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, in terms of these alternatives, Itoo would favor "B" for many of the same reasons that have alreadybeen cited. But I do have one question. Perhaps I am the only onearound the table who doesn't understand this, but I wonder if youwould repeat what you believe to be the significance of the federalfunds range associated with "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the alternative "B" and asking for clarification on a specific point.


Passage number 432.
" We've had an extensive discussion--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Axilrod would have to addressthat. I will give you a general answer: The federal funds range thatwe cite in the directive is the trigger for consultation, and thenwhat it means depends upon the nature of the consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that further clarification on a specific topic would need to be addressed by Mr. Axilrod, but they proceed to provide a general answer related to consultation.


Passage number 433.
MR. BALLES. My further question, Mr. Chairman, would be withrespect to the telephone conference call on February 24, when Ihappened to be out of town and wasn't able to participate. It wasdecided, as I remember from reading the memos, that there would be nochange in the official funds rate range at that time. But was thatalso meant to imply that the Desk was free in some sense to come inwith an actual federal funds rate lower than the officially specifiedrange. If that is the case, is that also what is suggested withrespect to this future period. That's what I'm trying to get someclarification on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely seeking clarification and information.


Passage number 434.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm just taking it literally. I'mnot talking about what numbers we put in there. The purpose of thefunds range is that if an inconsistency develops, as it says, we willhave a consultation. What happens during that consultation is an openquestion. It depends upon what the results of the consultation are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply explaining the purpose of a funds range and the process that occurs during a consultation when there is an inconsistency.


Passage number 435.
MR. BALLES. Well, to take an extreme point of view perhaps,I would want to know why it wouldn't make more sense to have a federalfunds rate range centered pretty much around where we are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their perspective and wanting to understand the reasons behind a particular decision.


Passage number 436.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my comment is entirely independentof where this federal funds range is set, which is something nobodyhas addressed yet. You may want to address yourself to that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the question of where the federal funds range is set has not been addressed yet and is encouraging someone to focus on addressing it.


Passage number 437.
MR. AXILROD. I probably should say something. There are anynumber of ways one could set this range. One is to project whatinterest rate level the staff thinks is consistent with theseaggregate targets and set a range of plus or minus 2 to 3 percentagepoints around that. That would again be different than taking thecurrent range, because we don't think the current range isparticularly consistent except for "A." We have done that in the pastunder previous kinds of operating procedures. I have felt reluctantin general to make the range substantially different, even though ourstaff forecast might be substantially different in a sense, from wherethe Committee had been. So, what these ranges really represent issome skewing of the present Committee range; they are skewed to allowfor where we think the funds rate will be, but there is more room ontop because our projection is that, if anything, rates will go higherthan where it appears the rate will start off and not that they willgo lower. So, they're in some sense judgmental in that respect,trying to distend the existing range to make allowance for how wethink the funds rate comes out of the analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply an explanation of the different ways in which a range of interest rates could be set and the approach taken by the speaker.


Passage number 438.
-42-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will tell you what my personal attitudetoward setting those ranges is. I look at what the staff has to say,but I don't think that's the controlling thing. It's where do we wantto have a consultation if it went either down or up, which may or maynot be consistent with where the staff estimates that the market mightbring it. Those estimates are not very good. They may be the bestestimates that can be made, but I look at the range and say, as afirst approximation: What level of interest rates might disturb usenough to want a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their personal attitude towards setting ranges and stating that they consider factors other than the staff's opinion, such as where they would like to have a consultation and what level of interest rates would be alarming to them.


Passage number 439.
MR. GUFFEY. That would suggest we could narrow it to 2percentage points.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any argument or opposing viewpoints. It simply states a suggestion made by Mr. Guffey.


Passage number 440.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd be having a consultation allthe time, I suppose.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing a possibility or assumption that a consultation would be happening frequently.


Passage number 441.
MR. BALLES. Well, to take an extreme view, which I'm notnecessarily proposing here: Since the recent fed funds rate has beenaround 14 percent, if we want to allow some room both on the up sideand the down side for the Desk to operate without the necessity of aconsultation, we might specify a range of something like 11 to 17percent to go along with "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply proposing a range for the fed funds rate without any opposition or contradictory statements being made.


Passage number 442.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Quite possibly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: no.


Passage number 443.
MR. BALLES. If there's some flaw in that argument, I wishsomebody would point it out to me; there may be a flaw.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 444.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it depends. There's no flaw in the logicof the argument, clearly. But the staff expectation of "B"--what wepresented--is a borrowing level of $1-1/2 billion. If the Committeechose that borrowing level, I believe that the funds rate probablywould be above 15 percent and maybe closer to 16 percent, althoughthese relationships are loose. In that case, the range around thatwouldn't be 11 to 17 percent; it would be quite a different range ifthat was where you wanted to start and you wanted to allow variationaround that. If you wanted to start at 14 percent as you weresuggesting and allow variation around that, then I don't think theborrowing level we specified for alternative B is consistent with thatapproach.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod is simply presenting different scenarios and explaining the potential implications of each.


Passage number 445.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we have two choices. One isto take what we think it probably would be--let's say 15 to 17percent--and then have a symmetrical range with enough room on eitherside. Or we can deliberately put it off center from that 15 to 17percent--let's say, John Balles' 11 to 17 percent--because we want totrigger a consultation at 17 percent. I think we are better offcontinuing to have a 5-point range that is symmetrical [around] themost likely area it will be within because the Chairman can alwayscall a consultation anyway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Rather, the speaker is presenting two choices and expressing their opinion on the matter.


Passage number 446.
MR. MORRIS. My concern, given my view of the second quarter,is whether, using John's range, we would want to allow the funds rateto go down as low as 11 percent before consulting. That's why I wouldprefer a higher lower limit than a lot of you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Morris is simply expressing his concern and preference regarding the lower limit for consulting.


Passage number 447.
-43-3/31/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If 15 to 17 percent is the best guessof the staff [at the Board] and in New York, then we can talk aboutsomething like 14 to 19 or 13 to 19 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is simply discussing a range of percentages that can be considered based on the staff's best guess and the situation in New York.


Passage number 448.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we haven't set the borrowing levelyet. Let's finish the go-around and we'll get back to this subject.It's obviously a variable we have to set. Who hasn't been heard from.Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply discusses a topic that has yet to be decided upon and suggests continuing the discussion after hearing from Mr. Boykin.


Passage number 449.
MR. BOYKIN. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I share many of the concernsthat have been expressed with respect to the forecast. I think theeconomy is and probably will be a little stronger than is projected.Possibly I'm influenced by the people I've talked to down in our partof the country where things tend to be a little stronger. Also, Ihave a concern, obviously, about inflation in that there doesn'tappear to be very much progress in that regard. For the reasons thathave already been discussed with respect to the uncertainty about M-1Band also for the arguments that Steve presented on M2, my inclinationwould be to put a little more emphasis on M2 at least for the timebeing. I favor maintaining a fairly firm stance in the policy areaand I do have some sympathy for alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boykin, shares concerns that have been expressed about the forecast and the economy but also expresses his own opinions and preferences based on his conversations and observations. He mentions his concern about inflation and his inclination towards putting more emphasis on M2. However, he also mentions having sympathy for alternative C, suggesting that he is open to different approaches but ultimately favors maintaining a firm stance in policy. There is no clear disagreement or contradiction between his statements.


Passage number 450.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage since there is only a reference to "Mr. Doyle" without any additional context or information provided.


Passage number 451.
MR. DOYLE. Mr. Chairman, as many others have today, I comeout on the gloomy side of the forecast on the real economy. Theprincipal reason for that is that it's just inescapable in ourDistrict to come to any other conclusion. I know that the plight ofthe automobile industry has been widely acknowledged, but I think it'simportant that the impact of that industry and the state it is in beseen in terms of what it does to us in the Seventh District. Forexample, there are all kinds of numbers on just what the employmentbase is, but I will cite just a couple of observations about that.Even little American Motors, which I think had less than 2 percent ofthe market last year, is the largest single employer in the state ofWisconsin. While hundreds of thousands of jobs have gone down on theproduction side, their board just recently announced that they haveterminated 60,000 salaried employees, and a cut into the staffing sideis quite a change. The second point is that the plight of Chrysler, Ithink, has tended to overshadow somewhat some of the problemsthroughout the rest of the industry. Of all of the automobiles soldin the country last year--just the domestic models--Ford only had twomodels in the top ten, and one of those was the Pinto which is nolonger made. One has to go all the way down to about the 21st rankbefore we find the car that used to be the number two and number onebest seller in the country: the large size Ford. The most difficultaspect, however, is the future. The industry has always been acyclical one and it has always been optimistic. But it is extremelypessimistic. I think that relates primarily to two things. One isthe difference in wage [costs] as they perceive them between theimports and the domestic models. While those figures again are allover the board, they could be greatly understated if we take intoaccount such factors as absenteeism and other benefits for theAmerican worker. And the second is the growing conviction among thedomestic automakers--and we hear this more all the time--that thelarge car must come back in order for them to survive. They areconvinced that, given the choice between a high-priced small car and ahigh-priced larger car, the consumer is going to take that large car.-44-3/31/81I'm not saying they're right; I'm merely reporting how they feel aboutit. But if they are wrong, that will have a very serious impact downthe road.Despite that, there are some bright spots in our area,particularly in steel and capital goods. But on balance, and despitethe suggestion--and certainly our directors feel very strongly aboutthis--that we should be easing economic policy, strong inflationarypressures still persist. That's particularly true in agriculture,where we probably have been lucky so far as price increases areconcerned, as others have commented here. We possibly will seecontinued upward pressures on prices toward the end of the year. Andbeyond that, any arguments toward easing tend to focus more on thecost of money. In fact, I think many of us feel the reason whyautomobiles, for example, are not selling is because of the pricesrather the cost of money borrowed to acquire them. So, on balance, Iwould concur with alternative B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and observations about the state of the automobile industry and the economy. They also mention some bright spots in certain industries. Overall, there is no argument or disagreement presented.


Passage number 452.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. According to my little checklist, Mr.Ford, you talked but you didn't express any conclusion about where weshould go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a fact about Mr. Ford not expressing any conclusion.


Passage number 453.
MR. FORD. Well, after listening to all the discussion, Ifrankly am confused by the indicators we're getting on the realeconomy. I've never been a great believer in trying to fine-tune theeconomy from one month or one quarter to the next, anyway. I come outbetween "B" and "C," where a number of other people have, with JohnBalles' reservation, however, that we ought to allow the lower end ofthe funds rate range to be at least somewhat lower than what the rateis today as we're sitting here. I'd be inclined to go for a "B-"solution with a little more stringency in the control of theaggregates growth and a little more attention to M2. Although Nancy'sargument about the unreliability of M2 also concerns me, I feel morenervous about the problems with M-1B than I do about the problems withM2. And looking at the growth rates that the staff has for M2 inthese various [alternatives], I'd lean toward trying to come down onM2 a little harder than "B" with an in-between policy prescriptionsomewhat like a number of others have expressed, except with the fedfunds range having a lower low end that will allow some flexibility inthe next few days so that if the futures market for the T-bills, forexample, is right, we don't have to be on the phone with each othernext week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 454.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich, you were not veryspecific. I gather you are on the lower side of things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It merely states that Governor Wallich was not very specific, implying that his position or perspective is uncertain or not clearly defined. The statement "I gather you are on the lower side of things" suggests that the speaker is trying to understand or interpret Governor Wallich's position, rather than expressing disagreement.


Passage number 455.
MR. WALLICH. I was for "C," and I would like to see thefunds range a little higher than it is there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing his preference for "C" and his desire to have the funds range higher.


Passage number 456.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A little higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This phrase does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply suggests a slight increase or advancement.


Passage number 457.
MR. WALLICH. Higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement where Mr. Wallich is speaking about something without any contrasting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 458.
MR. PARTEE. He always goes that way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information that suggests contention or disagreement. It simply states that "He always goes that way."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 459.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't quite sure how to interpret you,Mr. Winn, but I thought you were in the same direction. Is thatcorrect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and seeking clarification from Mr. Winn regarding their interpretation. This suggests that there may be disagreement or confusion between the two parties.


Passage number 460.
-45-3/31/81MR. WINN. Oh, no, "B" to "C," or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement.


Passage number 461.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given passage only mentions "Mr. Corrigan" without providing any information about his actions, beliefs, or opinions. Therefore, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 462.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'm kind of a "B-," but I could go with "B" ifwe put a little more explicit weight on M2, even if just in terms oflooking at the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement or opinion by Mr. Corrigan about his own preferences or beliefs.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 463.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The given sentence is just "Mr. Schultz", which is not enough information to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 464.
MR. SCHULTZ. I was arguing against "A" and "C." So, I'm for"B" and I tend to agree with Tony that we ought to start out withborrowing around $1.3 billion. And I would go with a federal fundsrange of 12 to 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker's position and agreement with Tony.


Passage number 465.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a lunch for Mr. Mayo and Idon't think we're going to complete this [discussion] before lunchwithout forcing things a little faster than I think is appropriate,considering the uncertainties here. It's clear that nobody has beenfor "A." There are a lot of "Bs," quite a few "Cs," and some inbetween "B" and "C." We really have had very little discussion of thefunds rate until very recently. I am comfortable myself on this. Idon't think I would be quite comfortable flat out aiming for "C." Iwouldn't be very comfortable going much above "B," depending upon howthings happen here. It's a question of how we posture ourselves onborrowing and the funds rate and how we react to the inevitableuncertainties that arise. I may feel differently about the borrowingand the funds rate or whatever, depending upon what happens in thenext couple of weeks. If it remains very quiescent for the nextcouple of weeks, we have quite a lot of room for growth. If wesuddenly get a jump in April, we're on the other side of the fence,and I think we will need a little discussion of how to proceed undervarious hypotheses--or at least two hypotheses. One is if moneysupply comes in weak in the short run and the other is if it comes instrong in the short run. When is lunch scheduled--at 1:00 or 1:15p.m..
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their comfort and preferences regarding certain decisions, but there is no argument or conflicting viewpoints expressed. The mention of lunch is unrelated to any disagreement.


Passage number 466.
MR. ALTMANN. Guests are arriving in your office at 1:15 p.m.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that guests will be arriving at a specific time.


Passage number 467.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if it's 1:15, I think we can proceeda little further. I'm a little worried about how the directive iswritten in the light of the various options before us. In generalterms, I take it that people are prepared to react fairly strongly, bywhich I mean they are prepared to see the borrowing level go up and adiscretionary adjustment in the path or whatever, if [monetary growth]began running significantly above "B." Nobody has been for above "B,"so I assume that that is the implication of that approach. I assumethat if we really got below "C," let's say--and there isn't a very bigmargin between these--in the way the numbers came in, that nobodywould resist a decline in interest rates in that possible scenario.Where has the borrowing been just recently. It's under $1 billion,isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and assumptions about a certain topic, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict between individuals.


Passage number 468.
MR. STERNLIGHT. This week it's coming in a little higher.It's averaging about $1-1/2 billion because one large bank borrowedsubstantially this past Friday and that is tending to raise thisweek's level. The implicit level that we're shooting for in this week-46-3/31/81is about [$1.150] billion, but it seems to be running higher thanthat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the current level of borrowing and how it is higher than the target level.


Passage number 469.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's that high, [$1.150] billion. I guessI would at least raise the question why we should start out any higherthan where we are, given that the money supply isn't moving in anyparticular direction. It's contrary to a "B to C" view of thingsuntil we get some evidence that it is moving in one direction oranother. I just don't feel confident enough about any of theseforecasts to suggest a strong view that we should move off theexisting level. But the implication is--you know, literally it canhappen in a week--that if a great big figure comes in as it sometimesdoes, assuming that it either happens in a week or over the course oftwo or three weeks, we would be prepared to move the path prettyquickly if we felt it was getting above the "B" path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their own opinions and uncertainty about the money supply, but there is no disagreement with any other party.


Passage number 470.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't March fairly strong, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It only poses a question without any conflicting or opposing views.


Passage number 471.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. I don't know how tointerpret it. The latest estimate is 8 percent or 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about how to interpret the information provided.


Passage number 472.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, 8-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any form of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement indicating the response or agreement of MR. AXILROD.


Passage number 473.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you just look at March in isolation,that's a reasonably big figure. If you look at it against theprevious two months, it doesn't seem very big, and the most recentfigures are slack. And if I take the revisions as my leadingindicator--that has been the most reliable indication--they're notvery clear but they're certainly not being revised upward as they dowhen this gets a lot of momentum. If anything, the latest revisionshave come in a little weak, haven't they, Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is presenting a series of statements and observations without expressing any clear disagreement or contention.


Passage number 474.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. Last week we revised down the [mostrecent] weeks in March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the weeks in March were revised down.


Passage number 475.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't March M2 still runningaround 19 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about the current running of March M2 without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 476.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It's 16-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a statement made by Mr. Sternlight about the length of something. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 477.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, M2 is around 17.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple statement of fact. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 478.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 is certainly high; there is no questionthat M2 is high. The prevailing view--and I should say that noteverybody mentioned it--among those who did mention it, with at leastone exception, was to give some weight to M2. And I think that that'simplicit. I should, though, make it explicit in what I'm saying, thatwe would give some weight to M2 in adjusting the reserve path. Again,I'm not quite sure what number to put down in the actual directive.But if I read the Committee right, the members are certainly moredisturbed about exceeding "B" than falling somewhat short of "B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents various perspectives on the topic without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 479.
"MR. PARTEE. So long as it isn't short of "C," I think Iwould agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "MR. PARTEE" expresses agreement with the statement given.


Passage number 480.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably a fair summary.What bothers me is how to word this. I'm not sure there's any massivedifference of opinion. I do think all these federal funds ranges seemtoo high. All these ranges as stated, given the uncertainties that-47-3/31/81exist, may be quite appropriate in terms of the best estimate thestaff can make. But I would get worried if the funds rate shot up to20 percent here, quite frankly, without reconsidering just where wewere. I would not get particularly worried if it went down to whereit was before, conceivably, depending upon how business [conditions]unfold in the next few weeks. The lowest was 13-1/2 percent on aweekly average basis. I can imagine circumstances in which that wouldnot be at all disturbing and may be desirable. The numbers I hadscratched down here before I heard any conversation were 12 to 17percent, but I had no particular brief for that exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their thoughts and concerns about the federal funds rates, but there is no indication of any disagreement with others or conflicting viewpoints being discussed.


Passage number 481.
MS. TEETERS. Why don't we make it 12 to 18 percent, as Fredand I [suggested].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a specific percentage range, 12 to 18 percent, which is what they previously suggested.


Passage number 482.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is symmetrical around where we are,sort of.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement simply describes that the situation is symmetrical around a certain point, without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 483.
MR. PARTEE. Where are we--around 15 percent or plus alittle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for confirmation or clarification about a specific percentage.


Passage number 484.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this week, I guess it would be alittle plus.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the current week, stating that it is slightly positive.


Passage number 485.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 486.
 Probably 18 percent, given--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The most recent figure is 14-1/2 percentor something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is suggesting a probable percentage (18 percent), given that the most recent figure is 14-1/2 percent or something similar. There is no conflicting information or contrasting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 487.
MR. STERNLIGHT. This week it's averaging 15.07 percent sofar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual statement about the average percentage.


Passage number 488.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it will probably ease for the restof this week, given all the borrowing that has already taken place.That still doesn't tell me how to write the directive, which makes mea little hesitant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty about how to write a directive.


Passage number 489.
 But I suppose we could put in a number somewhatbelow "B" if that captures the center of gravity, with whatever fundsrate range--MS. TEETERS. We've used language in the past that gave anumber and then said we wouldn't be disturbed if it fell slightlyshort of it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement discussing the possibility of using a number somewhat below "B" as a center of gravity. The mention of past language and the agreement with the possibility suggest a consensus rather than disagreement.


Passage number 490.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we could use that kind of language.Maybe that captures it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses agreement with the idea presented and acknowledges that the suggested language accurately represents their thoughts.


Passage number 491.
 We could say "B" or lower, depending upon--MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided does not contain any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 492.
 PARTEE and MS. TEETERS. Somewhat lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply mentions two individuals, PARTEE and MS. TEETERS, without any indication of disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 493.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the language we've used before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 494.
It was "somewhat lower depending upon"--MR. AXILROD. I think "or somewhat lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply clarifying that the amount mentioned can vary and be "somewhat lower depending upon."


Passage number 495.
"MR. ALTMANN. "Somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 496.
"MR. AXILROD. Well, we had language about interest rates--that you were not forcing them down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement between the speakers. It is a statement made by Mr. Axilrod without any conflicting views presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 497.
-48-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The equation -48-3/31/81 implies a mathematical operation, which can have different interpretations depending on the order of operations applied. The lack of clarity in the expression can lead to different outcomes, causing disagreement among individuals trying to solve the equation.


Passage number 498.
 Did we actually put that in thedirective or was that--MR. AXILROD. There was such language. I'd have to look itup, but there was such language.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It simply involves a question about the presence of specific language in a directive.


Passage number 499.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe that is the kind of languagewe need here. Can you provide that language to us, Mr. Secretary.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a request for the Secretary to provide specific language.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 500.
MR. ALTMANN. Possibly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage because the word "possibly" implies that the answer is not definite.


Passage number 501.
MS. TEETERS. What have the borrowings averaged in the lastfour weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is simply asking a question about the average borrowings in the last four weeks.


Passage number 502.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Last four weeks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage does not contain any information or statements that could suggest contention or disagreement. It simply states the duration of four weeks without any differing opinions or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 503.
MR. AXILROD. Well, in the last three weeks, which is easy to[calculate], they were almost $800 million.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states a fact about the last three weeks' monetary value which is easy to calculate.


Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but what do we actually put in the[path].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking for clarification or further information.


Passage number 505.
MR. AXILROD. But before that, they were in a range of $1.1to $1.7 billion in that one exceptional week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating the range of values before a certain exceptional week.


Passage number 506.
MS. TEETERS. So $1.3 billion would be an increase in theborrowing level over where we've been most recently.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. Teeters is simply stating a fact about an increase in borrowing level.


Passage number 507.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. In some sense, for this four-weekperiod that is ending, we are aiming at an average level of borrowingsomewhere on the order of $900 million. We're aiming this week at$1.2 billion because in the earlier weeks borrowing had dropped wellbelow that $900 million. So, it's coming up this week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the target level of borrowing for a four-week period, with a specific target for the current week due to lower borrowing in previous weeks.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just point out the consequences,not just the arithmetic consequences, of this decision in terms of itsimplications. If we went with "B" and if the forecast is [right]--andI think most people agree with it in terms of tendencies toward a weakeconomy in the short run and weaker than average in some sense for theyear--a 6 percent growth in M-1B in the second quarter maintainedthrough the rest of the year would leave us within our target, butbarely, with the prospect of a pretty good interest rate fluctuationif this next quarter is really soft. "B" potentially forces [thefunds rate] up against a natural tendency.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 509.
 "C" continued through therest of the year, I guess, brings us--MR. AXILROD. To the bottom end of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that "C" continued throughout the rest of the year and brings us to the bottom end of the range.


Passage number 510.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The bottom end for the year as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Answer: No.

Explanation: The passage simply states the "bottom end for the year as a whole" without providing any contradictory statements or opposing viewpoints. It does not suggest any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 511.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. And "B" to the middle.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a simple statement.


Passage number 512.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be more than the middle, wouldn'tit. It's three-fourths [of the year at] 6 percent and one-fourth atwhatever it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a calculation without presenting opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 513.
MR. AXILROD. [Unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not contain any actual content or information to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 514.
-49-3/31/81MR. PRELL. "B" would be in the middle by September and thenyou'd have to decelerate slightly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply discusses a chronological sequence of events.


Passage number 515.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we'd be above [the middle], yes. Well,these are monthly growth rates rather than quarterly. What is theequivalent quarterly growth rate here for "B". It appears someplace,doesn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is seeking clarification about the quarterly growth rate for "B" and expressing their understanding that the given growth rates are on a monthly basis.


Passage number 516.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the equivalent quarterly growth rate is5.7 percent for M-1B over the 6 [months].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The statement is a factual statement presenting a specific growth rate for M-1B over a specific time period. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 517.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, so it's a little less. But we'dstill be above the middle of the range, I think. It would not berunning at the top of the range, but just slightly below it after asmall first quarter. It's right at the middle of the range inSeptember. Continuing at 6 percent must put us above [the middle],but not as close to the top as I thought.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. While there is mention of different percentages and ranges, there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 518.
MR. AXILROD. Well, yes, quarter-over-quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 519.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All that suggests, I think, that we shouldbe more conscious of exceeding it than falling somewhat low. Whatlanguage do we have that was actually in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is expressing their opinion that it is more important to exceed a certain limit than to fall below it. The language used in the passage is speculative and suggestive, without any direct directive being mentioned.


Passage number 520.
MR. ALTMANN. It was in December [1980].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of a fact given by Mr. Altman.


Passage number 521.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that language was: "...someshortfall in growth would be acceptable in the near term if thatdeveloped in the context of reduced pressures in the money market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The language is simply stating a hypothetical scenario where a shortfall in growth would be acceptable if it occurred alongside reduced pressures in the money market.


Passage number 522.
"MR. SCHULTZ. That sounds pretty good because, as I recallSteve's figures, the staff is looking for velocity to slow down somein the second quarter so you were anticipating that we would have tohave the higher borrowing, weren't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Schultz about Steve's figures and an agreement about the anticipation of higher borrowing.


Passage number 523.
 What were you looking at interms of--MR. AXILROD. In terms of the level of borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.  This is a straightforward question asking for clarification about a specific topic.


Passage number 524.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, for "B." You were talking about $1.5billion, weren't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz simply asks for clarification on the specific amount being referred to.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 525.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. We had a rather high level of borrowingbecause we were assuming considerably higher interest rates than Ithink the Chairman or the specifications are either explicitly orimplicitly assuming. So there would be a difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, disagrees with the assumption made by the Chairman or the specifications regarding interest rates, stating that he believes they are assuming lower interest rates than him.


Passage number 526.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not particularly assuming alevel of interest rates. All I said is that I might want to consider[an adjustment] at some point if they got high enough. I'm suggestingthat this is what the relationships look like and if we want to hit"B," we'd better go out and increase the borrowing right away. ButI'm saying: Let's wait and see and get some evidence that thatprojection is in fact being borne out before we move. It may well becorrect or maybe we will have to go even further, but let's wait andsee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their stance on making adjustments based on interest rates and suggesting a wait-and-see approach before taking action.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 527.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think we'd have to be as specific asthat language that you just read, Paul. I don't know why we don't-50-3/31/81just say "growth in M-1B from March to June at an annual rate of 6percent or somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with the specific language that was just read and suggests a different approach.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 528.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that may be, because I'm not surewe're talking about reduced pressures. It might be that we'd acceptsomewhat less if [the funds rate] just stayed where it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they are not sure if they are talking about reduced pressures, indicating uncertainty or disagreement about the topic being discussed.


Passage number 529.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think so too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the previous statement made by someone else.


Passage number 530.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to see what we're talkingabout. You said 6 percent is the figure you were thinking of forMarch to June.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply trying to understand and clarify the previously mentioned figure of 6 percent for the timeframe of March to June.


Passage number 531.
MR. PARTEE. I was thinking March to June. After all,tomorrow is April 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker was thinking of a timeframe from March to June and points out that tomorrow is April 1st.


Passage number 532.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 533.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 534.
 And it seems to me, even though we don't quiteknow March, we ought to--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to use March to June,too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about using the months of March to June.


Passage number 535.
MR. AXILROD. Governor Partee, I would mention that we reallyonly know half of March.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply stating a fact about the knowledge of the month of March.


Passage number 536.
MR. PARTEE. I know. But people think we know it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Party simply acknowledges that people believe they have knowledge about something.


Passage number 537.
MR. SCHULTZ. People think we know a lot.SPEAKER(.). As you can tell from the previous discussion, wehave great faith in the forecast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Both Mr. Schultz and the speaker seem to agree on the fact that people believe they know a lot and have faith in the forecast.


Passage number 538.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can say 6 percent or somewhatless or I suppose we can say 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less. I don'tknow where you want to put the funds rate range. As I say, I wouldwant to look at it even if the funds rate were at 17 percent if theeconomy were also quite weak at the same time. It wouldn't bother meat 17 percent if the economy were quite strong. But that's somethingwe don't know until we sit down and look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. The speaker is expressing their willingness to consider different interest rate ranges based on the state of the economy.


Passage number 539.
MR. PARTEE. Speaking for those who like a wide funds raterange, I could accept 12 to 18 percent. I think we ought to have a6-point range rather than go back down to a narrower range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is expressing his opinion and suggesting a 6-point range for funds rate, but there is no opposing argument presented in the passage.


Passage number 540.
MR. BOEHNE. I think 12 to 18 percent makes sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Boehne simply presents his opinion without any opposition or contradictory statements.


Passage number 541.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would prefer 13 to 19 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. It is simply stating a personal preference for a specific range of numbers.


Passage number 542.
 Itseems to me a little more symmetrically placed around--MR. PARTEE. Well, if you think it's 15 percent now, 12 to 18is even-handed. But if Paul is sensitive to high rates, as he seemsto be, we're going to have a telephone conference call if the rategets up there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their opinion and discussing a potential course of action, but there is no argument or conflict present.


Passage number 543.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do have the feeling that at some pointwe would want to consult.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their own personal feeling without opposing or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 544.
-51-3/31/81MS. TEETERS. I can support the 12 to 18 percent. Are youimplying that we'd stay at about the $1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing support for the 12 to 18 percent mentioned.


Passage number 545.
1 billion in borrowing andthen let it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wanted to get to that next. I wasimplying that until we get further information we'd stay roughly wherewe are, whether that's $1.1 billion or slightly over $1.1 billion.But consistent with this whole attitude is that if the money supplycame in strong, we would be prepared to move pretty quickly, whichmight mean a discretionary move as the natural result of holding thenonborrowed path steady. And we'd be quicker to move in thatdirection if it came in strong than if it fell short.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing the potential borrowing amount and the possibility of adjusting their actions based on the strength of the money supply.


Passage number 546.
MR. PARTEE. That is to adjust the nonborrowed path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a statement of fact or intent.


Passage number 547.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A more even pattern of borrowingyielding the same total as this week would probably give us a lowerfed funds rate than the 15+ percent we're seeing, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is stating a possibility or suggestion, without presenting any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 548.
 Therefore,if we're talking about keeping the present fed funds rate, which isaround 15 percent, then--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't particularly care myself about thepresent level of the federal funds rate.SPEAKER(.). Well, I think this is going too far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The first statement expresses indifference towards the current fed funds rate, and the response agrees with that sentiment by stating, "Well, I think this is going too far."


Passage number 549.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we would certainly have tostart off with it there. Then I think we probably are talking aboutsomething closer to $1.3 billion than $1.1 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that the amount in question is likely closer to $1.3 billion rather than $1.1 billion.


Passage number 550.
MR. WALLICH. As to the lower level of 12 percent [for thefunds rate], if we get there, it would have to be below that onseveral days before we say that over a period of time it has beenbelow that. And then we would have done about three-fourths of thedrop that we had in 1980.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich about the lower level of the funds rate.


Passage number 551.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have no vested interest in 12percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements that indicate disagreement or contention. It is a neutral statement expressing the speaker's lack of personal interest in a specific subject.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 552.
 If you want to make it 13--MR. WALLICH. No, I want to make it substantially higher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, there is disagreement between the speaker who wants to make it 13 and Mr. Wallich who wants to make it substantially higher.


Passage number 553.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think making it 13 is going to capture[Henry's vote].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee expressing his opinion.


Passage number 554.
MR. CORRIGAN. I would prefer to state the March-to-Junegrowth rate at 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less. I could go either 12to 18 or 13 to 18 percent on the funds rate and borrowings startingout in a range of $1.2 to $1.3 billion. But I still have a questionin my mind. Suppose we did either one of these things and M2continued to grow at, say, 15 percent. If M-1B was around 5-1/2 or 6percent but M2 was 15 percent, what would we do then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply expressing his preferences and raising a question for discussion.


Passage number 555.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Chairman Volcker without providing any context or information that indicates disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 556.
 Well, I don't think we can deal with everypossible contingency, but I--MR. CORRIGAN. No, I [realize that].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I don't think we can deal with every possible contingency" suggests a viewpoint that is different from the interruption "No, I realize that" by Mr. Corrigan. This indicates a disagreement or contradiction in their perspectives.


Passage number 557.
-52-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to take the specifications yousuggested, if M-1B came in around 5-1/2 to 6 percent and M2 was veryhigh, we would lean on the tighter side. We might make an adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement describing a hypothetical scenario and the potential response to it.


Passage number 558.
MS. TEETERS. But we'd do it with a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a process that would be done with a consultation.


Passage number 559.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that would require aconsultation if the funds rate were in the range and so forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion about not needing a consultation in a specific scenario, without any indication of a conflicting viewpoint.


Passage number 560.
MS. TEETERS. Suppose it's all money market mutual funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement about money market mutual funds.


Passage number 561.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, there is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage about Mr. Corrigan.


Passage number 562.
 Well, there's a little more to it than--MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] market rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "[Unintelligible] market rates" suggests that the speaker is further explaining or expanding on the previous statement, rather than presenting a conflicting view.


Passage number 563.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm sure if it did, it will be all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses certainty about a hypothetical situation.


Passage number 564.
MR. PARTEE. [The money market mutual funds] are verysensitive to market rates. If market rates go above what the fundspay, the money that is in the funds will move back into the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that money market mutual funds are sensitive to market rates and explains that if market rates exceed what the funds pay, the money will move back into the market. There is no indication of conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 565.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a question of whether we give someweight to M2. But we don't have to word the directive that way; italready does. The directive always gives weight to M2 as I recall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author affirms that the directive already gives weight to M2.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 566.
MR. CORRIGAN. I'm reacting a little, Tony, to that memo thatyou distributed, which effectively points out that we don't make anyadjustment in the paths for the nonreservable components of M2regardless of what they do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "we don't make any adjustment in the paths for the nonreservable components of M2 regardless of what they do" suggests that there is disagreement about whether adjustment should be made for the nonreservable components of M2.


Passage number 567.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though I distributed the memo,on balance I would prefer that greater attention to M2 be done on ajudgmental basis rather than a mechanistic one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No
Explanation: The passage mentions a preference for approaching attention to M2 in a judgmental rather than a mechanistic way, but there is no clear indication of any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses a personal preference without any conflicting views.


Passage number 568.
MR. CORRIGAN. I agree with that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker explicitly states that they agree with the statement.


Passage number 569.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I'm not talking about a formula. Thedirective just specifies a target for both, which implies that we takeaccount of M2. I don't think we have to change the directive for thatpurpose.SPEAKER(.). Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement between the speakers. The first speaker clarifies that they are not talking about a formula, but that the directive still includes a target for both parties, implying that they consider M2. The second speaker agrees, responding "Okay" to indicate understanding or acceptance of the explanation.


Passage number 570.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have to have some knowledgeamong ourselves about what weight we give to it; I'm suggesting thatbe on a judgmental basis. If we want to give it weight, that doesn'tin itself require a consultation. The substantive question is whetherwe want to give it weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing the idea that there needs to be knowledge and judgment when determining the weight given to something. The passage is presenting a suggestion and posing a question, but there is no disagreement expressed.


Passage number 571.
MS. TEETERS. Well, it all depends, in Jerry's scenario, onwhat is making M2 go up relative to M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is asking for an explanation or clarification of the scenario, but there is no clear contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 572.
MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, without getting in a longdigression, do you have any feel as to whether Mr. Fauntroy's bill onmoney market mutual funds has any chance of passing in the nearfuture. That could have some bearing on the growth of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for a prediction or opinion about the chances of a bill passing.


Passage number 573.
-53-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no particular sense that any billon money market funds is going to be passed in the near enough futureto affect anything before our next meeting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the author does not believe that any billon money market funds will be passed in the near future.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 574.
MR. SCHULTZ. Furthermore, both bills have been referred tothe Commerce Committee, which is a very unfriendly referral.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that the Commerce Committee has an unfriendly attitude towards the bills.


Passage number 575.
MR. BALLES. Oh, really.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply expresses surprise or disbelief with the phrase "Oh, really."


Passage number 576.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There conceivably could be legislation,but I don't think it's going to take place in a way that affectsanything before May 23rd, or whenever our next meeting is scheduled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion about the timing of potential legislation, but there is no indication of conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 577.
MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Chairman, if we just go with 5-1/2 percentor somewhat less, doesn't that really give us the kind of flexibilitythat we need to take care of most of these [contingencies].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting a specific percentage as a solution and is discussing potential benefits and flexibility it may provide.


Passage number 578.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I just want an understanding of howwe adjust as we go along. The basic [M-1B reference] is 5-1/2 percentor less, but I think it is appropriate to give some weight to M2.That's what most people are saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their desire to understand how to adjust as they go along and mentioning that while the basic reference is 5-1/2 percent or less, they believe it is appropriate to consider giving some weight to M2. They mention that this is what most people are saying, indicating agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 579.
MS. TEETERS. How did we get to 5-1/2 percent. I thought wewere at 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement expressing confusion or surprise about a change in percentage.


Passage number 580.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to resolve that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show contention or disagreement as it simply states that a resolution is needed without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting statements.


Passage number 581.
MS. TEETERS. All of a sudden we've dropped 1/2 percentagepoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact or a change in a numerical value.


Passage number 582.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are trying to find the center ofgravity here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that the speaker is attempting to find the center of gravity. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 583.
MR. PARTEE. And it's falling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing viewpoints or disagreement. It simply states a fact about something falling.


Passage number 584.
MS. TEETERS. Yes. It was 6 percent or somewhat less and nowit's 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about a decrease in the percentage.


Passage number 585.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pardon me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "pardon me" does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply an expression used to politely apologize or request forgiveness in a given situation.


Passage number 586.
MR. ALTMANN. Peter Sternlight has a comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage merely states that someone named Peter Sternlight has a comment. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 587.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, you referred to giving someweight to M2 judgmentally. In the recent period, there was anopportunity to do that because the M1s were running weak and we couldmodify the extent to which we would change the path because of that.But that [situation] wouldn't necessarily arise in the future. Youmight not have the opportunity to give weight to a strong M2 if, forexample, the M1s were running right about on path. Even if M2 wererunning very strong, I wouldn't see that same kind of opportunity togive discretionary weight to that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing an explanation and a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 588.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand. You would just reducethe nonborrowed reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their lack of understanding and requesting clarification.


Passage number 589.
MR. STERNLIGHT. But we might be right about on path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Sternlight suggesting that they may be on the right path.


Passage number 590.
-54-3/31/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You might be on the M-1B path, but youwould not be giving weight to M2. I don't understand how it differs.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It is an expression of confusion and a request for clarification, but there is no explicit disagreement or conflicting viewpoints presented.


Passage number 591.
MR. STERNLIGHT. If M-1B were on target, we might be justabout on path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply mentioning a hypothetical situation about M-1B being on target.


Passage number 592.
 If that were the case--MR. FORD. Paul, the way I hear the sense of the Committee isthis: Whatever we want to argue about on M-1B, either 5-1/2 or 6percent, even if we're hitting M-1B at 5-1/2 or 6 percent, the fartheroff M2 goes, the more we want to adjust. I think that is what you'retrying to say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a clarification or restatement of a previous statement made by someone named Paul.


Passage number 593.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is what I am saying, yes. Well, wehave to go to lunch. We'll see whether we can resolve this in a hurryor not. We have a proposal for 5-1/2 percent or lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their point and suggesting that they will discuss and try to resolve the matter quickly.


Passage number 594.
MR. PARTEE. Somewhat lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting statements or opposing viewpoints. It is simply stating that something is "somewhat lower," without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 595.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll just put down 13 to 18 percent atthis point on the federal funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states an intention to put down a specific percentage on the federal funds rate.


Passage number 596.
MS. TEETERS. If we have [only] 5-1/2 percent, we can takethat "somewhat lower" off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement of fact without any contradictory or opposing ideas.


Passage number 597.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me finish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking for an opportunity to complete their thought.


Passage number 598.
MR. FORD. You may get a chance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This passage is a statement made by Mr. Ford, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 599.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm suggesting the level of borrowingsabout where they are, the implication being fairly rapid adjustment ofthe borrowing level if we exceed [the money supply growthspecification]. There would be an adjustment if we fell short, too,but it would be a little more sluggish. That's what the "or lower"reflects.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the potential adjustment of borrowing levels based on the money supply growth specifications. They mention that there would be adjustments both if they exceed or fall short of the specifications, with the latter being a little more sluggish. The phrase "or lower" simply reflects the possibility of falling short.


Passage number 600.
MR. BALLES. Where are we now on the borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 601.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. About $1.1 billion or slightly above, Ithink.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It only states a personal opinion or belief.


Passage number 602.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, we're aiming at that, but it is runningstronger. We're aiming at $1.16 billion. That's the point [target].SPEAKER(.). [Unintelligible] decimal point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker and Mr. Axilrod seem to be discussing a target amount of $1.16 billion, with Mr. Axilrod mentioning that it is running stronger. The mention of the decimal point being unintelligible does not indicate any disagreement or contention either.


Passage number 603.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's $1.2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 604.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $1.150 billion. And there's a degree ofconsensus that we're giving weight to M2 if it gets wildly off theassumption here, which is about 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a numerical value and mentions a degree of consensus.


Passage number 605.
MR. FORD. Are we leaving out M-1A altogether.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a question or inquiry by Mr. Ford.


Passage number 606.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the actual text.


Passage number 607.
 Yes, it's about 10 percent if you--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, [the "C alternative] is only 10-1/4percent [for M2], so we're at about 10-3/4 percent for M2 or someplace-55-3/31/81in there. If M2 were in the 11 percent area, it isn't going to getany weight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information and calculations without expressing any conflicting opinions or contradictions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 608.
 It's consistent if it's--MS. TEETERS. What was your fed funds range in the directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates disagreement or contention. The speaker is asking Ms. Teeters about the fed funds range in the directive, suggesting that there might be some discrepancy or conflict between the information given and what the speaker expected.


Passage number 609.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 13 to 18 percent. And the M-1B number inthe directive is 5-1/2 percent or lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It simply presents two different percentages (13 to 18 percent and 5-1/2 percent or lower) without any conflicting information or contrasting opinions.


Passage number 610.
MR. BOEHNE. "Lower" or "somewhat lower".
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating two options - "lower" or "somewhat lower" - without expressing any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 611.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either one you would prefer. "Or somewhatlower" probably better captures it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It presents alternatives and suggests that one option is possibly more suitable, but there is no direct conflict or argument present.


Passage number 612.
MR. PARTEE. "Or lower" is infinite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Or lower" being infinite is a statement of possibility or potential, rather than a point of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 613.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A consistent number for M2 is 10-1/2percent, I guess, just looking here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty or speculation ("I guess"), but there is no explicit contention or disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 614.
MR. ALTMANN. You need a time period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker simply states that a time period is needed, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 615.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the March-to-June period. Well, letme have a show of hands as to how many prefer this formulation. Ithink the obvious alternative is just changing M-1B to 5-1/2 to 6percent and leaving everything else the same.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking for a preference or opinion without indicating any conflicting views.


Passage number 616.
MR. PARTEE. You want voting members only, don't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply asks a question about the preference for voting members.


Passage number 617.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess so. We're on the 5-1/2 percentalternative at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their current position or choice without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions mentioned.


Passage number 618.
MR. PARTEE. 13 to 18 percent for the funds range and $1.150billion on borrowings.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage is simply stating the percentages for the funds range (13 to 18 percent) and the amount of borrowings ($1.150 billion), without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 619.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 13 to 18 percent on the funds rate and$1.150 borrowings with more of a hair trigger on raising it if itcomes in higher than lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is providing specific information about the funds rate and borrowing, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 620.
MR. BOEHNE. Is this prefer or accept.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification about someone's preference or acceptance.


Passage number 621.
MR. PARTEE. Is anyone unable to accept it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking if anyone is unable to accept something without any opposition or conflicting opinions being expressed.


Passage number 622.
MR. FORD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 623.
MR. PARTEE. Let's get it over with; somehow I'm able toaccept it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is expressing acceptance and a willingness to move forward with something.


Passage number 624.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's accept it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the statement "Let's accept it." Instead, it implies the idea of agreement or a willingness to agree with a particular statement or situation.


Passage number 625.
MR. BOEHNE. Accept. I can accept it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they accept something.


Passage number 626.
MR. RICE. I would prefer 6 percent or somewhat less, but Icould accept that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their preference for a certain percentage but also stating that they would be willing to accept a slightly higher percentage if necessary.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 627.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm still bothered by something. Iwant to be sure that everybody understands something, which is this:My gut instinct is that if we set the borrowings low at $1.150billion, we're going to see a drop in the fed funds rate in the nextweek or two. I realize that we'd be able to adjust it. But do we-56-3/31/81want to see at this point a market signal that we are easing monetarypolicy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I realize that we'd be able to adjust it" suggests that there is potential disagreement regarding whether or not to adjust the borrowings.


Passage number 628.
MR. PARTEE. The funds rate is not a signal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement by Mr. Partee, without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 629.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, may I add on to that. I don'tknow what the funds rate will be with that borrowing. We hadborrowing of $1.145 billion in the week of [February] 18th and thefunds rate was 15.81 percent. The preceding week borrowing was $1.1billion and the funds rate was 16.51 percent. And in the more recentweek of March 4th, we had a borrowing level of $1.3 billion and thefunds rate was 15-3/4 percent. All this [suggests] that we can't bevery certain where we're going to come out on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing data and observations about borrowing levels and funds rates.


Passage number 630.
 But I wouldassume it's somewhere above 15 percent, which would be above theexisting--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean with that $1.15 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 631.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Yes, there is contention or disagreement indicated by the response of "Yes."


Passage number 632.
MR. PARTEE. Holding it for a while.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. This is a statement indicating that someone is holding something for a certain period of time.


Passage number 633.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. I think from this day it would be above15 percent, but I can't be absolutely certain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Axilrod is expressing his uncertainty about the exact percentage, but there is no contradiction or argument present.


Passage number 634.
MR. STERNLIGHT. There's a range of uncertainty on these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Sternlight and states that there is a range of uncertainty. There is no mention of any conflicting opinions or disagreement among individuals.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 635.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's vote on this.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a potential for contention or disagreement in the passage as it suggests that there are differing opinions or perspectives that need to be resolved through a vote.


Passage number 636.
MS. TEETERS. Did you take a vote on the 5-1/2 to 6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It only mentions that someone named Ms. Teeters asked if a vote was taken on a specific topic.


Passage number 637.
MR. RICE. Six percent or somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states a percentage.


Passage number 638.
MS. TEETERS. Or 6 percent and somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any contentious or disagreement. It merely states that the percentage is 6 percent and somewhat less.


Passage number 639.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can explore preferences on that.How many people prefer 6 percent. Everything is the same except wewould put a 6 percent number in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply suggesting considering a different percentage (6 percent) and asks for a preference among the people.


Passage number 640.
MS. TEETERS. I would prefer 6.SPEAKER(.). Yes.SPEAKER(.). I would prefer 6.SPEAKER(.). I would prefer it too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Both speakers express a preference for option 6, indicating agreement.


Passage number 641.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One, two, three, four, five.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The given passage consists of a simple enumeration of numbers and does not involve any statements or arguments that can generate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 642.
MS. TEETERS. Try 5-1/2 to 6.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This sentence does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a suggestion or recommendation for an unspecified situation.


Passage number 643.
MR. PARTEE. No, we have to have a number for targetingpurposes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 644.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only states that Mr. Schultz said "Yes," it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 645.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're in an area where the [difference] isextremely narrow. How many people prefer the 5-1/2 percent.-57-3/31/81SPEAKER(.). Or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions that the difference is extremely narrow and poses a question about the preference for a certain percentage.


Passage number 646.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before I ask how many would accept it, howmany prefer the 5-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question without expressing any disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 647.
MR. WALLICH. Without accepting it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 648.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 649.
 You've got to sneak--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I prefer the 5-1/2 to 6.SPEAKER(.). You feel it has to be a single number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states a personal preference for a specific range of numbers without conflicting with any other viewpoint.


Passage number 650.
MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without having the full text or context. Please provide the specific passage you are referring to for a more accurate answer.


Passage number 651.
 Well, it doesn't really have--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We already have "or lower" and it makesalmost no difference here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It is providing an explanation that "or lower" does not have much impact in this particular situation.


Passage number 652.
MR. PARTEE. [The path would be drawn on] 5-3/4 percent if wesaid 5-1/2 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that the path would be drawn at a 5-3/4 percent interest rate if the range given is between 5-1/2 to 6 percent.


Passage number 653.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, put me down for 5-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker simply states their preference or choice.


Passage number 654.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, we're virtually equally divided asto preferences here. Let's go with the 5-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is an equal division in preferences and suggests a solution by going with the 5-1/2 option.


Passage number 655.
MR. PARTEE. I have a feeling it's the Chairman's preference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their perception or intuition about the preferences of the Chairman.


Passage number 656.
MS. TEETERS. Well, if you're going to do that, it should be5-1/2 percent or somewhat more. At least take off the somewhat less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Ms. Teeters is simply suggesting a higher percentage for something.


Passage number 657.
MR. SCHULTZ. It's only somewhat less, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 658.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, and you'd let it come out as a minus 3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a response by Ms. Teeters to an unknown situation without any conflicting opinions or viewpoints being presented.


Passage number 659.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions the name "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" without any further context or information to indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 660.
 I think there is a--MS. TEETERS. How far are we off the target for the firstquarter. That was a 4-3/4 percent rate of growth or 3 percent orsomething. And we're coming in at what, minus 2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the contrast between the initial statement about being off the target for the first quarter and the subsequent statement about coming in at a negative growth rate. The discrepancy between these two statements suggests a disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 661.
MR. SCHULTZ. I voted with you, Nancy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that Mr. Schultz voted with Nancy, indicating agreement or alignment.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 662.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's have a vote at 5-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The statement suggests having a vote at an unconventional time, which may lead to disagreement or contention among the participants. Some may argue that it's not a typical or appropriate time to hold a vote, while others may see it as a valid option.


Passage number 663.
MR. ALTMANN. Or somewhat less, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not present any opposing views or arguments. It simply states a possibility of a lower amount.


Passage number 664.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, or somewhat lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 665.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz Yes-58-Governor TeetersGovernor WallichPresident WinnTen for, one against.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Ten for, one against" indicates that there is one individual who is opposed to something that the others are in favor of.


