Passage number 1.
Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 6-7, 1981A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,D. C., beginning on Monday, July 6, 1981,at 2:30 p.m. and continuing onTuesday, July 7, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,Mr. Solomon,Mr. BoehneMr. BoykinMr. CorriganMr. GramleyMr. KeehnMr. ParteeMr. RiceMr. SchultzMrs. TeetersMr. WallichChairmanVice ChairmanMessrs. Balles, Black, Ford, Timlen,and Winn, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,respectivelyMr. Axilrod, Staff DirectorMr. Altmann, SecretaryMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield, General CounselMr. Mannion, Assistant General CounselMr. Kichline, EconomistMessrs. Burns, Danforth, R. Davis, Keir, Mullineaux,Prell, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, AssociateEconomistsMr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account7/6-7/81Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Johnson 1/, and Ms. Scanlon 1/, Economists, Divisionof Research and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,Board of GovernorsMessrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Keran, andKoch, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, San Francisco,and Atlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus, Burger, and Syron, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis, andBoston, respectivelyMr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew YorkMs. Meulendyke, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof New York1/ Mr. Johnson and Ms. Scanlon entered the meeting following the action toratify system open market transactions in Government securities, agencyobligations,and bankers acceptances and left the meeting prior to theadoption of the domestic policy directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply lists the individuals present at the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.


Passage number 2.
-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 6-7, 1981July 6--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's only a formal gavel. The meetingcan come to order. I should mention first of all that we have a newmember of the Committee in the broader sense. Is he a member in thenarrower sense--I should know this--at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the presence of a new member without any further discussion or indication of disagreement.


Passage number 3.
MR. ALTMANN. He is a member, which means he has a vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about Mr. Altmann's membership and voting rights.


Passage number 4.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to welcome Si Keehn from Chicago.I'm sure you are all aware of this at this point. I don't know if youhave had any meetings with the Presidents yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 5.
MR. KEEHN. Not quite yet, just having come in last week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that Mr. Keen has recently arrived.


Passage number 6.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You haven't been introduced to all thebureaucracy of the Federal Reserve. You can be introduced to thisportion of the bureaucracy. We welcome you.The second item of business is the election of the GeneralCounsel. As you know, Neil Petersen left some weeks ago, and I thinkwe are fortunate here at the Board in having enticed Mike Bradfield tocome as General Counsel. And I think it's appropriate that he be madeGeneral Counsel of the Committee. I am familiar with Mike, as aresome other people here, because he was with the Treasury for someyears; and he has recently been in private practice in a firm inWashington.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply providing information about the bureaucracy of the Federal Reserve and suggesting that Mike Bradfield be made General Counsel of the Committee.


Passage number 7.
 If somebody would like to make a motion to that effect--MR. SCHULTZ. I move the election of Mr. Bradfield as GeneralCounsel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 8.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Second heartily.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the following passage as it simply expresses a positive sentiment.


Passage number 9.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, we have several people herewho have worked with him closely in the past. Without objection, wehave formally disposed of that.I would like to change the [order of the] agenda a littlebecause enough has been going on with the money supply and interestrates recently that I think it would be useful to have thatbackground, if you are prepared, Mr. Meek. We will approve theminutes first.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It is primarily discussing the agenda and the order in which items will be addressed.


Passage number 10.
MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In the given passage, Mr. Schultz simply says "So moved," which indicates agreement or acceptance of a proposal or motion. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this statement.


Passage number 11.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection the minutes areapproved. Are you prepared to talk, Mr. Meek.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "Without objection the minutes are approved" and the question "Are you prepared to talk, Mr. Meek" are straightforward statements and do not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 12.
MR. MEEK. Yes sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple answer to a question. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 13.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll go to Mr. Pardee next just tocomplete this part [of the agenda] and then go to the general economicsituation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence provides a clear plan of action without any conflicting opinions or ideas.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 14.
MR. MEEK. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It appears to be a statement of a person named Mr. Meek.


Passage number 15.
]7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are the CD rates today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply asks a question about current CD rates.


Passage number 16.
MR. MEEK. They were about 17.70 percent last Thursday andare somewhat lower than that today--about 17.50 percent after ouroperations today, I would say.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of the decreasing percentage after operations.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 17.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How is FNMA raising the money [they need]if they have cut back [on their monthly offerings in the market].Where are they going for money--discount notes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The question is raising the issue of how FNMA is raising money despite cutting back on their monthly offerings in the market. The mention of "discount notes" suggests alternative methods of obtaining funding, indicating potential disagreement or uncertainty about FNMA's source of money.


Passage number 18.
MR. MEEK. Through the discount notes mostly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement presented in the passage. The statement "Through the discount notes mostly" is a simple factual statement provided by Mr. Meek.


Passage number 19.
MR. PARTEE. What fraction do they have in the discountnotes. Is that a pretty big figure, Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a simple question about the fraction of discount notes held by someone named Paul.


Passage number 20.
MR. MEEK. I had a call in today to find that out, but I havenot gotten the figures. The market says that the rollover is quitesubstantial.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 21.
MR. SCHULTZ. I hope when you are talking about municipalsbeing the "wallflowers in the industry" that you are not suggestingthat people are now papering their walls with them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing hope and seeking clarification.


Passage number 22.
MR. PARTEE. That comes next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of fact made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 23.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there are questions or comments, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 24.
MR. BOEHNE. Regarding this spread between rates on U.S.Treasuries and agency issues: Is that pretty widespread throughoutthe agencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply asking about the spread between rates on U.S. Treasuries and agency issues.


Passage number 25.
MR. MEEK. It's pretty widespread. What has happened withFNMA, as I said, is that a good many people have taken them off their[approved] list, and it's harder for FNMA to sell anything longer thanthe four-year issue that they came out with. It's a much wider spreadthan I think lasted for any length of time in 1974. There was a briefperiod [then] when it got up to 75 to 100 basis points. But they havea significant problem. The new management of FNMA met with theindustry about a week ago and everyone is impressed with their plansand with the kind of appreciation they have of their problems. Butit's going to take some time to resolve them. Basically I believe, asthe Fortune article on FNMA reported, that the portfolios are underwater by a very substantial amount.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 26.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 27.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman as I listen to this and think backover what we've had to read, I become more and more impressed with thefact that we are hung by our own petard in the M-1B concept. If onereally tries to convert that to a deposit category, and makes anyallowance for the money funds and for repos, then the wholeperspective changes. One's whole interpretation and thinking aboutthis changes. I just think we are hanging onto something that is notvery real.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Winn, is expressing his own perspective and thoughts on the topic of the M-1B concept. He is not presenting any disagreement or contention with others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 28.
 I know the difficulty of trying to get rid of it, but itcertainly--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have one proposal to get rid of a rangeon M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I know the difficulty of trying to get rid of it" suggests that the speaker is aware of challenges in eliminating something, while the phrase "We have one proposal to get rid of" indicates that someone else has a different idea or proposal for removal. This contrasting information suggests disagreement or differing perspectives.


Passage number 29.
7/6-7/81MR. WINN. It really alters one's whole perspective on thisto think about it in a realistic sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 30.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know. The report that Paul gavesounded to me like very tight money in the old fashioned sense of theterm.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty about the report and stating their interpretation of it.


Passage number 31.
MR. WINN. Well, I think one understands it a lot better ifone thinks of it in terms of the behavior being somewhat differentthan reported.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Winn is expressing his personal opinion and explaining his perspective on understanding the behavior. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 32.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or context about Mr. Wallich, so it is impossible to determine if there is any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 33.
 Do you mean that it naturally has a highergrowth rate or--MR. WINN. Sure. You get a much higher growth rate if youconvert this. We talk to people who are using money funds for theirdeposits; they're banking the rest of it. Something has to give.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 34.
MR. WALLICH. So it ought to have a lower growth rate. I'mjust trying to understand the thrust of your remark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is seeking clarification and trying to comprehend the speaker's statement.


Passage number 35.
MR. WINN. My thought is that if you change the measurementof what we call [M-1B], then you get a different behavior path. Andyou get a different outlook on this whole history as well as oncurrent developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the speaker's thought about changing the measurement of [M-1B] and its potential effects on behavior path and outlook.


Passage number 36.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand fully the statistics onthe money market funds. Everybody I talk to is using them like crazyand the statistics don't show that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the speaker does not understand the statistics on money market funds and that the usage of these funds by people they have talked to contradicts the statistics.


Passage number 37.
MR. WINN. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The response "That's right" simply confirms or agrees with a previous statement or question.


Passage number 38.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we have the preliminary resultsof the survey from Michigan in which we surveyed a thousand or soaccounts and asked about their money market funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about the preliminary results of a survey conducted in Michigan.


Passage number 39.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [You mean] a thousand or so people, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The given statement does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It simply seeks clarification or confirmation regarding the number of people mentioned.


Passage number 40.
MR. AXILROD. People. And there were very close to athousand [with] accounts in money market funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a fact without any contention or disagreement. It mentions the number of accounts in money market funds without presenting any opposing views or conflicting information.


Passage number 41.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, really. How big was the sample.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The sentence "Oh, really. How big was the sample" is a response to an unknown statement or claim, showing curiosity or interest in further information.


Passage number 42.
MR. AXILROD. Well, you are going to tax my knowledge here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod is expressing that he may be tested or challenged in terms of his knowledge.


Passage number 43.
MR. PRELL. About 5,000.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage is simply presenting a statement made by Mr. Prell without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 44.
MR. AXILROD. It's 5,000 households of which 1165 had an OCDaccount. Just adding quickly--there's close to a thousand or a littleunder that have money market fund accounts. We asked all holders [ofsuch accounts] the number of checks written per month. I don't haveit by the amount of deposits at the moment, but 76 percent wrote nochecks, 18 percent wrote 1 to 3 checks, 2 percent wrote 4 to 9 checks,and 2 percent wrote 10 or more checks per month. That's veryconsistent, of course, with our measure of the velocity of theseaccounts, which is very low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is providing numerical data and stating that it is consistent with their measure of the velocity of the accounts. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 45.
7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But how many withdrew money on 24-hours notice, Steve, without writing a check.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question asking how many people withdrew money without writing a check.


Passage number 46.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think we asked that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion and there is no opposition or contradiction presented.


Passage number 47.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You can set up your account rightaway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "You can set up your account right away" is a straightforward and informative statement without any conflicting ideas or opinions.


Passage number 48.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that's true. We asked: If money marketfunds were not available, where would the money be. That's anotherindirect way of getting at it. The answers were: Non-interestchecking, 2 percent; interest checking, 3 percent; and the rest was insavings accounts, and the bulk in money market certificates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the results of a survey or study without indicating any conflicting opinions or conflicting information.


Passage number 49.
MR. WALLICH. The analysis that only a very small fractionuse the account actively and that, therefore, it is like a savingsaccount may be misleading. That's because [if] only 5 percent or soof the holders use the account as if it were a checking account, thatpart really ought to be added to M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 50.
MR. BOEHNE. I'm impressed with the number of small bankersin small towns in rural areas who now are running into their owncustomers who are putting money into money market mutual funds. Thesophistication of this is spreading to areas where in the past it hasbeen slow to go. It seems to have happened in the last 4 or 5 months,since the beginning of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and observation about the increasing number of small bankers encountering customers who are investing in money market mutual funds.


Passage number 51.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions, comments. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The sentence is simply asking if there are any further questions or comments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 52.
MR. BLACK. Paul, how did you interpret this "3 percent orlower" [reference to M-1B growth in the directive]. Was there anyfloor in your mind on that "or lower". When we voted on the 3 percentor less, most of us would not have anticipated the kind of weakness wehad in the aggregates, nor probably would we have voted for that aheadof time had we known it. Yet, as the aggregates began to come in moreweakly, you lowered our nonborrowed targets to account for thatweakness, which seemed counterproductive to me if you had in mind somefloor not too far below 3 percent. If you had in mind no floor, thatseems appropriate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: Mr. Black is questioning Paul's interpretation of the "3 percent or lower" directive and expressing disagreement with the decision to lower nonborrowed targets. Mr. Black suggests that if they had anticipated the weakness in the aggregates and the need to lower targets, they may not have voted for the 3 percent or less initially. This indicates a difference of opinion or disagreement between the two individuals.


Passage number 53.
MR. MEEK. When the Committee consulted by phone on the 17thof June, the amount we had lowered [the nonborrowed path] at thatpoint was $180 million, and the shortfall was not all that great. Wehave seen quite a lot of weakness, of course, since that time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states that there has been a weakness observed since the committee consulted on June 17th, but it does not mention any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 54.
MR. BLACK. After you constructed the path on 3-1/2 percentand you got persistently [low] figures, you still moved it downsomewhat after that, didn't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking about a past action.


Passage number 55.
MR. MEEK. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any form of contention or disagreement. Mr. Meek's response is a simple statement without any controversy or opposing views.


Passage number 56.
MR. BLACK. Didn't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: provide your statement to the police?

No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a question in a straightforward manner.


Passage number 57.
MR. MEEK. No, it has not been moved down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Meek simply states a fact without any opposition.


Passage number 58.
MR. PARTEE. No, that was the decision in the conferencecall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no evidence of contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply states the decision that was made in the conference call.


Passage number 59.
7/6-7/81MR. MEEK. Except that there was an adjustment. We came outof that Wednesday with the very high borrowing that I mentioned, andthere were some spillover effects into the next week, when borrowingalso ran high. And the overshoot in borrowing in that first week wasthen disregarded in that sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 60.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has not been moved down; it also wasn'tmoved up. And if the borrowings have fallen out since that time, theyhave just fallen out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 61.
MS. TEETERS. [During this period] we've had some ratherpeculiar borrowing patterns within the week. Sometimes borrowing wasvery late in the week and it was very early in the week a couple oftimes. What explanation do you have for that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Ms. Teeters is simply posing a question and seeking an explanation for the observed borrowing patterns.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 62.
MR. MEEK. I think one has to start with the Memorial Dayweekend when there is some suspicion that borrowing was as heavy as itwas over the weekend because we were coming toward the end of thequarter and people felt entitled, in some sense, to use the window.It was a long weekend and borrowing was quite heavy over that weekend.Thereafter, we had a kind of alternating pattern in which borrowingtended to be low and then high in successive weeks, which is not anunfamiliar pattern with banks who tend to bet that the next week isgoing to be like the [current] week. So, if Wednesday is tight, theyare likely to figure that out and borrow on Friday. That gives aprofile for the week of high borrowing before the weekend and lowborrowing afterward. If borrowing then toward the end of the weektends to be low, which happened in several weeks, and money marketconditions are easier, that tends to make banks borrow less before theweekend--less than called for by our path--with the result that byWednesday the amount they have to borrow is substantially more thanthe average, and interest rates go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing fluctuations in borrowing patterns and how banks tend to bet on the next week being similar to the current week. However, there is no explicit disagreement mentioned between the speaker and another party.


Passage number 63.
MS. TEETERS. We've had some exceptionally tight Wednesdays,haven't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is a simple observation about the experience of having tight Wednesdays.


Passage number 64.
MR. MEEK. We've had some very tight Wednesdays. And as I[mentioned in my statement], I think [in the days prior to] theWednesday in the middle of June, the willingness to accumulatedeficiencies on the part of the banks reflected a conviction thatinterest rates were moving lower automatically because the economyseemed to be weakening and the M-1B numbers were coming out weaker.The banks assumed, I think, that at the end of the week it would becheaper to cover their positions than it was at 18-1/2 percent beforethe weekend. That presumption was not at all consistent with ourreserve path. So, on Wednesday the 17th of June, banks wound upborrowing $6.4 billion in order to have over $5 billion of excessreserves that day to balance their position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Meek, is sharing his observation and analysis about the actions and assumptions of banks in relation to interest rates and their reserve path.


Passage number 65.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I think it might be helpful inresponse to President Black's question to point out, with regard tothe additional very sharp weakness that occurred in M-1B, that thedata became available only Wednesday and Thursday when we had a sharpdownward revision in deposits of a couple billion dollars for the weekof June 24th relative to path. And preliminary data suggested a dropof almost $7 billion in the week of July 1st.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 66.
7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I remember it correctly, two weeks agowhen we already had some June numbers, we were assuming [that M-1B in]June was minus 3 percent or something like that. We are now assumingtwo weeks later that it was minus 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states two different assumptions made about M-1B in June, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 67.
MR. AXILROD. Most of that occurred in the last two days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the timing of an event.


Passage number 68.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 69.
MR. ROOS. Paul, isn't it our purpose, though, to impose thediscipline of monetary policy upon the banks. And won't the fact thatthey had to pay more teach them a lesson. Won't it teach them that ifwe want to discourage their extending credit, for example, that theyhave to take it seriously and not anticipate that we'll be there withthe funds they need for their reserve requirements when they needthem. In other words, isn't this really the strategy of our wholepolicy currently, and isn't the level of the fed funds rate reflectingexactly what we want to achieve, if our strategy is right. We'reusing it as a means of affecting the commercial banks' creditactivities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 70.
MR. MEEK. What I was just describing was the conflictbetween their expectations and our reserve strategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing a conflict between expectations and a reserve strategy.


Passage number 71.
MR. ROOS. They haven't had this unfortunate experience in along time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "They haven't had this unfortunate experience in a long time."


Passage number 72.
MR. MEEK. [Unintelligible] that took place. That changestheir expectations, you see, and has market effects [such as I]described.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact or explanation without any contradictory or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 73.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the federal funds rate today.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple question asking for information about the current federal funds rate. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 74.
MR. MEEK. I walked in here [directly] from the airport, so Idon't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Contingent information or disagreement cannot be determined from this passage alone as it is a simple statement of fact.


Passage number 75.
MR. AXILROD. It may be just under 20 percent by now. It hasbeen right around 19-3/4 to 20 percent all day.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any language or context that suggests contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of a numerical value.


Passage number 76.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. He started doing his operations at19-3/4 percent; it bounced up a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a fact about someone starting their operations at a certain percentage, which then experienced a slight increase.


Passage number 77.
MR. MEEK. We did $3-1/2 billion of 3-day repurchaseagreements today. On Thursday, both the New York and Board staffprojections suggested that we should be absorbing reserves this weekand, in fact, that was a fairly general forecast in the Street. Wediscovered a big shortfall the next day, and the estimates thismorning showed a need to add $1.1 billion of reserves on our numbersand $1.9 billion on the Board staff's numbers. So we did $3-1/2billion of 3-day RPs, which would supply about $1-1/2 billion [onaverage for the week].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating the actions taken by MR. MEEK and the monetary projections made by the New York and Board staff.


Passage number 78.
MS. TEETERS. What was the shortfall. Was it in float.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a question and there is no indication of any conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 79.
MR. MEEK. Yes, and the banks' Treasury balances [were alittle high].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Meek, states that the banks' Treasury balances were "a little high," suggesting that the balances were higher than what is desired or expected. The use of the phrase "a little high" implies criticism or disagreement with the current state of the banks' Treasury balances.


Passage number 80.
7/6-7/81MR. PARTEE. I was surprised, Larry, by what you said. Itseems to me that this could be a miscalculation on the part of thebanks. But it could be an unfortunate exercise. We have beenspending quite a lot of effort, if I understand it, trying to say tothe market that we don't watch the funds rate and that what we do isto operate on aggregates. So, looking at a weakening in theaggregates, I think an intelligent banker might say: Well, that meansthere are going to be more reserves around and the market is going toease. So [the banker] operated on that presumption and then, in fact,found that the market didn't ease. Why. Because we were reducing ournonborrowed reserve target in the early part of the first four weeksor so in order to keep the funds rate from declining.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing surprise and offering their own interpretation and analysis of the situation. They are questioning the actions of the banks and suggesting a possible reason for the market not easing.


Passage number 81.
MR. ROOS. Well, Chuck, I thought our strategy essentiallywas to attempt to bring down inflation by controlling the availabilityof bank credit. And I think the banks have been accustomed in thepast to assuming that when Wednesday came around somehow or other theFed would supply the necessary reserves in order to resist theotherwise upward movement of the fed funds rate. Now, by letting thefed funds rate flow upward, even though it's more expensive to them,we will discourage their provision of credit. Am I mixed up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Roos explaining the strategy of attempting to bring down inflation by controlling the availability of bank credit.


Passage number 82.
MR. PARTEE. Well, no. My point was simply that onWednesday they either come into the window or they don't come into thewindow; [that has been their practice] for a long time. My furtherpoint was that they could look at what they regarded as being prettyweak money numbers and they could look at our statements to the pressthat we were going to provide the reserves and let the funds rate gowhere it would, and they might conclude that the funds rate ought toease if the money numbers are weak. Now, Steve's point, I think, isthe most relevant one, which is that it has only been in the last fewdays that the numbers have been all that weak. So, it's the hazard ofnot following the regime that we said we would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of different points made by different individuals.


Passage number 83.
MR. BOEHNE. Is the weakness that has become apparent in thelast couple of days going to show up in the figures that are publishedthis afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a question asking for clarification.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 84.
MR. AXILROD. Only to a degree. This afternoon we willpublish data for the 24th and that will show no change in M-1B fromthe previous week. But in the preliminary estimate we had expected a$2 billion increase. For July 1st our preliminary numbers, for whatthey're worth, show a $4-1/2 billion drop in the actual figure fromwhat we had projected. But that won't show up [in our published data]until next Friday, if it stays.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod indicates that the published data for the 24th will show no change in M-1B, but the preliminary estimate had expected a $2 billion increase. Additionally, the preliminary numbers for July 1st show a $4-1/2 billion drop in the actual figure from what was projected.


Passage number 85.
MR. PARTEE. It could be revised quite a bit couldn't it,Steve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In this passage, Mr. Partee is expressing a statement followed by a question. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 86.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. The preliminary numbers have beenrevising $1 to $2 billion, at least recently since the MCA.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the preliminary numbers and their recent revisions.


Passage number 87.
MS. TEETERS. Is it consistently in one direction or not.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unable to determine without the actual passage or context.


Passage number 88.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we had two downward revisions [in a row].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there were two downward revisions.


Passage number 89.
MR. BOEHNE. We seem to be in one of those patterns [wherethe revisions] go the same way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply describes a pattern without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 90.
-7-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states a mathematical expression and mentions the need to ratify transactions, which does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 91.
MR. PARTEE. So moved.SEVERAL. Second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage indicates that Mr. Partee made a motion and it was seconded by several individuals. This does not imply any disagreement or contention; instead, it shows agreement and support.


Passage number 92.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Pardee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no passage provided, therefore it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 93.
MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 94.
]VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(.). I think [the situation] is seriousmyself, because there are quite a few industries that are losingcompetitiveness very rapidly and are having difficulty getting exportorders at these levels [of the dollar]. I have a report that theTreasury is projecting a $50 billion deficit next year on the currentaccount. We've been projecting a somewhat smaller deficit than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of one person's opinion and an observation of the current situation.


Passage number 95.
MR. SCHULTZ. Current account or trade account.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statement that would indicate contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the terms "current account" and "trade account" without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 96.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Current account. Under thosecircumstances, the dollar is going to start crashing and it has a longway to go. And there is going to be very little [foreign centralbank] cooperation. I [heard] that atThe feeling is that one of thereasons don't ask for cooperation is first, that theydon't want the United States to hold a lot ofsecondly that, when the dollar starts to fall, they don't want to havecreated a precedent whereby they would have to give us cooperation.The whole tenor or the atmosphere [is that] the kind of cooperationwe've had in the last few years with central banks has been seriouslydemoralizing. This is what telling me also when I wasin Europe. I'm not saying that we are going to be able to do verymuch about it, given the Treasury's view, but I think it's not a happysituation at all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker suggests that there will be little foreign central bank cooperation in helping the United States with the falling dollar, and that the previous cooperation has been demoralizing. This implies a disagreement or disagreement in the approach and expectations.


Passage number 97.
MR. WALLICH. Would you think that if we did operate in themarket, we could have changed these [exchange] rates much or couldhave kept them significantly lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 98.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we had had consistent andcooperative intervention both by the Bundesbank and ourselves, yes,they would be significantly lower because the foreign exchange marketwould be influenced by that to some degree. And so maybe wouldcorporations. I'm not saying our intervention as such makes thatdifference. If the psychology is not handled in such a way that thepsychology of the traders is influenced by our cooperativeintervention, then it's self-defeating. But we had a problem alsowith the Bundesbank, which followed extremely erratic interventionpolicies. They've gone as high as $700 odd million in one day andthen the next day [have done nothing]. For example, today theDeutschemark fell very rapidly and sharply and they didn't spend adime. On other days they will spend a lot of money. I don't thinkthat kind of intervention, even when large, is of any use at all. Itdoesn't change the psychology of the traders [and reinforce the view]that it's a two-way street.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker believes that consistent and cooperative intervention by both the Bundesbank and themselves would lead to lower foreign exchange rates. However, they criticize the erratic intervention policies of the Bundesbank, stating that their large interventions do not change the psychology of traders and are not useful.


Passage number 99.
MR. ROOS. Tony, weren't these the same guys, though, whoback in the fall of 1979 jumped all over our Chairman allegedly7/6-7/81because just the opposite scenario was occurring. They were concernedabout the expansiveness of our policies and the dollar was terriblyweak, and I remember our discussing this and wringing our handssomewhat around this table about that problem. Aren't we damnedwhatever we do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and expressing concern about the situation. They are not arguing or disagreeing with anyone else.


Passage number 100.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is a tendency always for theEuropeans, and to some extent the whole world, to be super critical ofus since we are the biggest economic force. There's no question aboutthat. But I think the situation was very different in the fall of1979. What they were looking for then was some meaningful monetarypolicy [action] that would promise to check our rate of inflation,which was running very high and was having an indirect spillovereffect on the dollar. There were no complaints in terms of the levelof cooperation between central banks on intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 101.
MR. PARTEE. Are you hearing reports of noncompetitiveness ofU.S. manufacturers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there are reports of noncompetitiveness of U.S. manufacturers, indicating a disagreement or contention regarding the competitiveness of American manufacturers.


Passage number 102.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: 
Without the passage included, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage in order to answer your question accurately.


Passage number 103.
MR. PARTEE. What kinds of industries. Chemical.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 104.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chemicals have been very prominent,but we're getting reports of some others, such as textiles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that chemicals have been prominent and that there are reports of other substances, such as textiles. There is no indication of any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 105.
MR. GRAMLEY. I don't think one ought to look at the factthat American industries are becoming less competitive as analtogether undesirable thing in the sense that this is one of the waysin which the incidence of monetary policy shifts and gets moved aroundfrom those industries that are heavily dependent upon credit toothers. The problem as I see it--and this is where I would agree withTony--is that the lags in this whole process are very different. Whatmay well happen is that two years from now we will be looking at acurrent account deficit of enormous magnitude [that is] slowing theeconomy down a lot, and we will be driving interest rates down becausewe're trying to keep our own domestic economy going, therebyaggravating our inflation problem because of what is happening to theexchange rate. It would be a lot better if we could smooth thisprocess out a little through intervention policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley disagrees with the idea that American industries becoming less competitive is altogether undesirable, while Tony's view on the matter is not stated.


Passage number 106.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We won't be masters of our owndomestic monetary policy if at that point it makes sense domesticallyto ease and we're running a $50 billion current account deficit andthe dollar is reacting the way I would expect it to be reacting. Even[though] last month's German current account and trade figures weredisappointing, the Germans are fairly confident that they will come insubstantially lower in '81 and with a surplus in '82. At some pointthe markets will turn around, and I think the extremes of this rollercoaster are unnecessary. We could be in a situation where we're goingto need that kind of cooperation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 107.
MR. CORRIGAN. Chuck, I've had reports of noncompetitiveness[with foreign producers] even in computers and high technology in thelast couple of months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely presents information stating that there have been reports of noncompetitiveness with foreign producers in computers and high technology in the last couple of months.


Passage number 108.
MR. MORRIS. That's true in Boston, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states a factual statement, without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 109.
7/6-7/81MS. TEETERS. This doesn't jive with the staff presentationthis morning on the deficit that is in the projection. The staffdoesn't anticipate that the value of the dollar is going to fall morethan 4 or 5 percent. Isn't that right, Ted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by one person questioning the consistency between two pieces of information.


Passage number 110.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, from the average of the second quarter.It's a decline of 4 percent from where we are now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any sign of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a comparison and decline in percentage.


Passage number 111.
MS. TEETERS. I assumed there was a self-correcting mechanismand people say it's not going to work.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents the assumption of Ms. Teeters and acknowledges that some people have a differing opinion or skepticism about it. However, the passage does not explicitly express disagreement or engage in a debate on the topic.


Passage number 112.
MR. BOEHNE. Tony, from the European side, is the mainconcern with the high dollar a capital outflow problem or is it thisissue you're talking about that there's a lack of cooperation here andthat countries may not be the masters of their monetary policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It discusses two separate issues - the concern over the high dollar causing a capital outflow problem and the lack of cooperation between countries in regard to monetary policy. There is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 113.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I think they're more concernedabout the immediate impact on their currencies. There's a secondarylevel of concern among some of them, not among others, about the factthat in the longer run cooperation is going to be eroded. Some ofthem, on the other hand, may be perfectly happy to see a majorreversal of this, in which they would not come in and support thedollar as strongly [unintelligible]. They feel that the presentpolicy has freed them from that obligation. Obviously, they're stillgoing to support the dollar at some level because it can be verydamaging to them for us to get too competitive on exports.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It merely presents different perspectives or concerns among some individuals without suggesting any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 114.
 But thispolicy carries things to such an extreme, given the lag in the J curveeffect that--MR. BOEHNE. We trip up with the lag.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply presents a fact about the policy and its potential consequences without expressing any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 115.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's just begging for more and moreamplitude in the swings. Add that to the volatility of our domesticinterest rates and it begins to have a damaging effect on the volumeof world trade and the volume of economic activity. Anyway, that's myview.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the author's opinion on the topic of increased amplitude in the swings, volatility of domestic interest rates, and its potential impact on world trade and economic activity.


Passage number 116.
 I don't know what to recommend, but we are confronted--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The implication is that the Germans wantto intervene. I haven't seen any [evidence] of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating their uncertainty about what to recommend and mentioning that they have not seen any evidence of the Germans wanting to intervene. There is no conflicting opinion or argument presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 117.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, the German government would liketo see cooperative intervention between the Bundesbank and the FederalReserve. The Bundesbank, or at least the head of the Bundesbank, isreluctant for the two reasons I mentioned: One, he doesn't want tosee the United States holding too many deutschemarks simply because itgives us more independence and we're less controllable; and secondly,when the dollar has turned around, he doesn't want us to be able withmore moral clout to ask for intervention because of the fact that hehad asked us to intervene earlier. I would say that there's a clearsplit in many ways right now between the Bundesbank and the Germangovernment. The German government's view is that one has to ignoreshort-term interests in the interest of stronger internationalcooperation. There's quite a difference of view, which they'reprepared to talk about, between them and the Bundesbank right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage mentions a clear split between the Bundesbank and the German government regarding their views on international cooperation and intervention. The German government is advocating for stronger international cooperation, while the head of the Bundesbank has reservations about certain aspects of this cooperation. This difference in views indicates contention or disagreement.


Passage number 118.
MR. GUFFEY. Does this have any implication at all for ourswap arrangements and the conditions under which we could draw onthem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question and does not present any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 119.
-10-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not in any formal sense. But I thinkyou're right if you're implying--assuming that our policy of benignneglect continues--that if there's a reversal and the dollar comesunder heavy pressure and they are reluctant to support it with theirown resources and we start supporting it by wanting to activate theswap line, it is possible there will be somewhat less enthusiasm andmaybe more foot dragging on our activating the swap line.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It discusses a hypothetical situation and speculates about potential reactions without presenting opposing views or conflicting statements.


Passage number 120.
MS. TEETERS. Well, there are two different points of viewhere. We're looking at the possibility of a current account deficitof fairly sizable proportions, which you're saying could bring about avery sharp decline in the value of the dollar.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage states that there are two different points of view regarding the possibility of a current account deficit and a decline in the value of the dollar. However, it does not indicate any contention or disagreement between these points of view.


Passage number 121.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At a later time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no clear indication of contention or disagreement in the passage as it only states "At a later time." This statement does not convey any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 122.
MS. TEETERS. At a later time. Our staff has taken just theopposite point of view: That we're going to get a sizable deficit andsome decline in the dollar but not a collapse. Is that correct, Ted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The staff's opinion differs from the point of view previously presented. They believe there will be a deficit and decline in the dollar, but not a collapse.


Passage number 123.
MR. TRUMAN. It depends on what you define as a collapse.The dollar today is 1.09 on this weighted average we use. We have itat the end of next year at 1.00. Is a 9 percent decline a collapse ornot. That is the first proposition, the trade weighted dollar. Thesecond proposition, after this correction, is that when we try to runit out and see what happens beyond 1982, the current account deficitessentially stabilizes at the $25 to $30 billion dollar range. That'snot $50 billion but it is a very large deficit. But it does stabilizeunder that scenario; it doesn't get worse. Those, I think, areconsistent with the kinds of numbers that President Solomon wasdescribing. It is describing a process, though perhaps not as far asothers might think it would go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents different propositions and scenarios, but there is no clear contention or disagreement. The speaker is providing information and explaining the potential outcomes, but there is no argument or conflicting viewpoints expressed.


Passage number 124.
 If the dollar moves [down] sooner,then we are not going to get quite as large a deficit, but we mighthave more--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would guess--and Ted, I'd beinterested in your guess--that a 9 percent decline in the tradeweighted value of the dollar probably is going to be something like a30 percent decline against the deutschemark.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 125.
MR. TRUMAN. Probably something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement made by Mr. Truman without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being mentioned.


Passage number 126.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without additional context or information. The given phrase "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" does not provide enough information to make a judgment about contention or disagreement.


Passage number 127.
 Now, a 30 percent decline is notcollapsing in the sense of the whole financial system collapsing oranything like that, but I'm simply saying--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait a minute. A 30 percent decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 128.
MS. TEETERS. That takes us back to 1.80.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 129.
MR. TRUMAN. A 20 percent decline would take it into the1.90s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact about the potential decline of something into the 90s.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 130.
MR. WALLICH. That would imply a very sharp rise in theD-mark against most other currencies.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the following passage. The phrase "That would imply a very sharp rise in the D-mark against most other currencies" suggests a potential disagreement or different perspective regarding the potential rise in value of the D-mark.


Passage number 131.
MR. PARTEE. Of course, a higher dollar would be having avery favorable effect on our own inflation rate in the meantime. We'd-11-7/6-7/81be getting the benefit that the foreigners were getting a couple yearsago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: This passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It is a statement made by MR. PARTEE about the potential positive effect of a higher dollar on their own inflation rate.


Passage number 132.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I detect a ground swell here in favorof intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a question or observation about a possible ground swell in favor of intervention, but it does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 133.
MR. PARTEE. I don't feel it. I think it's working prettywell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, expresses his positive opinion that something is working well and does not indicate any contradictions or disagreements.


Passage number 134.
MR. MORRIS. Does it make any difference.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a straightforward question.


Passage number 135.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage does not provide enough context or information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 136.
MR. PARTEE. You mean in what the value [of the dollar] wouldbe.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Partee's question.


Passage number 137.
MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The provided passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 138.
 Whether the Treasury will [want to intervene],given its--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's not only the Treasury; it's alsothe present management of the Bundesbank. The two together I thinkprobably make it less [likely] even if all of you feel very stronglyon this side--if you all feel strongly as I do. I don't see it, giventhe joint position [of the Treasury and the Bundesbank].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply explains that both the Treasury and the present management of the Bundesbank are factors that make intervention less likely, despite the speaker's personal feelings.


Passage number 139.
 Now, in afew months it may be beneficial--MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, does it make any difference whatwe think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply presents a statement about a potential future benefit without any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints being expressed.


Passage number 140.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, we have independent powers[but] we endeavor to cooperate internally as well as externally. Do Idetect a ground swell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It mentions independent powers and cooperation, indicating a desire to work together both internally and externally. The reference to a "ground swell" does not introduce disagreement but suggests a potential change or development.


Passage number 141.
MR. MORRIS. I certainly do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris expresses agreement or confirmation in his statement.


Passage number 142.
MR. CORRIGAN. A cooperative policy of intervention is betterthan not having one and I think the arguments that Tony makes arereally the cogent ones over a period of time. I'm not sure it mattersday-to-day in terms of any particular exchange rates, but in terms ofbeing able to ameliorate at least some of these more violent swingsthat produce these crazy effects over time, I think it is desirable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It expresses a positive stance towards a cooperative policy of intervention.


Passage number 143.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Leutwiler, the head of the SwissNational Bank, said to me a couple of weeks ago that he feels that themore permanent disadvantage of the policy, as distinct from theBundesbank position, is that the foreign exchange market will not beas easily convinced in the future that there is cooperation amongcentral banks. He feels that when the time comes when there iscooperation again, it's going to take a lot more money and a muchlonger period of time for that stand to have credibility and to havean impact on the exchange markets. It is true that in the last yearor two, when the exchange market would see the Bundesbank and theFederal Reserve acting in very close harmony, they would pay a heck ofa lot of attention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any form of contention or disagreement. It is simply stating the opinion of Leutwiler, the head of the Swiss National Bank, regarding the potential future impact of a policy compared to the position of the Bundesbank.


Passage number 144.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not so sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 145.
-12-7/6-7/81MR. WALLICH. Basically it is a matter of supply and demandin the market. You may change some people's minds and thereby shiftthe demand and supply schedules, but if we have a $25 billion deficit,it has to be financed from somewhere. It isn't going to come becausetraders take positions supporting the dollar. It will have to befinanced either by central bank action--they once bought $35 billionin one year and it didn't accomplish much--or it has to be financed byour borrowing abroad and putting that into the [exchange] market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about the need to finance a deficit and explaining the possible methods of financing.


Passage number 146.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Sure. Current account deficits haveto be financed. But you would agree I'm sure, Henry, that there areshort-term capital flows that, based on expectations and movements inexchange markets, can go way beyond [unintelligible] in the oppositedirection, depending on the particular psychology.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement followed by a question, but there is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 147.
MR. WALLICH. Well, it's the possibility of affecting thatpsychology that I don't feel very optimistic about.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is expressing his personal opinion about the possibility of affecting psychology and he is not arguing against anyone else's opinion.


Passage number 148.
MR. SCHULTZ. I just don't know [at what point] we'dintervene. I recall that we were surprised that the mark moved from180 to 190 and we were intervening and then it went from 190 to [200].Those were big moves. Why didn't we go in at that point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and a question about the intervention strategy used in response to market moves.


Passage number 149.
 I don'tknow--MR. PARTEE. We bought quite a few.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of fact about purchasing several items.


Passage number 150.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, we did; we bought quite a few[deutschemarks] at that time. And now look how much further it hasgone. It's terribly difficult to know when to intervene. I do thinkwe'd be a lot better off if certain people in the Administration wouldnot make such a public [declaration] about nonintervention and thefact that we're not going to do anything. It seems to me that we'd bea little better off if there were a little less talk about it, but I'mnot sure that I'm for jumping in with a policy of [large-scale]intervention.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any explicit contention or disagreement. It mainly presents the speaker's personal opinion on intervention and the potential consequences of public declarations about nonintervention.


Passage number 151.
MR. WALLICH. Well, one has to consider, in addition to thearguments that Tony has made for German nonintervention, that theywould be buying dollars at a very unfavorable rate if they bought any[ahead of] a near-term decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting another factor to consider in addition to the arguments made earlier.


Passage number 152.
 So, that's not--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Nobody would expect them to supportthe dollar even under the tightest of cooperation at anywhere nearthese levels. I don't mean to carry this too far. Even though I maybe among the most concerned here, Paul, I'm not recommending that youdo anything about it and take on a confrontation in this area at thesame time that we have other problems in domestic monetary policy. Itdoesn't seem to make a lot of good sense at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their concern about the dollar and explaining that they do not expect anyone to support it at the current levels. They also mention that they are not recommending taking any action at the moment due to other problems in domestic monetary policy.


Passage number 153.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Trade one [problem] for another.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: This statement is not presenting any conflicting or opposing ideas. It simply suggests the possibility of exchanging one problem for another.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 154.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you mean now that we're followinga more and more [unintelligible] on the domestic scene we can get more[unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of "[unintelligible]" indicates that there are missing or unclear words, making it difficult to determine the exact meaning of the sentence. This lack of clarity could lead to different interpretations or opinions, resulting in potential disagreement or contention.


Passage number 155.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Divert the argument. Well, I haven'tdetected a full-scale ground swell.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of any contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement seems to be presenting a suggestion or strategy to divert an argument, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 156.
-13-7/6-7/81MR. GUFFEY. I would join those who would like to have a morecooperative intervention policy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 157.
 If that, added to the two or threeother voices, is a ground swell, then--MR. WALLICH. I would be very happy to support it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker states that they would be happy to support the mentioned idea or proposal.


Passage number 158.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would be very happy to go back to the old wayof doing things, if it could be done without a fight with theAdministration. I can't think of grounds on which I would less wantto do battle than this one.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley states that he would be happy to go back to the old way of doing things, but only if it can be done without a fight with the Administration. He further mentions that he cannot think of any grounds on which he would less want to do battle than this issue. This suggests that Mr. Gramley would prefer to avoid conflict and is willing to work towards a resolution without contention.


Passage number 159.
MS. TEETERS. Well, at least at this point in time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply expresses a current situation or perspective without presenting any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 160.
MR. PARTEE. I think the question can be left to developing astrategy as the dollar drops. It's too late now to rescue anything onthe up side I think. We did, of course, have a very activeintervention policy right up until January 20 or thereabouts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing the opinion of Mr. Partee.


Passage number 161.
MS. TEETERS. Just as a point of information, when are theCarter bonds due. And how big are our balances over and above theamount that we owe in Carter bonds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply asking for information about the due date and balances of Carter bonds without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 162.
MR. TRUMAN. First, Carter bonds are due at the end of thismonth. And the answer to the second question is that we have about$5.8 billion over and above the Carter bonds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states information about the due date of Carter bonds and the amount of money available.


Passage number 163.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But not in deutschemarks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply mentions that something is not happening in a specific currency, without presenting any disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 164.
MR. TRUMAN. Not all of it. We have $5.8 billion over andabove the Carter bonds, $3.6 billion of which is in DM. That's it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. This is a straightforward statement of financial information.


Passage number 165.
MR. BOEHNE. I think Chuck is right. We can't fight this outphilosophically. We have to wait until the flag is on our side; wehave to wait until the dollar comes down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Boehne agrees with Chuck's perspective and suggests a strategy of waiting for certain conditions to be favorable. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 166.
MR. GRAMLEY. Unfortunately, if we wait that long we couldfigure, as Tony indicated earlier, that we wouldn't have the foreigncentral banks on our side any more. It's going to be a lonely battleto fight. I think the die is cast; there's not much else we can do.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley is expressing a belief that waiting too long could result in losing the support of foreign central banks and that the situation is already determined, leaving no other alternatives.


Passage number 167.
MR. PARTEE. Just demand rules of the gold standard, that'sall, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement suggesting that the demand for rules of the gold standard is sufficient.


Passage number 168.
MR. WALLICH. You'll hear more about that soon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Wallich is simply informing the reader that they will learn more about a certain topic soon.


Passage number 169.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not convinced that it would have mademuch difference in the actual level of the dollar; in terms ofatmospherics, it may have made some difference. If we haven't anymore questions about that, we can turn to the economic situation overa prolonged period as background to our deliberations, keeping in mindthat we have to make quite a few decisions over the course of ourmeeting, presumably tomorrow morning for the actual decisionmaking.Are you prepared, Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any conflicting ideas or opposing viewpoints. It simply discusses the potential impact of a particular action and then transitions to a different topic.


Passage number 170.
MR. KICHLINE. Prepared for what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not suggest any contention or disagreement. Mr. Kichline is simply mentioned as being prepared for something without any indication of conflict or differing opinions.


Passage number 171.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything. Go ahead.-14-7/6-7/81MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, and TRUMAN. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage simply states that the three individuals mentioned have made a statement, without expressing any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 172.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply expressing the fact that there are questions. There is no opinion or disagreement being presented.


Passage number 173.
MR. CORRIGAN. You didn't say anything about answers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 174.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a chart here on the money supply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 175.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's plotted wrong. It's plotted in the middleof the period; it should be plotted at the final period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is stating that something is plotted wrong and expressing their disagreement with the current plotting placement.


Passage number 176.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I was wondering. Iwondered what was plotted. I can't find it at the moment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing curiosity and admitting to not knowing something at the moment.


Passage number 177.
MR. KICHLINE. For M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the name "MR. KICHLINE" and mentions "M-1B" without providing any context or information for an argument or disagreement to exist.


Passage number 178.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Those are the changes fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage doesn't mention any changes or comparisons between different quarters.


Passage number 179.
MR. KICHLINE. They are changes fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter, adjusted, beginning in 1975 to date. We tried to incorporatesome ad hoc adjustments for ATS and NOW accounts. I think they arethe familiar numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply providing information about changes in numbers over time.


Passage number 180.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I just didn't know whether they werefourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating a statement of uncertainty or confusion about a specific period of time.


Passage number 181.
MR. KICHLINE. In 1980 it's 6-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the interest rate in 1980. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 182.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would note in that connection that I'vebeen trying to keep track of the annual year-to-year changes. Ofcourse, we won't know what the quarter-to-quarter changes will be forthis year either until we finish the year. But it looked for a longwhile as if it was going to be difficult to make the year-to-yearchange less than it was last year. Last year adjusted it was 6.7percent, which was the same as in '79. With this slump in June, if weremain within our targets without a weird pattern, we're going to havea year-to-year decline. If we're at the midpoint of the range orbelow, it will be a sizable year-to-year decline in the adjustedfigure. It will be an increase in the unadjusted figure, but I guessthat's to be expected.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 183.
MR. GRAMLEY. Do you really mean a decline or a reduction inthe rate of increase.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply asks for clarification on the meaning of a decline or reduction in the rate of increase.


Passage number 184.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A reduction in the rate of increase--adecline in the year-to-year change. What did I look at. I waslooking at the wrong numbers. My conclusion is right, but it's notmuch of a decline. That's right. I'm sorry. We have to be at themidpoint or below to get a year-to-year decline--I'll get thisstraight now--for M-1B adjusted. For M-1B unadjusted, we'll never geta decline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a mistake made by the speaker and acknowledging the need for clarification.


Passage number 185.
MS. TEETERS. Why do you want a decline on a year-to-yearbasis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only presents a question without any additional statements or ideas that could indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 186.
-15-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because that's what we're supposed to bedoing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a mathematical expression and mentions what is expected to be done with it.


Passage number 187.
MS. TEETERS. I thought it was fourth quarter-to-fourthquarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states their belief or thought, without any contradiction or disagreement with others.


Passage number 188.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon which figures youthink are more significant. I happen to think the first threequarters are not excluded from the year. But I may be peculiar inthat respect. On M2, we are not going to get a decline year-to-year;regardless of what we do, we're going to get an increase of some size.And it looks as if we'll get a big increase in M3 on a year-to-yearbasis. I just cite this as background. We'll probably get a smalldecline in M-1B adjusted and some increase in all the other numbersyear-to-year.Let me ask another question and then I want to say somethingelse. The Treasury seems to think that the budget this [fiscal] yearis going to be only about $50 billion in deficit, if I interpret themcorrectly. How do we have a $10 billion dollar difference with onlytwo months left to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear statements of contention or disagreement. The speaker simply presents their own thoughts and observations without contradicting or challenging any other perspectives.


Passage number 189.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't know.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and does not indicate disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 190.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My other question is: How much [reflects]the difference in your [interest rate assumptions]. They wereassuming a 9 percent interest rate next year for the bill rate, andyou're assuming what--15 percent or something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The author and the other person mentioned have different assumptions or beliefs about the interest rate for the following year, which suggests a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 191.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. How much is that worth in fiscal terms.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply presents a question by Mr. Kichline regarding the value of something in fiscal terms. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 192.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without the passage being provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the text.


Passage number 193.
MR. KICHLINE. It's $17 billion additional expenditures usingthe staff forecast because of higher interest payments compared totheir March numbers. The actual level of interest payments in thebudget for fiscal '81 in our forecast--and I presume ours isreasonably close to the Administration's--is nearly $71 billion, andit would rise to $88 billion next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply presenting information about the expected additional expenditures and interest payments in the budget.


Passage number 194.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the figure on interest payments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward question asking for information about the figure on interest payments. There is no contention or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 195.
MR. KICHLINE. $71 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a simple statement of a numerical figure and does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 196.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a tabulation of the tentativeforecasts, at least, that were made by various members of theCommittee. I don't know whether you can review this better than I,Mr. Kichline; I don't know whether you are prepared to.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that they have a record of forecasts made by different members of a committee and expressing uncertainty about whether the listener can review it.


Passage number 197.
 Are thesestaff forecasts the same as the ones you have here or--MR. KICHLINE. Yes, they are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker confirms that the staff forecasts are the same as the ones mentioned before.


Passage number 198.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somehow, the Committee members straddlethe staff forecast in every item for this year and for next yearexcept [for nominal GNP].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the Committee members are aligned with the staff forecast for every item except for nominal GNP.


Passage number 199.
MS. TEETERS. You mean [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The response from MS. TEETERS is unclear and might require further clarification, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 200.
-16-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, in [nearly] everything. Technicallythey straddle [the staff forecasts]. The staff's forecast of real GNPis in the middle of the others for this year. For the GNP deflator,the staff is on the low side and for unemployment it's about in themiddle. But next year the staff is on the low side on real GNP and Iguess on prices. It's not unanimous but it's about in the middle Iguess on unemployment. If this [table] is right in terms of theAdministration's forecast, no member of the Open Market Committee whohas expressed himself so far [has a forecast close to] the real GNPgrowth implied in the Administration forecast [for 1982].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is not contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply describes the different forecasts of the staff and the Open Market Committee without any explicit disagreement or contention between them.


Passage number 201.
MR. FORD. Paul, [our forecast is] much closer to theAdministration's than the staff's but we're still well below theAdministration's. [Real GNP growth of] 5.2 percent [in 1982] doesseem optimistic. The question I have that builds on your observationabout their T-bill rate [assumption] is this: Jim, am I reading yourcharts right in trying to put them together for the corporate AAA bondrate, the T-bill rate, and the implicit price deflator in 1982. If Ido the arithmetic correctly, are you really projecting that in 1982the 3-month Treasury bill rate will be a flat 16 percent in the faceof a 7 percent GNP deflator and an 8 percent CPI, yielding real ratesof interest of 8 percent on the short end of the yield curve and realrates of interest of 7 to 8 percent on the long end. These seem to meawfully high real rates if I'm reading your charts right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply seeking clarification and confirmation of the information presented in the charts.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 202.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This has been a matter of some discussion.Maybe we ought to linger on this point a moment, Mr. Kichline.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "This has been a matter of some discussion" implies that there has been disagreement or contention on the topic being discussed. Additionally, the suggestion to "linger on this point" further indicates that there may be differing opinions or perspectives that need to be addressed.


Passage number 203.
MR. FORD. If you lower that, it seems to me then that youcan allow for a lower deficit, you can allow for more investmentspending, and you can get a little closer to the Administration's realforecast, which is where we come in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely suggesting a possible adjustment that could lead to a more accurate forecast.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 204.
MR. KICHLINE. As you know, forecasting interest rates is areal problem, and I tried to say in my [briefing] that there are a lotof pitfalls involved in this process. We've tried to look at this ina variety of ways. The charts aren't plotted incorrectly, and you'vedescribed what is there and what the implications are. Our generalview is that we do have very strong latent demands for goods andservices in the economy in a variety of sectors; [those demands] arebeing held down by interest rates. We're stuck with an assumption of4-1/4 percent [growth in] M-1B and a good deal of uncertainty abouthow to interpret that measure of money. Is it really the sort ofthing that one would have perceived in the past, linking it closely totransactions demands. Or is it changing. In our forecast, looking at4-1/4 percent money [growth], we have what we've termed some furtherdownward drift in the money demand function. That is, money is actingin a more powerful way than the 4-1/4 percent [growth] we observe.But even so, using any of the standard models, to get the economy tolimit growth of money demand to 4-1/4 percent takes incredibly highshort-term rates. The Board's model has much higher rates than wehave here. At the same time, we get very high long-term rates, whichis one of the factors damping investment growth in our forecast. And,in response to a question earlier this morning, my [comment] was thatwith the kinds of rates we have built in one could easily argue a casefor a lower investment demand than the staff has forecast. That is,the implied real rates are very high.-17-7/6-7/81So, we're really fighting this issue of what kind of[interest] rates would be associated with the 4-1/4 percent growth inmoney, whether [that] is sustainable, or whether in fact we might justfind the economy collapsing in that environment and [money growth]then snapping back. But it's a key issue with regard to the staffforecast. Projecting nominal interest rate levels out a year or ayear and a half is something I wouldn't like to stake a lot ofconfidence on. So, you pointed to a real problem. It seems to methat we could not expect that situation [of high real rates] topersist for an extended period of time. It would have to be resolvedin one way or another, either by the economy collapsing and draggingrates down or by rates falling with changing price expectations. Wedo have in this forecast a rather favorable price performance, and onewould think there would be an unwillingness to pay those long rates.So, it would need to be resolved.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage describes a disagreement or contention regarding the appropriate interest rates associated with the forecasted growth in money. The speaker remarks that the Board's model predicts much higher rates than what is currently projected. There is also disagreement about whether the 4-1/4 percent growth in money is sustainable and how it will affect the economy in the long term. Overall, there is contention and uncertainty surrounding the issue of interest rates in relation to money growth.


Passage number 205.
MR. WALLICH. Well, as long as the short-term rates aresignificantly above the long rates, people have an expectation thatrates will come down. And that is why they're willing to pay veryhigh rates temporarily. If they ever gave up on that expectation, the[yield.] structure presumably would flatten out, and it's only thenthat we would see the full restraining power of those interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 206.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody is enough ofan historian here [to know]. There have been lots of times in historywhen short-term rates have been above long-term rates, going way back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a statement of uncertainty rather than a statement of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 207.
MR. WALLICH. During the 1920s.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Wallich and references the 1920s.


Passage number 208.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does this happen when the generalstructure of interest rates is going down--that short-term interestrates are persistently higher than long-term interest rates and thegeneral trend is downward. In the 1920s I guess the trend was down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a hypothesis about the trend of interest rates in the 1920s.


Passage number 209.
MR. WALLICH. It seems very logical in terms of thestructure. People expect rates to go down and they do go down; but inorder to hold short-term securities, they have to be paid a premium.Otherwise, they do like Merrill Lynch and start buying bonds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a logical observation about the expectation of rates going down and the need to pay a premium for holding short-term securities.


Passage number 210.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the historical recordhas been.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about the historical record, but it does not present any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 211.
MR. FORD. Paul, may I just expand briefly on the point youmade. Has there ever been a time in our history--I just don'tremember seeing a good chart on this--when long-term and short-term[real] rates were both in the 7 to 8 percent range for a period longerthan a year, which seems to be implied here. Right now we have highreal rates, so it's not impossible. We have them temporarily rightnow. I guess one has to believe that anything that is reality has tobe believable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 212.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with that analysis, to meanyway, is that it doesn't take taxes into account. And we've neverhad the kind of inflation, interest rates, and high marginal tax ratesof the sort we have now. I don't know how high these interest ratesare. They're high for some people and they're not high for otherpeople. I don't know how to resolve that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.
Explanation: The passage does not present any clear contention or disagreement. It is mainly expressing uncertainty and lack of knowledge about certain factors like taxes and interest rates.


Passage number 213.
-18-7/6-7/81MR. BOEHNE. Well, I came out the way Bill did on the realrate route. It seems to me that these kinds of rates could notpersist over this long a period without causing some kind of collapse.I have found in the last six weeks that the apprehension and theanxiety level have been increasing in the thrift industry and in smalland medium size businesses. I think their expectation is thatinterest rates are going to come down before the end of the year. Ifthis kind of view prevailed in the economy, I think we'd have amassive spread of heart attacks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 214.
MR. BALLES. Starting at this table.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only states the beginning of a conversation without indicating any opposing opinions or conflicting statements.


Passage number 215.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes, starting at this table probably. It justdoes not seem to me that we can have this kind of interest ratestructure lasting for two years without some very serious financialcollapses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no disagreement or contention in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the potential consequences of a certain interest rate structure.


Passage number 216.
MR. PARTEE. But the question is: Do [rates] come downbecause the GNP weakens or for some independent reason. What Jim saysis driving them is [the assumption of] a relatively small money supplyexpansion and [the staff forecast] has to force that on an economywith quite a lot of nominal GNP. The staff could be making a mistakein velocity; turnover could be faster than has been predicted. Butotherwise, it either has to be a faster increase in money or a smallerincrease in nominal GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is merely exploring different possibilities and discussing the factors that could influence rates coming down.


Passage number 217.
MR. BOEHNE. You've got a collision there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehner is simply stating a fact about a collision.


Passage number 218.
MR. PARTEE. The [problem] may be that what this forecastdoesn't show is the collapse that you said would develop.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 219.
MR. FORD. Something does not add up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Ford simply states that something does not add up without expressing any disagreement with anyone.


Passage number 220.
MR. BOEHNE. This forecast cannot come about in reality.Something has to give between now and the time we get to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the forecast mentioned is not feasible in reality and suggests that adjustments or changes need to occur before reaching that point.


Passage number 221.
MR. GRAMLEY. But there are possible adaptations to thisforecast, setting apart the collapse of the thrift industry--orassuming that the thrift industry is handled by merging three-fourthsof them into banks or something like that. You could make thisforecast work by pushing up the deflator somewhat so the real interestrates don't look quite that fierce and by shifting the mix of GNP.If, for example, we got a substantial consumer anticipatory responseto a 3-year tax cut and less housing and less business fixedinvestment, we might get 1 percent [real] GNP and a somewhat higherdeflator; the overall outlines might work. But then we'd still haveto worry about how to handle the collapse of the thrifts and what sortof additional structural damage would be happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing possible adaptations and scenarios to make a forecast work, without stating any opposing views or conflicting arguments.


Passage number 222.
 I agree that weare looking at a situation in which very, very substantial structuraldamage is probably ahead if this is--MR. FORD. If the rates stay up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It seems to express agreement with the idea that there will likely be substantial structural damage if the rates remain high.


Passage number 223.
MR. WALLICH. What would happen if the M-1B estimate isreally, in effective terms, much too low. In other words, if asubstantial shift in the demand schedule were ahead because of the useof substitutes, would that lower interest rates in your context or--.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply posing a hypothetical scenario and asking about the potential effects. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 224.
-19-7/6-7/81MR. KICHLINE. Yes. Another way of saying that is that wewould have more money growth than the measured M-1B picks up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there would be more money growth than what is measured by M-1B, without any disagreement or contention presented.


Passage number 225.
MR. WALLICH. And it would mean lower interest rates, then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 226.
MR. PARTEE. For this nominal GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no obvious contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 227.
MR. KICHLINE. Right, other things unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that other things remain unchanged.


Passage number 228.
MR. WALLICH. Which is what has happened to us again andagain, hasn't it. We set what looked like a very low M1 target andthen a shift occurred and it turned out not to be very low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of fact.


Passage number 229.
MR. AXILROD. Governor Wallich, that hasn't really occurredsince 1975-76. That's when it most clearly occurred. Thus far thisyear, unless we get further shifts, we're pretty much on the"schedule" that we tended to project--that is, a so-called downwardshift on the order of 2-1/2 to 2-3/4 percentage points. If there's nofurther shift this year, that's about what we'll end up with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact and providing information about the projection for this year.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 230.
MR. WALLICH. Yes, but aren't you arguing in effect thatbecause we've had such a large shift in the first half of the year,we're therefore unlikely to get any in the second.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents a disagreement by questioning the argument that a large shift in the first half of the year would make it unlikely to have any shift in the second half.


Passage number 231.
MR. AXILROD. If we get a similar shift in the second halfthen we'll have a much more expansionary policy than was voted for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement stated in the passage. It is simply discussing the potential outcome of a shift in policy.


Passage number 232.
MS. TEETERS. Do you have a major shift in the demand formoney built into the '82 forecast also.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage presents a question about a forecast, but there is no indication of disagreement or controversy.


Passage number 233.
MR. KICHLINE. About the same as in 1981. I would say thatin February we had a high interest rate scenario. We had assumed somedownward shift of the money demand function, as Steve mentioned. Wedidn't, however, have it all occurring essentially in the firstquarter. We're stuck with the question of what to do at this point,and we made the assumption that, in fact, a demand shift of 2 to 2-1/2percent for the year was reasonable. So, we wouldn't anticipate anyshift over the balance of this year, but we have once again put in asimilar shift for 1982. Even with that, however, we get very highinterest rates in order to hold the M1 growth down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting information and making assumptions based on that information.


Passage number 234.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll reverse the question. It's easy toask the questions of Mr. Kichline, but almost everybody in this roomhas a similar forecast for nominal GNP. You were told to assumesomewhat lower monetary growth next year. What interest rates are youassuming and how do you get there on the basis of historicalexperience.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the forecast for nominal GNP and inquiring about the assumptions made regarding interest rates.


Passage number 235.
MR. FORD. Well, I think we have to assume--we better assumeit and if we don't assume it, we better pray for it--that what's wrongabout the way [the components of the staff's forecast] add up is thatthey do not believe that real interest rates will come down and thatthat will be accompanied by a decline in nominal interest rates.That's what solves the puzzle. That's what we have to hope for.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is simply stating a belief and expressing a hope for a specific outcome.


Passage number 236.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It solves the puzzle unless you considerpart of the puzzle [to be the] historical relationships between moneyand nominal interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a condition or possibility to consider when trying to solve the puzzle related to money and nominal interest rates.


Passage number 237.
-20-7/6-7/81MR. FORD. Perhaps what we have to do--I've been thinkingmore and more about this--is to consider another shift adjustment.Now, listen fellows, if we project these kinds of interest rates of 16percent out for another two years then I think we have to hire thoseguys to do the Michigan survey every month from now on. I haven't hadthe benefit of [seeing] that but I used to work at that survey centerso I know how they operate. If I understood you right, you said that18 percent of the thousand households that have such an account saidthey were writing 3 or 4 more checks [per month].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing considering another shift adjustment and proposing to hire a survey team to gather data.


Passage number 238.
MR. AXILROD. Four percent of those who have money marketfunds--is that what you meant.--were writing more than 3 checks.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a percentage and clarifies the type of checks being written.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 239.
MR. FORD. Yes, but that could be consistent.... Let me putit to you as a question: Couldn't that be consistent with a muchlarger percentage of the balances in money market funds being drawn inthe form of transactions if the wealthier households are the ones thatare doing it. Each check would have to be a minimum of $500, right.Then there is a learning curve. I would say that over the next yearor two, if you guys believe that these high interest rates will last,that percentage of households and especially the percentage of dollarsthat get used as checking accounts--assuming Congress doesn't takeyour advice, Paul, and puts reserve requirements on them--[is going torise]. We are going to see a big shift. The shift we're going to betalking about six months or a year from now isn't going to be theshift to NOWs out of checking; it's going to be the shift to checkingin the form of MMFs. And since normally we think of checking accountmoney as an M1 type number and since MMFs we think of as M2, we mayhave to think some more about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is proposing the possibility of a larger percentage of balances in money market funds being used for transactions. This idea is potentially in disagreement with the beliefs or assumptions of the other people in the conversation, as Mr. Ford suggests that there may be a shift towards using money market funds as checking accounts.


Passage number 240.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure that resolves your dilemma.The deus ex machina that brings that about is the high interest ratesthat you don't want to assume in the first place.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear indication of contention or disagreement. It is simply expressing uncertainty and stating the potential drawback of assuming high interest rates.


Passage number 241.
MR. FORD. I'm saying that if you're assuming it, then youhave to do some shift adjusting of this other type.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement made by Mr. Ford explaining a condition or requirement.


Passage number 242.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can consider that we may have aninsolvable problem here and that Mr. Kichline is right: That barringa so-called disaster, if interest rates go down, then the GNP willjump up. And if interest rates don't decline, the economy willdecline sharply.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply presents various scenarios regarding the relationship between interest rates and the GNP, without indicating any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 243.
MR. SCHULTZ. Isn't that what's likely to happen--that we'llhave periods of weakness that will tend to be followed by somestrength. It seems to me perfectly reasonable to expect some weaknessin the latter half of the year followed by some strength in the firstpart of next year caused to some extent by lower interest rates, bythe tax bill that will go into effect, and by [higher] defensespending. And given the kind of monetary policy we have had, if wehave some strengthening in the economy, we most certainly will havesome upward movement again in interest rates. So, are we not likelyto be faced by these opposing forces going back and forth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 244.
MS. TEETERS. [Interest rates] never go down, Fred.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply states a belief or statement by Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 245.
MR. SCHULTZ. Oh, I think they do; they go down. I thinkthey're going to go down in the latter half of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz is expressing his belief that something will happen in the latter half of the year.


Passage number 246.
-21-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it's likely that we'regoing to have that kind of gradual change. I think it's more likelythat after a protracted period of these high real interest rate levelswe will see a significant recession both here and abroad. I don'tknow whether that will be in 6 months, 9 months, or a year, but atsome point I think we will see a significant recession; inflationaryexpectations will get lowered and interest rates, both nominal andreal, will come down. But I don't know if we have any alternative tothe policy that we're following. I don't see any gradual way for thisscenario to be different than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is expressing a view and speculation about the future, but there is no contention or disagreement among different parties or perspectives.


Passage number 247.
MR. WALLICH. An average of 1 percent growth or 1/2 percentgrowth over a period of two years is historically very rare. I don'tknow if it has ever happened. I think that's the kind of scenario oneprojects when one doesn't know whether [economic activity] is going upor going down. So, you have the economy growing very slowly andunemployment rising. But it doesn't have a very high percentageprobability, as Otto Eckstein would put it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply stating his opinion about the rarity of a 1 percent or 1/2 percent growth over a period of two years and his uncertainty about the direction of economic activity.


Passage number 248.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without seeing the complete text.


Passage number 249.
MR. BALLES. Well, for a more optimistic scenario: Our staffhas recently gotten into this treacherous business of forecastinginterest rates and they come up with much lower rates by '82 and goingon into '83 than the Board's model. That reminds me of that old storyabout a tough question in an economics exam where the student wrote"God only knows what the answer is." The professor came back and said"God gets an A and you get an F." Without going into a long harangueon methodology here, the Board's model is this large structural model.As I understand it, there's a lag of about 4 years between money andprices. By using a much smaller model with about a 2-year lag and byusing a loanable funds theory of interest rates rather than thetraditional liquidity preference theory, we get more real growth, lessinflation, and lower interest rates. That's really rather startling.Specifically, as opposed to, say, a 16 to 17 percent level for the3-month Treasury bill for this year and next year, we would show theTreasury bill rate coming down to about 9 percent in '82 and goingdown to about 7 percent in '83.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 250.
 As I say, God only knows which modelis right, but I wouldn't--MR. SCHULTZ. What do you get for real growth and inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 251.
MR. BALLES. We get more real growth and less inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a claim without any opposing view or contradictory statement.


Passage number 252.
MS. TEETERS. What money supply do you get.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about the money supply without expressing any disagreement or opposing view.


Passage number 253.
MR. BALLES. We're using the same assumptions as the Board'smodel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply states that the assumptions being used in the model are the same as those used by the Board.


Passage number 254.
MR. GRAMLEY. What kind of increase in velocity are youtalking about, then. Well over 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question followed by a statement indicating that the increase in velocity being discussed is "well over 10 percent."


Passage number 255.
MR. BALLES. No. As I understand it--and we'll get beyond mytechnical knowledge pretty fast here--one of the things that's keepinginterest rates very high in the Board staff's big structural model isthe need for a big increase in velocity. In our particular way oflooking at the world, we get a quicker decline in inflation byreducing the rate of monetary growth in each of the last 2 years. As-22-7/6-7/81you remember, there has been a slight decline in the growth of M-1Band there apparently will be a bigger one this year. That reactsfaster in our way of looking at the world in getting inflation down;hence, interest rates come down faster.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Balles is simply explaining his understanding of the factors keeping interest rates high and how reducing the rate of monetary growth could potentially lead to a quicker decline in inflation and lower interest rates.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 256.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If this table is right that I have infront of me and you haven't changed your numbers, your nominal GNPforecast for next year is a lot higher than the staff's. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker is suggesting that there is a disagreement between their forecast for next year's GNP and the staff's forecast.


Passage number 257.
MR. BALLES. Yes, without trying to be overly precise.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Balles agrees without any sign of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 258.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which means your velocity must be muchhigher than this, assuming you use the same money assumption, withlower interest rates. You have much lower interest rates and muchhigher velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating two facts without any contradictory or conflicting information.


Passage number 259.
MR. FORD. That's the key to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Ford's statement without any contradictory or conflicting elements.


Passage number 260.
MR. AXILROD. About [unintelligible] percent velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 261.
MR. GRAMLEY. If you figure out how to make that work, itwould be great. It's the kind of thing in which you've not looked atthe specific [unintelligible] about the implications for money demand.How is it that you get this sort of money demand relationship withinterest rates declining. If you have a big shift in the money demandfunction, then it will work. Otherwise, you're sort of out in limbo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley is expressing his agreement and support for the idea presented, while also suggesting the need for further examination to address any potential implications or uncertainties.


Passage number 262.
MR. BALLES. Well, one of the things that we are assuming hashappened, and I think the Board staff has arrived at the sameconclusion, is that there probably has been a big downward shift inthe demand for money so far this year. We have the same ingredientsworking that we had in '74 and '75 when we had big institutionalchanges--remember that corporations and municipal governments couldget into savings accounts--and extraordinarily high interest rates.At that time we were [registering] an all time new record as well.And of the various episodes of history in which we have thought thatthere might have been a downward shift in money demand, the 1974-75experience stands out as one of the more likely episodes. We'reguessing now that the same thing has occurred this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is stating assumptions and observations about the demand for money, and there is no indication of any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 263.
MR. PARTEE. And will continue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 264.
MR. BALLES. And will continue.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "Mr. Balles" does not indicate any disagreement or conflicting opinion.


Passage number 265.
MR. PARTEE. So, you're not that far from Bill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement or question without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 266.
MR. FORD. No. And what's more, with regard to velocity andhow much GNP can be supported, M-1B is what you gave us for thespecification. You did not give us [a specification] for M2 or demandthat we respond [on the basis of] M2. It might be, if indeed thepublic meets more of its needs for money with these tricky MMFs usedas checking accounts, especially where big dollars are involved, thatlower money growth can hold up more GNP. So, yes, we get morevelocity; and it may be believable if this structural change that theMichigan survey talks about is happening.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing different aspects of money growth and velocity.


Passage number 267.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, no. The passage is not provided, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 268.
-23-7/6-7/81MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, all this conversation, ormuch of it, suggests to me that we ought to face up to the fact thatwe do not know how to measure transactions balances in our presentsociety. M-1B is somewhat of a nostalgic attempt to maintain aconcept of transactions balances and I think it's leading us into allkinds of problems. First of all, we don't know what M-1B unadjustedis in the sense that we don't know how much of M-1B is really not atransactions balance. For example, in the areas where there are veryhigh minimum balance requirements for NOW accounts, people will shiftassets into their NOW account in order to get the free services. InConnecticut, for example, the average balance in a NOW account is$6,000. This is substantially higher than the average balance inpersonal checking accounts in Connecticut before the NOW account cameinto being. The reason is that [banks] learned from the Massachusettspricing of NOWs and put in very high minimum balance [requirements].So, some part of M-1B unadjusted is not a transactions balance. Thenwe adjust the M-1B for shift adjustments, and I suspect this is doneon the basis of--to put it mildly--incomplete evidence. In additionto that we have the evidence just cited that some 4 percent of themoney market funds are being used, at least to some degree, astransactions balances. I suspect that percentage will rise over time.We have overnight RPs, for example, that are used by a good manycorporations as transactions balances, and RPs are not in M-1B at all.I really don't think we will ever, from now on, be able to have aconcept of a transactions balance in which we can have the sameconfidence we used to have in the old M1. At least we knew then thatM1 was the store of money that people had available to them to makepayments. It seems to me that we could be splitting hairs on M-1B fora great many years and talking about these wild changes in velocity,about these changes in money demand, and so on, and all we'd be doingis covering up the fact that we simply don't have any basis formeasuring what transactions balances are any more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Morris, argues that the concept of transactions balances, specifically M-1B, is problematic and outdated. He believes that the measurement of transactions balances in the present society is uncertain and incomplete. He questions the accuracy of adjusting M-1B and suggests that it includes non-transactions balances. He also mentions the use of money market funds and overnight RPs as transactions balances, which are not accounted for in M-1B. Overall, Mr. Morris argues that there is no basis for measuring transactions balances accurately anymore, which is in disagreement with the current approach.


Passage number 269.
 And that's likelyto be [more] true in the future than--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states a possible future scenario.


Passage number 270.
 Once Reg Q is gone completely and alldeposits bear some kind of competitive market rates, it's mind-boggling to think of [where] to cut off the so-called money supply interms of a coherent [measure of] transactions--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anyone who would like to defendM-1B or M1-A or M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing confusion about where to establish a measure of the money supply in the absence of Reg Q and with all deposits bearing competitive market rates. It is asking if there is anyone who would argue in favor of specific measures like M-1B, M1-A, or M1.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 271.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I think M-1B is quite a bit better thanFrank has said. What we really have to do is to talk about firstdifferences. We need something to steer by. Now, the fact that thereare some idle balances in a transactions total of M1 doesn't mean athing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is disagreeing with Frank's statement about M-1B and expressing his belief that it is better.


Passage number 272.
 There have always been a lot of idle balances in there, andwhat we need to do--MR. MORRIS. There are a lot of transactions balances thatare not in there, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there have always been a lot of idle balances, and then adds that there are also transactions balances that are not included. This is a statement of fact rather than expressing disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 273.
MR. PARTEE. And that, of course, one allows for in thevelocity estimate. You can take any number and modify it to takeaccount of other things that you think are happening in the economy.I don't see that M2 is that much better [than M1]. If I understandwhat the DIDC did, in another 25 days we're going to have 4-yearcertificates in M2 that are probably going to sell like wildfire. Are-24-7/6-7/81you going to consider those transactions balances. They're going tobe in M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing skepticism about the effectiveness of including M2 in velocity estimates compared to M1. He questions whether certain transactions, such as the sale of 4-year certificates in M2, should be considered as balances in M2. This indicates a difference of opinion or disagreement about the validity of including such transactions in the calculation.


Passage number 274.
MR. MORRIS. I think M2 is too narrow, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage provided does not indicate any disagreement or contention. The statement simply expresses the opinion of Mr. Morris, without any opposing views or conflicting ideas being presented.


Passage number 275.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether it helps or hurts,but we had a conversation similar to this about a year ago I suspect.I thought that M1 [growth] would never come up. And no sooner did Iso state in public testimony, it came back up to the point where[M-1B] was [above the Committee's ranges] by the end of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their own thoughts and observations without contradicting or challenging any opposing views.


Passage number 276.
MR. SCHULTZ. But it seems to me that this is only half ofthe problem. Half of the problem is that we don't know what themonetary aggregates are; the other half of the problem is that wedon't know what the relationship is between the aggregates and GNP.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Schultz explaining his perspective on a problem.


Passage number 277.
MR. ROOS. Maybe we're getting to where we ought to give somethought to the monetary base.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The person is suggesting that it may be a good idea to consider or give thought to the monetary base.


Passage number 278.
MR. WALLICH. I do think it can be said in favor of M-1B thattransactions balances are a unique concept. There's a logical reasonwhy they might be related to GNP. Once you go beyond that to M2 orM3, there's really no place to stop. All you can do is stop withtotal credit, like Henry Kaufman, because changes in credit presumablyindicate the degree to which people and businesses are overspending orunderspending their income. If you measure all forms of credit, thenmaybe you can measure excess demand or deficient demand. But by justmeasuring what is related to depository institutions, such as M3, youdon't capture the whole. There still are possible substitutions fordepository institution credit and open market credit, and one may bemisled.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing different measures of money supply and credit and expressing their opinion on the matter.


Passage number 279.
MR. PARTEE. That is what led the Board many years ago topromote the development of the flow of funds accounts.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 


Passage number 280.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply states "Mr. Corrigan" without providing any context or information that could imply disagreement or contention.


Passage number 281.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I'll start off by saying that Ididn't really use any model, but for the balance of this year my viewof the economy is very similar to that in the Greenbook foressentially the same reasons. I do see a bit steeper drop in thesecond and third quarters but a little faster snapback in the fourthquarter. For 1982 I haven't seen all those forecasts you have infront of you there, but I suspect that mine is probably an outlier inthat I'm looking for real growth in the 3-1/2 to 4 percent range, aslight fall in unemployment over the year back to where we are now,and inflation around 8 percent but with a hunch that we could dobetter on that.There are several reasons why I put down that kind ofscenario. One is the pent-up demand that Mr. Kichline referred tobefore, combined with the tendencies toward creative financing. Atany level of interest rates I think we're liable to see more activitythan we might otherwise assume simply because of the way things arebeing financed these days. The second point that I think is importantis the implication of this improved inflationary outlook, regardlessof whose numbers one looks at. With any of those numbers, we'regetting near the point where we've got to see some improvement in-25-7/6-7/81inflationary expectations begin to feed through into long-terminterest rates, along the lines perhaps that Mr. Ford was suggestingbefore. Certainly in the long-term area I do expect to see interestrates quite a bit lower than they are now. I'm not as pessimistic asthe staff is either in terms of the near-term or the longer-termoutlook for interest rates in general, partly for the reasons I justmentioned. But I also think that financial innovation, or however youwant to describe it, will have continuing implications in terms of thebehavior of M-1B, even if interest rates are lower. I also aminclined to the view that at least in the context of next year, weprobably will see a fairly exuberant response to the tax package,although I'm not sure about the durability of that going out to '83and '84. So, there's a good chance that we could see a fairly strongeconomy throughout next year.I have to hedge my bets a little, too, though. Obviously, anoutlook like mine assumes, among other things, that we do get at leastsome give in wages; and it assumes that we don't get any fresh shocksfrom energy or food. More importantly, it assumes that we're able tosneak through this [period of] financial strain and keep thingsreasonably in check. There I must confess to being a little morenervous now than I was even a month ago. Paul Meek mentioned the FNMAsituation. I think it is symptomatic. I had another incident relayedto me the other day when the people at the Independent State Bank inMinnesota who are [pooling] bank CDs and selling them [as] moneymarket mutual funds told me that they were now having trouble sellingthese funds, even [though they consist of] bank CDs that are fullyinsured by the FDIC. The sensitivity level has reached that point, sothey reported to me. That's obviously a major question mark.The other thing I'll mention in terms of major question marksis this deficit outlook. Obviously, we still don't know where we'regoing to come out on the tax package. But if we look at the staff'sestimate for the '82 deficit, they have about $80 billion compared to$45 billion. They have about $100 billion in Treasury and agencyfinancing for the year as a whole and they are $30 billion above theAdministration's estimate of outlays despite, I think, having lowereddefense expenditures as well. Now, if the staff is right and theAdministration and Congress are unable to make offsets, that comesnear to resulting in a $50 billion deficit and I think we will haveproblems both in terms of the real economy and in terms ofexpectations and everything else. For the moment in my own forecastI'm willing to assume the best, but I wouldn't bet all I own on it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their own viewpoint and making observations about potential factors that could impact their forecast.


Passage number 282.
MR. PARTEE. You wouldn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: be able to handle all that without some difficulty. 

No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee simply states a statement about the capability to handle a certain task.


Passage number 283.
MR. CORRIGAN. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a simple statement from Mr. Corrigan without any expressed disagreement or contention.


Passage number 284.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else would like to go on the couch.Nobody else has anything to say about the outlook.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is just asking if anyone else wants to go on the couch and stating that nobody else has anything to say about the outlook.


Passage number 285.
MR. ROOS. Is this in addition to [the forecasts] we wiredin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 286.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, just any general comment that youwould like to make.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is open-ended and does not express any conflicting opinions or opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 287.
-26-7/6-7/81MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the key is what happens toinflationary expectations. If we keep the money supply on target, asI think we will, I believe we're going to see lower interest rates anddrastically improved inflationary expectations. So, I come out fairlyclose to John Balles and Jerry on that. My figures are a littledifferent. I didn't have to contend with a speed-up in velocity,John, because we put our nominal GNP at 8 percent, which is a littleless than the Board staff [forecast]. But we come out with realgrowth of about 3 percent for '82, about the same on nominal GNP bothyears, and an implicit price deflator of 5 percent in '81. The latteris probably whistling Dixie, but I think we could see some drasticimprovement there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is simply stating his own figures and expressing agreement with John Balles and Jerry.


Passage number 288.
MR. SCHULTZ. I thought I was the outlier on that deflator.I had 6 to 7 percent, but you have me beat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is agreement in the passage. Both individuals are discussing their estimates for the deflator, with one person acknowledging that the other person's estimate is higher than their own. There is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 289.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I share all this optimismabout inflation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates uncertainty about the speaker's level of agreement with the optimism about inflation, but it does not explicitly mention any contention or disagreement with another person or viewpoint.


Passage number 290.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I was just going to say the same thing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker agrees with the previous statement made by someone else and expresses that they were about to say the same thing.


Passage number 291.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just report on a few veryscientific surveys I've made in my own research.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they will report on some scientific surveys they have conducted in their own research.


Passage number 292.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You've [talked to] lots of taxicabdrivers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 293.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right. I asked a fewbusinessmen recently what they are assuming on inflation for the nextfive years in their internal planning. I haven't found one who is notclose to 10 percent. I also asked them, when I've had a chance, whatit would take to change their mind. And they say a couple of years ofless than 10 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply relaying the opinions of businessmen on their assumptions about inflation.


Passage number 294.
MR. FORD. It's a distributed lag effect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

In the passage, Mr. Ford is simply stating that there is a distributed lag effect. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 295.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just wonder with how much speed we canexpect these changes in expectations to materialize. As nearly as Ican see, they haven't been dented by anything--well, I shouldn't saythey haven't been dented. There is more questioning; business peopleare not so likely to say [inflation] is going to accelerate. They'reready to concede that they may be wrong, but I'm not sure they are yetready to take a strike to have wages rise at 8 percent, let's say,given that kind of expectation. And I don't think labor is going toask for less than 10 percent, so where are we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the speed at which changes in expectations may occur and the differing views of business people and labor.


Passage number 296.
MR. SCHULTZ. Corporate profits aren't going to be verystrong and [corporations] are going to have some real incentive tostart getting a little tougher.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no disagreement or contention expressed in this passage. The speaker is stating a fact about corporate profits and the potential incentive for corporations to become tougher.


Passage number 297.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. Theoretically, yes.But as they look around, they say look at what happened to our friendMr. McCardell at International Harvester. He took a nice strike andtried to get wages down and damn near bankrupted the company.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and then providing an example of a potential outcome, which supports the initial statement.


Passage number 298.
MR. FORD. The tax cut will pay for that union settlement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement presents a straightforward assertion about the tax cut paying for the union settlement.


Passage number 299.
-27-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The corporate tax cut will pay for theunion settlement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the corporate tax cut will pay for the union settlement.


Passage number 300.
MR. FORD. Yes, that's what I mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Ford simply agrees with a previous statement or question.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 301.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Market people that I talk with feelthat inflationary expectations are not down. That's a view amongtheir clients as well as their own view. And, of course, that iscorroborated by the long rates we see. So, I come back to a verypessimistic view. It seems to me that there's a good deal oflikelihood that [the economy] will stay stagnant. If the economypicks up in the fourth quarter the way some people feel it will, itwill put a lot of pressure on interest rates. And we will have had bythen, unless we [see rates decline] in the coming weeks of thisquarter, a protracted period of very high real interest rates. Itseems to me that some companies are getting to the limit of theirabilities [to cope with these high interest rates] and there will besome failures. I think this will change inflationary expectations andin the process there will probably be a certain amount of recession,too. But that's a [scenario] that doesn't give us a gradualtransition to a much better world.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

There is contention or disagreement in the passage because the speaker presents a pessimistic view and suggests that there may be failures and a recession as a result of high interest rates. This is in contrast to the perspective of others who believe that the economy will pick up in the fourth quarter.


Passage number 302.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but I would need the full passage or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 303.
MR. BOYKIN. As far as inflationary expectations areconcerned, people I've been talking to are really not convinced atthis point that we'll make a lot of progress. There seems to be moreconversation about that possibility, but decisions are being madeevery day down our way based on expectations of [continued high]inflation.As for the economic outlook, we don't differ greatly with theBoard staff's forecast. Though we think the rate of inflation mightbe a little less in 1981, our 1982 forecast is just about where theBoard staff is. But we feel the economy in 1982 is probably going tobe a bit stronger than the Board staff is forecasting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that there is more conversation about the possibility of inflation, but overall they do not greatly differ from the Board staff's forecast for the economic outlook.


Passage number 304.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without additional context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 305.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't submit estimates so perhaps it'sunfair to say anything. But I come out a lot closer to Tony thananybody else who has commented. I think we have a heroic staffforecast here in saying that inflation is going to drop this much.I'm inclined not to believe it because I don't think we've had theconfrontation with costs that is going to be required to call for apermanently lower increase in costs than we've been seeing. I don'tthink that's easily handled by people just saying that they willsettle for a lower pay increase or take lower corporate profitswithout fighting back. I think they will fight back, and it's goingto be a very difficult period. I have the feeling--and have had itfor the last year or so--that the way we're running monetary policynow, and it's a way that's probably appropriate, is as a governor onthe economy. Essentially what we have here is a governor-typeoperation in the way the staff has run their forecast through '82.Any time those latent demands begin to perk up and we get an overrunin money, we will tighten up and interest rates will go higher. Thatwill then force the economy down [to] the point where the money demandwill be [less] strong and interest rates will fall. And we'll get a-28-7/6-7/81little better [economic performance] coming up to that limit again andthen tend to go through it while interest rates will be high until theinflation rate is significantly reduced.I guess I would be rather in agreement with the staffprojection except that I would have put inflation a little higher thanthey have it, for next year certainly. I think there's going to be abig food price increase next year. Also, I can't really buy therecovery they have in the second half of '82 because by then we'll befaced with financial distress on all sides. And I think that willhave enough of an expectational influence that the economy won't, infact, recover. That's all.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. MR. PARTEE disagrees with the staff's forecast and expresses skepticism about the likelihood of inflation dropping significantly and the economy recovering in the second half of '82.


Passage number 306.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 307.
MR. GRAMLEY. I put down numbers for 1982 that are not a lotdifferent from what the staff is forecasting. My real growth numberwas 1 percent; my implicit deflator number was, as I remember, 8-1/2percent or somewhere around there. But I put those numbers down witha lot more foreboding than has been expressed in some of the commentsaround the table, because I think those numbers are realizable only ifwe get very, very lucky and have a big shift in money demand or if wehave a sequence of developments in which we get more consumption thanthe staff is talking about and a lot less investment, with all thatmeans for potential problems for the future. Particularly, I want tocall the Committee's attention to what I think could be a degree ofself-deception. That is, we have to be awfully careful about whatwe're accomplishing, if in fact we live within our targets of moneygrowth but get a lot more effective increase in money because we'vehad big downward shifts in money demand. I don't buy the argument,for example, that because nominal money growth is actually falling wecan get declining inflation but because we're getting such a big dropin money demand we can also get real growth. That in effect sayssomehow that the inflation rate is some mystical property ofexpectations and has nothing to do with what is really going on in theeconomy. I don't think it's going to happen that way. Inflation isgoing to come down if, and only if, we're awfully lucky and at thesame time have very, very constrained growth in real economicactivity. We'd be very lucky indeed to get the kind of improvement onthe inflation front that the staff is forecasting. We will get itonly if real growth is constrained to somewhere around where we'retalking about. I worry a lot about the implications of interest ratelevels that persist at where they are now for another 18 months. Ithink we're really looking at major, major problems ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. Mr. Gramley disagrees with the optimism expressed by some of the other participants around the table. He expresses concern that the numbers for growth and inflation can only be achieved if there is a significant shift in money demand or a difference in consumption and investment. He argues against the idea that declining money growth can result in declining inflation and real growth, stating that inflation will only come down if there is constrained growth in real economic activity. He also expresses worry about the implications of persistently high interest rates for the future.


Passage number 308.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage because it only mentions Governor Teeters without providing any additional information or context.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 309.
MS. TEETERS. I played with the numbers also and I came upwith two scenarios. Basically, the overall [unintelligible] is thegovernor on the rate of growth of nominal GNP. And given thereduction in the rate of growth in money and the assumed reduction fornext year, we don't have much room for a nominal GNP that is verylarge. One of the two scenarios that seemed to fall out of my workingwith the numbers was that we would have a full blown recession thisyear. Yes, it could happen. With all the growth that we've had,[growth for the year] could still come out at 1 percent because of thefirst quarter, but we could have zero or a negative in the otherquarters. If you look at the flash on real GNP in the second quarter,-29-7/6-7/81the only thing that is positive is inventories; everything else isdown. Basically, it's a negative quarter. If we got the recessionthis year and we stayed with high interest rates, then we could getsome recovery but not a very vigorous one next year. The otherscenario that can work here, with these high levels of interest rates,is that we could squeak by this year without a major recession andthen have very, very slow growth next year also--basically two verylow growth years rather than a recession and a recovery. I don'tthink we can live with these interest rates over that period of timewithout really causing a recession, the timing of which I'm uncertainabout. But with these rates of interest we will be there probablysooner rather than later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker presents two scenarios, one suggesting a full-blown recession this year and the other suggesting slow growth without a major recession. The disagreement arises from the different possible outcomes and the uncertainty about the timing of a potential recession.


Passage number 310.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no passage provided, therefore it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 311.
MR. ROOS. Our projections for 1982 are almost exactly insync with the staff's, whereas we project a little stronger economicgrowth in 1981 than does the staff and are a little less sanguineabout the deflator. However--and I guess maybe I'm always out ofsynchronization myself--for once I feel a lot more satisfied with whatis happening than do some of my colleagues here at this table. Ithink one has to look at it with a little perspective, recognizingthat we have embarked on something quite different than what we hadback in October of '79. We had an understandable year of adjustmentprocedurally to get the effect of what we said we were going to do.We did this against a backdrop of a public and financial markets thathad been promised an awful lot repeatedly and they were, and still areto some extent, somewhat cynical and understandably so as to what theymight expect either from the Administration or from the FederalReserve. However, I think in the last several months our record onmonetary policy--our record of holding monetary growth under control--has been quite remarkable; and at least the utterances of theAdministration, whether or not one agrees with them philosophically,are somewhat of a departure from anything that has been presented tothe citizenry in a long time. It seems to me that the key to thefuture depends very much on the next 6 to 9 months. If we're able, aswe appear to be doing now, to control the growth of money and if theAdministration--and the politics of this are somewhat important interms of people's attitudes--is able to produce and to persist inhaving a friendly understanding on the part of the public of what it'strying to do, and if we can stick with this over the period of theimmediate future, I think the entire ball game might be significantlychanged and changed for the better. I am a little apprehensive. Twomonths of control of M-1B or the monetary base or whatever else onemay look at is not indicative of long-term results. But it certainlyis better than anything I've seen in a long time. And I feel prettygood about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their satisfaction with the current state of affairs and their optimism for the future.


Passage number 312.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The given passage only provides the name "Governor Wallich" without any statement or context to suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 313.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I was away so I didn't put in anynumbers. My only reaction to the staff forecast is that I'm skepticalof the favorable inflation developments. I can't prove that outcomeisn't likely but it seems more optimistic than I would expect in lightof the details of the situation, both in terms of the particulardevelopments in food and energy and what I see on the side of costs.As for the slow growth, I have no sense of which way it's going to go.It seems to me that Chuck is right in saying that we have a governor-30-7/6-7/81on the up side. Any time the economy breaks out on the up side itwill be pushed down again by rising interest rates. If we have asymmetrical policy, that would be true also on the down side. That isto say, any time the economy slows down interest rates will be pusheddown if we keep the money supply on track. So, I wouldn't anticipateany very severe recession. But the economy could fluctuate betweenmoderate expansion and moderate contraction. Now, I hope the analysisis true regarding this quasi-equilibrium of [the economy] movingsomething like 1 percent for two years as a result of strong privatedemands. It would give us an opportunity for the future. It would beequally well rationalized in terms of there being a very strong demandfor credit on the part of the government through a rising deficit thatkeeps interest rates high rather than the strong and unsatisfiedprivate demands. If we get out of this inflation, it's unlikely to beby what Lyle calls some mythical relationship. I think it will bebecause costs are coming down. And costs will come down in the[usual] painful and unpleasant way--falling profits, rising excesscapacity and, unhappily, higher unemployment. There is some tradeoff,I think, in terms of lowering the level of unemployment, excesscapacity, and the duration; the lower level and longer duration willaccomplish about the same. But I think it would be surprising if wegot out of this inflation without more sacrifice than is implied inthe optimistic interpretation of our situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. Mr. Wallich expresses skepticism and disagreement with the favorable inflation developments predicted by the staff forecast. He also suggests that there may be different reasons for getting out of inflation and that it would require more sacrifice than what is implied by the optimistic interpretation of the situation.


Passage number 314.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn. This may be your only chanceto give us a view from the outside world uncontaminated bydeliberations within the Federal Reserve.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply refers to the opportunity for Mr. Keehn to provide an external perspective without being influenced by the discussions within the Federal Reserve.


Passage number 315.
MR. KEEHN. Well, having been in the chair about three orfour days, I'm sure you can appreciate that my impressions andopinions are rather freshly minted. But I must say, reading theforecast and hearing it today, that I find it exceptionally gloomy;the figures we submitted were slightly on the more optimistic side.But as I relate this to the individual industries in our area--and Ithink you have heard in the past that some of our industries areindeed troubled, and certainly since the last meeting, if anything,they have deteriorated further--I really end up not finding anyparticular disagreement with the way the forecast looks.But just to add a comment to what Lyle said earlier, there isa growing impatience, if you will, in our area about the high level ofrates. Many of our industries which are troubled now really areimperilled by the high level of rates. Though our board, for example,understands the need for this, they are taking the view that at somepoint we have to bring rates down or we're going to cause some verysignificant problems with some basic industries in our area. On alighter note, at our board meeting a week or so ago at which wediscussed the discount rate, there was a comment--more in desperationthan I think as a serious comment--that we should recommend areduction in the discount rate of about 4 percentage points. But inthinking about that, it did occur to our directors that if I walked infor my first meeting with that kind of suggestion, you might reallylook up to see what just came in the door. I did want to report,however, that the interest rate scenario is of increasing concern andis increasingly worrying the people in the Middle West.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 316.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 317.
-31-7/6-7/81MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, we've mentioned very little aboutwages, but we have the backdrop of the air traffic controllers, theupcoming post office [negotiations], and baseball as anotherindication of the popular mood on wages.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information or statements that suggest contention or disagreement. It simply mentions various factors that serve as an indication of the popular mood on wages without taking a specific stance or sparking disagreement.


Passage number 318.
MR. GRAMLEY. Foul ball.SPEAKER(.). It sounds like you're getting [unintelligible].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The response by the speaker might indicate that they didn't hear or understand something the other person said, but it doesn't necessarily imply disagreement or contention.


Passage number 319.
MR. WINN. I don't see much easing of inflation occurring.It may show up. But at the moment, with utility rates going up andthe possibility of food [price increases], the mood in the publictoward inflation easing isn't very evident. Everybody is looking morefor it to hold [steady].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not express any disagreement or contention. It simply presents Mr. Winn's observation about the lack of evidence for inflation easing based on the increase in utility rates and the possibility of food price increases. There is no conflicting viewpoint presented in the passage.


Passage number 320.
MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 321.
MR. WINN. My second point is that in talking around--I'vebeen in the building game a little recently--builders all complainthat they haven't had a chance to increase their prices in the lasttwo years because of the status of housing. They are all sittingthere with [price hikes of] 20 percent or more ready to go anytimethere's a little uptick in the housing area. Now, this may be wishfulthinking, but they certainly are not psychologically adapted towardholding the line. Finally, all our scenarios suggest a smooth processdeveloping. I just think about all the uncertainties and thequestions. I don't think we have a year to go on the thrift industrybefore we start to see some major shifts of funds. I don't knowwhether it will be people getting scared and shifting funds, or anacceleration [of flows] into the money funds, or a money fund goingkaput. Then we could wake up with $100 billion more looking for aplace to go. We may have major problems from crises and movements ofmoney, which are going to impact institutions in a way we don'tforesee. And that's going to be the biggest psychological change totake place in the period ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The passage contains various points of contention or disagreement. First, there is disagreement between builders who complain about not being able to increase their prices due to the status of housing, and the speaker who believes they are psychologically ready to raise prices at any sign of improvement. Second, there is uncertainty and disagreement about the future of the thrift industry and the potential impact on funds. The speaker raises various possibilities and uncertainties, indicating a lack of consensus on what will happen. Overall, the passage presents conflicting views and uncertainties, which suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 322.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we exhausted the comments. I guesswe can't carry this much further this afternoon. We didn't get quiteas far as I thought we would. Maybe we'll start off with Mr. Axilrodtomorrow.Let me just say that, when I look at where we are today ascompared to where we were six months ago, I share Larry Roos's feelingof some satisfaction thus far. But it's a limited satisfaction. Ithink we have clearly taken the froth out of inflation. All thoseprices that are sensitive to tight money or expectations, or both, arepretty well deflated. In fact, I think many of them are deflatedbelow the cost of production and, therefore, if things got easier,they would go up again at some point. If the economy began going upagain and interest rates began going down, we probably [could expect]increases in some raw materials prices anyway. I think we've beenexceptionally lucky on oil--I don't know how long that will last--andwe've been pretty lucky on food. The trick is to convert that luck,to the extent that it is luck--it's partly tight money--into a morelasting wage and cost pattern. Views differ on that. I don't quitebelieve that we're seeing it yet, but I hope we will see it. I thinkwe can begin to say that something may be happening on the inflation-32-7/6-7/81side. I'll concede that much, Mr. Kichline, even though it will takesome time to be confirmed.I also think conditions are softening in the economy, whichmay be optimistic compared to the view of some in the markets thateven this level of interest rates wouldn't soften anything in theeconomy. I believe we are seeing, at the moment at least, somesoftening; but the burden of all the comments that were made aroundthe table is that there is no simple way to get from here to there. Idon't know whether the staff forecast or many of the other forecastsimply a fairly simple way. They don't imply big recessions or a bigbacktracking on inflation. I'm not sure that there is an easy way toget from here to there or any way that doesn't involve a lot more realproblems and controversies than we've had so far. But we don't knowwhere all that is going to lead or precisely what direction it's goingto take.Meanwhile, we have to make a few decisions. We unfortunatelyhave to use these fragile numbers that we have, and some of them aregetting increasingly fragile. I agree with Frank Morris in terms ofdirection, but we happen to have a law as well as an expectation thatsays that we have to review our present targets and have to put downsome new ones for next year. We are in a happy or unhappy situationthat practically everything is outside the target range. It's notquite that bad: Some are high within the range; others are above orbelow; it depends upon which one you look at. I think we do haveinconsistencies among the targets for the first half of this year. Isuspect the staff analysis, when Mr. Axilrod gets to it, will suggestthat those inconsistencies will become less as the year progresses. Iguess he has to assume that because they were estimated in aconsistent way originally and if they're off path for six months--ifthe original analysis was right--they have to come back towardconsistency in the next six months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker mentions that there are differing views and uncertainties about the effects of inflation and the state of the economy. They also mention inconsistencies in targets and the fragility of the numbers. This suggests disagreement and uncertainty among the speakers.


Passage number 323.
MR. AXILROD. We're not that stubborn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Axilrod simply states that "We're not that stubborn" without any opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 324.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, at the moment they areinconsistent. We have to consider, therefore, whether to change thepresent targets to realign their internal relationships. I don't meanto suggest that that's positively necessary; it depends upon theanalysis. And they all have ranges, so we have some room for someinconsistencies. But we do have to consider this internal alignmentquestion. We have to consider all the questions that were raisedabout what velocity is likely to do and what all the new institutionalarrangements mean. When we get through all that technical [analysis],we have to decide where policy ought to be in some sense in terms ofreal pressure. And the policy [discussion] only comes after we getthrough that morass of technical questions, the way this is set up.We're going to do all that for this year and, obviously, we have toset some ranges for next year. Again, we have what one might think ofas pictorial questions in terms of how the targets look against thisyear's targets and this year's performance relative to all thoseexpectations out there, and we have to reconcile that somehow with ourpolicy predilections.The policy question comes down, I suspect, to a question ofwhere we want to take our chances because--at least speaking formyself--I doubt that anybody can be all that certain about any-33-7/6-7/81particular outlook or all that certain about what some of theseinternal relationships are. Not only do we have to make substantivedecisions, but we have to portray them to the public. And we aregoing to have to lean one way or the other on where we want to takeour risks. I would only say in that connection that we may not bequite as far along as we thought but we are some distance along theroad of taking the risks that a constraining policy [presents] in theinterest of dealing with the inflationary problem--risks for not onlythe financial system but the real side of the economy. I supposeeverybody is looking to see whether that's where the risk is going tobe balanced in the future or not. With that much comment, I guess itis late enough so that we can retire for the evening and come back atwhat time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing the need to consider internal alignment and make decisions based on analysis and policy predilections. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 325.
MR. ALTMANN. 9:30.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states the time as "9:30".


Passage number 326.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At 9:30 in the morning we will take up thelong-term discussion. We will consider revisions in the targets forthis year, if any--and I'm not implying there should be any--andwhether we want to make any changes in the targets from this year fornext year. And then we will come back to what we want to do in thenext month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply describing the agenda for a meeting, outlining the topics that will be discussed.


Passage number 327.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any context or specific information about Mr.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 328.
 Chairman, isn't it worth pointingout that the staff originally recommended a much higher M2 as beingconsistent with--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they recommended a somewhat higherM2, but the distance--SPEAKER(.).
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The chairman suggests that the staff originally recommended a higher M2, while the speaker disagrees and says that they only recommended a somewhat higher M2.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 329.
 10 to 12--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. It wasn't that high; it was1/2 to 1 percentage point higher. The discrepancy could explain, onecan say, perhaps half [of the overshoot from the target]; I thinktheir original analysis probably would have explained one-third ortwo-thirds of it or less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker is expressing disagreement or uncertainty about the exact percentage point difference. They suggest that the discrepancy could explain some but not all of the overshoot from the target, and speculate that the original analysis might have explained even less of it.


Passage number 330.
[Meeting recessed]-34-7/6-7/81July 7, 1981--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline, do you want to take about aminute to describe the producer price index figures that came out thismorning.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply mentions a meeting being recessed and asks Mr. Kichline to describe producer price index figures.


Passage number 331.
MR. KICHLINE. In June the producer price index for totalfinished goods rose 0.6 percent; that compares with 0.4 percent in Mayand 0.8 percent in April. For the second quarter as a whole, it wasup 7.1 percent at a compound annual rate compared with 12 percent inthe first quarter. Food prices rose 0.5 percent compared with nochange in the preceding two months. Finished energy goods rose 0.2percent compared with a decline in the preceding month. But excludingfood and energy, the total was up 0.6 percent, with a bit slower orpretty much unchanged rates of increase across the board. Forexample, capital equipment prices were up 0.7 percent compared with0.9 percent in the preceding two months. On average there does notappear to be much of surprise in this particular index compared to ourearlier expectations.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 332.
MS. TEETERS. The crude food [component] was up verystrongly, though, wasn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact that the "crude food component" experienced a strong increase.


Passage number 333.
MR. KICHLINE. That's correct. It was up 2.8 percentcompared with a 2 percent decline in the preceding month. I might sayon food that it's principally the meat prices that are up,particularly beef but pork as well, and we had in our forecast acontinued further rise in those prices. So it appears as if the risein meat prices has begun.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply explaining the increase in meat prices.


Passage number 334.
MR. SCHULTZ. But futures prices for meat in the last coupleof weeks have been down surprisingly. I don't understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing confusion or a lack of understanding about the recent decrease in futures prices for meat.


Passage number 335.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. Some of the spot prices, though, havebeen moving up. I think the crude materials prices reflect that risein the food area, in beef and cattle particularly; it's just therethat we've seen increases in spot prices. The rise has been erraticbut [generally] up. You're quite correct, though, that there is[that] expectation. I don't know about the last couple of days, butthe futures prices did not show anything that unusual.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply provides information about spot and futures prices without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 336.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod, do you want to proceed with alaying out of these difficult arithmetic issues and presumably someeconomic implications thereof with respect to the targets with whichwe are blessed or hung--one or the other.SPEAKER(.). Hoisted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking Mr. Axilrod whether he wants to proceed with discussing the arithmetic issues and economic implications related to the targets they have.


Passage number 337.
MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing gratitude to the chairman.


Passage number 338.
]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's all complicated, as Mr. Axilrodsuggests. Let me just make a couple of comments. If I can, I willseparate the substance from the numerology; that distinction may notbe accepted by everybody around the table, but let me make it for themoment. I do think there are some signs of progress on inflation andinflationary psychology; I'm not one to overstate that, as I suggestedyesterday. Largely we have affected the things that are most likely-35-7/6-7/81to be affected by restraint in the short run: commodity prices,precious metals prices, and the exchange rate to some extent. Thehardest part of the battle is ahead in terms of affecting theunderlying rate of inflation. Maybe something is happening there butit's still in the "maybe" stage. Nevertheless, the stage is at leastset more favorably than we've had it in the past. All that is on theplus side.We discussed at great length the economic outlook yesterday.I don't think anybody is very satisfied with any of the projections interms of their internal logic and plausibility for continuing over aperiod of time. There is a high risk premium in any of them and ourjob is assessing where the risks lie in our own policy in terms of ourbroadest objectives. I haven't much doubt in my mind that it'sappropriate in substance to take the risk of more softness in theeconomy in the short run than one might ideally like in order tocapitalize on the anti-inflationary momentum to the extent it exists.That is much more likely to give a more satisfactory economic as wellas inflationary outlook over a period of time as compared to theopposite scenario of heading off economic sluggishness or even adownturn at the expense of rapidly getting back into the kind ofsituation we were in last fall where we had some retreat oninflationary psychology and the latent demands in the economyimmediately reasserted themselves. Then we would look forward toanother prolonged period of high interest rates and strain and facethe same dilemmas over and over again. Neither of these outlooks isvery simple or happy in a sense. But between the two I suspect, hardas it is to say, that the lesser risk in the long run is taking achance on more sluggishness in the short run rather than devoting allour efforts to avoiding the sluggishness in the short run.How that converts into these numbers is another thing. Wehave technical problems of internal consistency between M-1Bunadjusted and M-1B adjusted and between M1 and M2. We have theproblem--if it is a problem--that we're low on M-1B and that to comeback within the range or at least near the midpoint of the range, asSteve said, gives us very high growth rates in M-1B for a period ofmonths. If we had those high growth rates, we'd probably overshoot onM2. We wouldn't be overshooting on the annual objective for M1 but wewould probably be overshooting on M2. So, we have a question as towhat to do with this year's ranges. I have some predilection myself,but it's no more than a mild predilection, not to fool around withchanging them this year on the grounds that to change them has anatmosphere of fine-tuning and it's even harder to explain at the endof the year why we are outside of the ranges if we are outside ofthem. [Changing them implies] a kind of renewed commitment to comingwithin them and we may lose a little flexibility that it may bedesirable to have.On the other hand, internal consistency and the actual levelof M-1B could easily suggest that some reduction in that range wouldnot be out of line. So, one could argue it either way. If we raise[the range for] M2 or M3, which is another possibility, as Stevesuggested, it creates something of a problem of giving confusingsignals to the market, just in terms of the surface impression of"easing." And if we change this year's targets, particularly if welower the M-1B range for this year, we have to consider what that doesin terms of what we can say about next year in the portrayal of some-36-7/6-7/81year-to-year declines. [The task] is not impossible, but we just haveto consider what those implications are. So, we have a lot ofpermutations and combinations, starting from my own predilection thatthe general risk is that we in some sense may be too easy rather thantoo tight during the period ahead. I think we ought to take our riskson the side of being tighter rather than looser. I leave it to you toconvert that into numbers, but that's my general sense of thedirection in which we should be moving.With that much introduction, I open the discussion at thispoint not to a consideration of the short-run operational decision forthe next month or quarter or weeks--although obviously that's going tobe in the back of people's minds--but of this problem of what to dowith [the ranges for] this year in terms of internal consistency orbroader changes and what to do about next year. We are not looking atthis point at the short run but recognize that the [dilemma] we're inis going to be greatly colored if we have the [large] decline in M-1Bfor the next published figure that the preliminary data suggested.The way we start out the next quarter is going to be considerablyaffected by whether we get a big increase in the following week, whichis now the instinct of the projectors and some people in the market.We have an [estimated] increase of $5 or $6 billion in the week ofJuly 8, which seems possible. We started out July with a betterposture in terms of our targets; if M-1B goes down by $4 billion inthe next published figure and remains there, then we are really behindthe eight ball in terms of the targets in the short run. Whereas, ifwe have that big recovery in the following week, we would not be facedwith that same drastic low starting point. In an ironic way I ratherhope that the July 8th figure is a big increase. The ideal thingwould be that we recover from the big decrease of the coming week andstart off at a reasonable level for the next quarter. But that's allin the lap of the gods, so far as I know. All I know is that it'sgoing to color where we start off this quarter. But since we don'tknow that and we can't do anything about it, I don't think we can takeit too much into consideration at the moment. Let us proceed. Mr.Roos.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is focused on discussing various factors and considerations related to monetary policy and the ranges for money supply targets. There is no evidence of disagreement or conflicting opinions among the speakers.


Passage number 339.
MR. ROOS. I think you've resolved the question I had. I wasgoing to ask a procedural question. Maybe I'm alone in this, butwhen Steve reports a lot of figures as he did--four pages of them--Idon't have the mental ability to absorb that and to translate thatinto where we are going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is sharing their personal opinion and stating that they were going to ask a procedural question, but they feel it may not be necessary anymore.


Passage number 340.
 I was going to ask the question--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a comment in that respect, ifI may. I think we are all in the position you are in. I suspect thatif we arrive at some tentative figures, after some preliminarydiscussion, we better have a recess for figuring out the implicationsof all these figures in terms of growth rates over the next couple ofquarters to make sure we are really where we want to be. There's toomuch arithmetic involved to put together the figures casually. So, Ithink we ought to get a general feel of what people think and then goback and do some of the arithmetic and see whether we are really wherewe want to be in terms of all these targets and theirinterrelationships. Go ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is focused on the speaker's suggestion for taking a recess to discuss and analyze figures and targets more thoroughly.


Passage number 341.
MR. ROOS. Well, I would support the basic position youexpressed a little while ago: That if we are going to err, which Ihope we won't, it ought to be on the side of constraint rather than-37-7/6-7/81ease. I think that one of the big problems we have is the problem ofcredibility and how people see what we are doing. If we were to doanything that would give the appearance of easing monetary policysignificantly at the present time, I think we'd frustrate what wouldbe the apparent objective of ease--bringing down interest rates andbringing relief to a soft economy. So, I would support, Mr. Chairman,what you have said as far as basic policies are concerned.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 342.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be pretty vague, and I was prettyvague. I raised the question of lowering the M-1B target [for thisyear]. But whether or not we lower it, I would not aim right nowaggressively, in quotation marks, for something like the A alternativepresented here in the short run and what that means for the long run--returning to the midpoint of the present target. I think we have thealternative of either lowering the target or saying that we are goingto be low in the range--not necessarily outside the target, but wedon't expect to be in the upper part of this range. We could eitherbe below the target or in the lower part of the range. Those are thetwo choices I see for changing the M-1B target for this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker suggests two different options for changing the M-1B target for the year, indicating a disagreement or alternative viewpoints on the matter.


Passage number 343.
MR. ROOS. Well, alternative 2 on page 8 [of the Bluebook]would be my preference in that regard. That's the more restrictive ofthe two for the remainder of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in this passage. The speaker simply expresses their preference for alternative 2 on page 8 of the Bluebook.


Passage number 344.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think that's moving too fast.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states Mr. Schultz's opinion that the situation is moving too fast.


Passage number 345.
MR. ROOS. Are we moving up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking if there is forward progress or advancement.


Passage number 346.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Page 8 is where are we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states the location or page number of where "we" are.


Passage number 347.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's 3-1/2 percent. You are not suggestingthat we attempt to get on a path right now of getting back to 3-1/2percent by the end of the year, are you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is simply seeking clarification on whether the suggestion is to aim for a 3-1/2 percent target by the end of the year.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 348.
MR. ROOS. No.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

Explanation: The use of the word "No" in response to a question implies disagreement or contradiction.


Passage number 349.
MR. PARTEE. I didn't think we were talking about the shortrun.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee simply states his understanding that they were not discussing the short run.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 350.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we shouldn't be talking about theshort run. Is page 8 the short-run stuff.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker starts by saying "No, we shouldn't be talking about the short run," suggesting that they disagree with discussing the short-term. However, the latter part of the statement, "Is page 8 the short-run stuff," implies a questioning of whether page 8 is related to the short-term. Therefore, there is contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 351.
MR. ROOS. That's the last half of this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a fact or point without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 352.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without any provided context or information about its content.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 353.
 To hit the bottom part of the present range of3-1/2 percent--MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know. You say it's fast. Let meremind you that a year ago we were sitting here talking about how inthe world we could get back up into the ranges. In fact that was thekey note of your July presentation. So, who knows. I think we oughtto choose these numbers with respect to what we think the longer-runeffect will be and then struggle with the question of whether we comein low or go above or anything like that in the short run. But weought to try to keep in mind what the economy requires.Quickly, Paul, I happen to agree: Alternative 2 looks allright to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is some disagreement in the passage when Mr. Partee mentions that a year ago they were discussing how to increase interest rates. This implies a different perspective or opinion on the current situation compared to the previous discussion. However, the passage also indicates some agreement when Mr. Partee says that Alternative 2 looks alright to him.


Passage number 354.
-38-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What page.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage as it is a mathematical expression.


Passage number 355.
MR. PARTEE. Page 8.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement expressed in this passage. It simply states a speaker's name and page number.


Passage number 356.
 That's the--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I'm confused about what thosealternatives are. What are they.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing confusion and seeking clarification.


Passage number 357.
MR. AXILROD. Those, Mr. Chairman, are simply the growthrates--in some sense the midpoint growth rates--we'd expect. So,alternative 1 is the midpoint of the present longer-run range of 3-1/2to 6 percent and we would expect M2 and M3 to grow at rates above theupper ends of the present ranges. If, however, growth in M-1B wereheld to the lower limit of the present 3-1/2 to 6 percent range forthe year, we would expect that growth in M2 would be in its range andgrowth of M3 just a tick above its range. That [table on page 8]shows those relationships.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different scenarios and discussing the expected growth rates for M2 and M3 based on those scenarios.


Passage number 358.
MS. TEETERS. Steve, in Appendix III, the associated interestrates for the third and fourth quarters are 19-1/2 and 21 percent, isthat right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the interest rates for the third and fourth quarters. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 359.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 360.
MR. PARTEE. They're high rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "They're high rates" without any conflicting opinions or contradicting statements.


Passage number 361.
MR. SCHULTZ. If you believe that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about Mr. Schultz's beliefs or any potential disagreement. It only mentions his name without any context or conversation surrounding it.


Passage number 362.
MR. PARTEE. But I think the point is that we can, in fact,accept the strategy of alternative 2 and not change the long-rangetargets for this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the strategy of alternative 2 and stating that the long-range targets for the current year do not need to be changed.


Passage number 363.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. Let me just clarify this.If we implicitly accept the strategy of alternative 2 in a rough way,we are left then with the question before us of whether we keep theM-1B range unchanged or whether we lower it. [That strategy] isconsistent with either hypothesis, and we wouldn't have to change theM2 range. We could, but we wouldn't have to. Now, I don't knowwhether any of you people who have commented already want to sayanything about 1982. In effect, you have said alternative 2. Youhaven't said anything about 1982, and I don't know whether you want toat this stage.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply asking for clarification and input from others on the topic of alternative 2 and its implications for the M-1B range and the M2 range.


Passage number 364.
MR. WALLICH. The 1982 ranges and the changes for 1981 aresomewhat separable topics. We can separate out the very short run andseparate out the rest of year, and then we can talk about 1982. Ithink those three topics are more manageable than if we try to getinto all of them at the same time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It suggests a plan for discussing different topics in a more organized and manageable way.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 365.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I disagree, Henry. I think one hasto discuss what one is recommending for '82 in discussing whether torevise the remainder of '81 or not. If you want to revise theremainder of '81, you then are going to be much less willing toannounce a further reduction [for '82], presumably, at this time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses disagreement with Henry's viewpoint and offers their own opinion on the matter.


Passage number 366.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is a relationship betweenthe two. We have too many numbers to discuss here, we all agree. ButI think we should just get out on the table initially a feeling--I-39-7/6-7/81guess it's broadly reflected on page 8 and then it's reflected on page14, too--about what's implied for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges that there are too many numbers to discuss, but suggests that they should start by expressing a general feeling about what is implied for next year.


Passage number 367.
MR. ROOS. I would recommend alternative II in '82 also,going slowly at [our job of reducing monetary growth]. Alternative IIis consistent with our long-range objective of reducing our M-1B[range] by about 1 percentage point a year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not display contention or disagreement. It simply states a recommendation and explains that it is consistent with a long-range objective.


Passage number 368.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have an Arabic number 2 on page 8 anda Roman numeral II on page 14.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that there is an Arabic number 2 on page 8 and a Roman numeral II on page 14; there is no conflicting information or differing opinions presented.


Passage number 369.
MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't go with the Roman II; I would sayRoman I, possibly with a 3-point range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion about the Romans I and II options, suggesting that they would prefer Roman I.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 370.
MS. TEETERS. We don't have the answers, but implicit inthese is the level of interest rates. Alternative I is the one thatkeeps interest rates in the 18 percent range for the full 18 months,isn't that correct. Presumably alternatives II and III would putinterest rates in the 20 or perhaps 22 percent range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. This can be observed in the mention of "Alternative I" and "alternatives II and III." The speaker is suggesting that each alternative would result in a different range of interest rates, which implies a disagreement or debate about which alternative should be chosen.


Passage number 371.
MR. AXILROD. Well, it probably would, if you assume theeconomy unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states a hypothetical scenario without exploring any opposing viewpoints.


Passage number 372.
MR. PARTEE. Until the economy collapses.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Partee about the possibility of the economy collapsing.


Passage number 373.
MR. WALLICH. It doesn't have to collapse; it just needs toease a little.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It merely states a statement made by Mr. Wallich without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 374.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's a further complication. Atleast we in New York, Steve, are a little surprised by the interestrate levels projected to be consistent with each of thesealternatives. To me these interest rates are very much on the highside. Certainly the market would think they are on the high side.And since they're derived on fairly unreliable historicalrelationships based on the model, it may be that the market is lesswrong and more right. We ought to take with a grain of salt theinterest rate projections; I'd think of them as being more the outsidelimit on the upper side rather than as the most likely result.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing surprise and skepticism about the projected interest rate levels, suggesting that they might be higher than what is likely to happen in reality. This is a personal opinion and does not involve any contradictory viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 375.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. May I just go back and ask Mr. Roos andMr. Partee if they are ready to pronounce judgment. This all shouldbe considered very tentative. All I want is an instinct at thispoint. Consistent with alternative 2 for the short run, meaning thisyear, would you leave the ranges unchanged or would you lower M-1Bpresumably.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a request for input or opinion and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 376.
MR. ROOS. For the short run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing a response or answer to a question without any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 377.
MR. PARTEE. No for this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention. It simply states that there is no disagreement for this year.


Passage number 378.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I mean this year. Not really short runbut this year as opposed to next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is clarifying that they are referring to the current year and not the next year.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 379.
MR. ROOS. The ranges should be left unchanged. I think weought to opt for the lower of the two alternatives to stay within theranges, if I understand it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Roos, suggests opting for the lower alternative to stay within the ranges. This implies that there is disagreement or potential disagreement about whether to choose the higher or lower alternative.


Passage number 380.
-40-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. We have two questions here. One iswhere we should aim in substance and the other is whether we shouldchange the range. That's a pictorial question. We can go either wayon the pictorial question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Instead, it presents two questions and states that either option can be chosen without conflict.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 381.
MR. ROOS. I would think, and this may be unrealistic, thatat this particular time whichever way we go, it would be appropriate[to provide] an early explanation in a public statement by theChairman or through some other mechanism as to what we actually wereseeking to accomplish in this meeting. In other words, in thissituation an understanding of what we are trying to do is so criticalcurrently that getting our story across through signaling [may not bethe way to go]. Maybe it is too early to talk about this--maybe itought to be in the directive--but whatever we come up with, if we optfor what the Chairman implied earlier, I just wonder whether thisshouldn't be expressed and explained quite openly or publicly withoutthe 30-day lapse that usually accompanies these things.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker suggests that there should be an early public statement or explanation of the meeting's purpose, while acknowledging that others may have different opinions or that it may be too early to discuss it.


Passage number 382.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it presumably will be explained inthe testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating that something will be explained in the testimony, without indicating any conflict or disagreement.


Passage number 383.
MR. ROOS. That's when--the 21st. [Secretary's note:Chairman Volcker testified on July 20, 1981.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a straightforward statement of an event or fact.


Passage number 384.
]MR. PARTEE. On your question, I think it's really a matterof taste. We could say, as we often have with these ranges, that theyare there for a purpose. That is, things change, and we change [ourview of where we want to be] within the ranges. It looks as if therewas a change in the demand function for money and, therefore, we aregoing to come in low on M-1B and we're going to come in high on M2 andM3. Or, if you prefer, we could say there has been an apparent changein the relationships here and, therefore, we are going to reduce theM-1B range 1/2 point and increase the M2 and M3 ranges 1/2 point.It's just a matter of taste as to the cosmetics of how we go about it,Paul.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is presenting two different ways to interpret and explain the changes in the demand function for money, but he does not express any disagreement or contention with either perspective.


Passage number 385.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think it is a matter of pictorialtaste. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their personal opinion and subjective view that the matter being discussed is a subjective matter of taste.


Passage number 386.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I am very sympathetic to yourexpression and Larry Roos' expression of the way in which we ought toerr if we have to. I would take a different position on the ranges,however, and suggest that the more prudent thing to do in light of theweakness in the aggregates in the first half may be to take the bottomhalf of this range that we previously adopted. That would mean thatif M-1B could grow 10.4 percent, it would hit the midpoint of thepresent ranges; it would end up considerably below that, of course, if[second-half growth] came in below that. The reason I think this isimportant is that even to hit the bottom part of that range, we haveto have a pretty good rate of increase in terms of how the marketjudges that. We would have to have [growth at a rate of] 7.4 percentbetween now and December. And since they remember what we did lastyear, if they start seeing figures like that and we have not taken anyexplicit action to lower that range, I think that would disturb themmore than if we do lower it. It is quite true, as Larry says, that ifwe explain this at an early stage, that will help some. But all toooften the market doesn't seem to listen to these explanations; theyjust look at the cold figures. So, I would say we really ought to-41-7/6-7/81make [our objective] explicit and try to come in somewhere in thatlower half. I would rather come in a little above the lower part ofit, though, and would want growth a little higher than that ofalternative 2, which would bring us nearly to the lower part of theM-1B range. So far as the ranges for M2 and M3 are concerned, I'dleave those unchanged. If we come in somewhere in the lower part ofthe existing M-1B range, that would enhance the chances that M2 and M3would come in within the ranges that we specified; if they should turnout to be lower than that, then we have plenty of range to accommodatethat, too.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It presents different perspectives and suggestions on the ranges for M-1B, but there is no direct disagreement or argument between the speakers.


Passage number 387.
MR. PARTEE. Would you just cut the range. Is that the idea,Bob.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply requesting clarification or confirmation of the idea that Bob mentioned.


Passage number 388.
MR. BLACK. Yes, I'd cut it off at the midpoint of 4-3/4percent and have the range be 3-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent and try to comein somewhere within it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 389.
 If we had had stronger performance in theaggregates up until now, I would not be as sympathetic to that, but--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are you for next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. Explanation: The passage is stating a hypothetical condition (If we had had stronger performance in the aggregates up until now), followed by a subjective opinion (I would not be as sympathetic to that), and then a question about future plans (Where are you for next year). There is no contention or disagreement presented.


Passage number 390.
MR. BLACK. Next year I would cut [the range for] M-1B downto 3 to 4-1/2 percent. That's not exactly what any of thesealternatives specify.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black, discussing his plan to cut M-1B to a specific range.


Passage number 391.
MR. PARTEE. 3 to 4-1/2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "3 to 4-1/2" is simply a numerical range and does not involve any argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 392.
MR. BLACK. Yes, 3 to 4-1/2 percent for M-1B and then I wouldtake the alternative III [ranges for the other aggregates] but I'dclip the top half of M2, M3, and bank credit by about 1 percentagepoint and leave it there. Most of those ranges might be prettyreasonable. They are not all that far apart so I don't feel asstrongly about that as I do about the desirability of emphasizing,either through explicitly cutting the range or through stating it veryclearly, that we are aiming at somewhere in the bottom half this year.That's really the important point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion and preference regarding the ranges for M-1B, M2, M3, and bank credit, but they do not contradict or argue against any other viewpoint.


Passage number 393.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the rest of the context. The phrase "Governor Gramley" does not provide enough information to make this determination.


Passage number 394.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'd like to say a few words first about how Iget to where I am. It's useful for thinking about ranges in thefuture to remember that we are dealing in a world now in which themoney demand function has been shifting all over the lot. And I agreewith Tony that one can't make interest rate forecasts from the moneygrowth ranges under these circumstances without having a great deal ofuncertainty. But I wouldn't express it the way he does. I don'tthink we ought to take these interest rate forecasts with a grain ofsalt. I think we ought to look very, very carefully at thepossibility that they may be right and at what that means for theselection of ranges. It seems to me we are looking at an economy withsome very strong increases. We have a lot of expansive forces goingon, but the economy is being held in check by very, very tightmonetary policy. High interest rates have slowed economic growthessentially to nothing. And if interest rates went down a lot, theeconomy would bounce right back again. On the other hand, I alsothink we have real interest rates where we want them now because weare making progress on inflation. If one believes the staff iscorrect that we are going to make more progress over the next 18-42-7/6-7/81months, we are going to have a rather dramatic shift in expectationsabout inflation. That means that unless nominal interest rates comedown as inflation subsides, we are going to have real interest ratesincreasing substantially. We are going to have a lot tighter monetarypolicy than we really want. If nominal interest rates come down, thenthe downward shifts in money demand that we have been experiencing inthe past several years are much less likely to occur. I'd like toremind you of how much this has meant for the course of the economythis year. If you look on page 6 of the Bluebook, you find that overthe fourth quarter of '80 through the second quarter of '81 shiftadjusted M-1B went up 2.2 percent at an annual rate. But if you addthe 5 percentage point shift in the money demand function that tookplace, that number converts to 7.2 percent. The point is that we maynot be anywhere near that lucky in getting downward shifts in moneydemand in the future.So, I think Chuck Partee is right. We may be sitting on asituation in which, in order to keep interest rates from going up likegangbusters, we have to permit a lot faster money growth than we havehad in the first half of this year. That means to me that we shouldstick for '81 with the same ranges we have. If we are fortunate andmoney demand continues to move down, growth will come in near thelower end of the ranges. If we are not so fortunate, we may end upwith growth over the four quarters more like the midpoint of therange. I would leave M2 alone; I don't think we need to change the M2range. And I would be inclined to abandon altogether the actual M1range along the lines that Steve suggested. For '82, I would beleaning in the direction of something like a 3 to 7 percent range forM-1B and maybe even 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 because I think wehave seen somewhat of a change in the relationship between the two--although heaven knows, developments may come along that would alterthose relationships between now and then. I'm wondering, in light ofthe uncertainty with which we've been looking at these M-1B numbers,if we ought to be thinking over the long run of leaning more heavilyon a broader aggregate such as M2 and perhaps indicate in ourannouncement this July that we are thinking along those lines.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker agrees with Tony's point about the uncertainty in interest rate forecasts, but expresses it in a slightly different way. The speaker also agrees with Chuck Partee's point about the need for faster money growth to prevent interest rates from rising too much. Overall, the speaker's views align with those mentioned in the passage.


Passage number 395.
MR. PARTEE. The trouble with going toward leaning on M2 isthat we still haven't had a presentation of information that wouldindicate that it's a more reliable guide. One has an instinctivesense of that because it's more stable and closer to GNP, but wehaven't had that analysis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that there is a lack of information and analysis to support the idea that M2 is a more reliable guide.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 396.
MR. SCHULTZ. But some comment in the directive to indicatethat it is indeed being looked at might well be worthwhile. Giventhat we are in fact looking at a family of aggregates and that none ofthese aggregates is behaving very well, it might be a good idea toindicate to people in the market that we are indeed looking at leastto some degree at M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "none of these aggregates is behaving very well" suggests that there are issues with the aggregates, indicating some disagreement or concern. Additionally, the suggestion to "indicate to people in the market that we are indeed looking" implies that there may be differing opinions on how to address the issue.


Passage number 397.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make one comment on one ofGovernor Gramley's points, which I think is valid, but maybe not toomuch in the very short run. At some point, if inflation does comedown and interest rates come down, we may find we need much highergrowth in transactions balances relative to nominal GNP than anythingin recent experience has suggested. How we would ever make that shiftis very difficult psychologically in terms of all this numerologybecause we all keep talking about the need to reduce money growth, and-43-7/6-7/81it would give the wrong signal if we actually set a projection basedupon [the need for faster growth]. It's too early to assume that needanyway. Some day it's going to happen or it may happen. My reactionis that it's premature [to act on it now]. It may not be premature toraise the subject as a possibility for the future, but it's too earlyto raise the subject in terms of the actual targets we put downbecause I don't think we are there yet. And we might give a wrongsignal by leaning on it now even though I suspect it is going tohappen at some point. Some day we are going to have to say ratherflatly that the target is higher relative to nominal GNP precisely forthis reason, and I would consider putting a sentence or two of thatsort in the testimony. But it's probably too early to reflect it inany actual targets we set, because it will not be identified in thepublic mind with this rather sophisticated analysis but would just beinterpreted as a straightforward easing of policy. And that is notwhat would be meant. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing a potential need for higher growth in transactions balances relative to nominal GNP in the future, but acknowledges that it is too early to act on it now. They express caution about setting specific targets based on this need because it may be misinterpreted as a straightforward easing of policy. Overall, the speaker's comments are measured and not in conflict with any other viewpoints.


Passage number 398.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I think Lyle has given us a verysophisticated argument against the proposition that the way to getinflation down is to keep pulling the aggregates down. I get thesimilar argument from a very theoretical side. The people who areexamining the post-World War I inflations conclude that at the end ofthe inflation [the monetary authority] can enormously increase themoney supply without rekindling inflation because that is whathappened then. But I share the Chairman's view that we are far fromthat point. Moreover, typically when one has had declining interestrates, velocity has not changed back to its previous behavior but hasremained high because there's an underlying trend that increases it.So, I would be very hesitant now to move in the direction of allowinghigher targets.There are two things we need to bear in mind. One is thesubstantive point about what we want to do; the other is thestrategic. The two substantive things we need to do are to avoid therepetition of 1980 by going to a very high rate from a low level,perhaps in order to get back on track, and thus conveying theimpression of a massive expansion. That suggests to me that we oughtto keep M-1B growing slowly the rest of the year, if necessary bychanging the target range downward. But that can also be done byspecifying that we're aiming at the lower end of the range. That'swhat the Germans have been doing, and recently they actually havechanged the target. The other thing we ought to do is to get M2 andM3 more or less on track. Yesterday's discussion shows that M-1B isincreasingly regarded as unreliable. I say that very reluctantlybecause I've favored transactions balances as a criterion. But itdoesn't seem to be a feasible criterion, at the present time at least.So, I think we need to focus on M2 and M3, and that suggests to meagain that either we lower the M-1B target or aim specifically at itslower end. In either event, I come out with something like thealternative 2 growth rates for '81.Now, for '82 I see Tony Solomon's point that if we make a bigmove on anything in '81, we can't make a very large move in '82.That's the strategic aspect of the matter. But I think there's stillroom for some reduction in the target for M-1B this year and a smallerreduction for it next year. I would go somewhere along the lines ofthe ranges in alternatives II and III on page 14.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is sharing their views and opinions on the topic, but there is no direct disagreement stated.


Passage number 399.
-44-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage only mentions the name of Governor Schultz and a mathematical expression (-44-7/6-7/81). There is no information provided that indicates any disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 400.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, with the exception of Mr. Black, I wasthe outlier on my forecast for inflation for next year. [My forecastwas] predicated on the idea that we would continue with the policy ofmonetary restraint. I disagree with Governor Wallich. I think wehave a real opportunity at this point to bring inflation down. Thereare a lot of indications that the groundwork has been laid and thatthere is sensitivity [to that possibility]. I certainly would agreewith Mr. Solomon, though, that it takes a period of intense price andwage competition to bring inflation down. We have that opportunityover the next four quarters and I think it is very important that wenot lose this opportunity for two reasons: (1) because the Americanpublic are going to get very impatient if they don't start to see somereal effects from the kind of policy we've been carrying out; and (2)because we have another big tax cut coming up on the first of July ofnext year and that's likely to be very stimulative.So, to me, the next four quarters are really crucial. It isvital that we have a continued policy of monetary restraint. Thereare risks on both sides. There is a risk in what I really would liketo see, which is a period of very slow growth or a mild recession, andthe risk is that it could get out of hand on the down side. I don'tthink that's likely to happen, first because there is a great deal oflatent demand in the economy and if the economy does weaken to thatdegree, interest rates would come down and that would have astimulative effect. Also we have another tax cut coming on October 1and we have continued heavy defense spending, [both of] which I thinkare likely to prove to be a support underneath the economy if itshould get much weaker than I would anticipate. The risk on the otherside of not having a firm policy of monetary restraint is that wecould have a very difficult time early next year. It seems to me thatthe period of greatest danger for the thrifts is that period; if weease up and then have this tax cut and the defense spending and theother things that could well take place, we could easily be in asituation in the first quarter of next year where interest rates arerising and there is tremendous pressure on the thrifts. I thinkthat's the period of great danger. It seems to me that we have a realopportunity here and it's very important that we not let thissituation get out of hand as we did last year. The economy is poisedso that we can exert a real effect on inflation.So, I would like to see us reduce the lower M1-B band forthis year to 3 percent from 3-1/2 percent. I see the arguments on theother side, but if we leave it at 3-1/2 percent the market would lookat it and say: "That points to a big increase for the remainder ofthis year and if the Fed weren't going to try to hit that target, whydid they leave it there." I think that makes a lot of sense. Theargument can be made that if we put in 3 percent, then that is a realtarget and maybe we would have to hit it in spite of what may happenin the meantime. It seems to me that the stronger argument is that ifwe leave it at 3-1/2 percent, the market will anticipate that we'regoing to be pumping up the money supply pretty rapidly between now andthe end of the year to get to that figure. So, I'd like to see uslower that range to 3 percent on the down side.Next year, I do think there's likely to be a wide swing,particularly in M-1B. My anticipation is that the economy likely will-45-7/6-7/81remain somewhat sluggish in the first half. But if we do have somesuccess in getting inflation down and that tax cut hits on July 1, thesecond half of the year could be pretty strong and I think we arelikely to get some rather wide swings [in monetary growth]. I wouldopt for alternative III, which would mean a further lowering of thetarget range for M-1B on the bottom side but retaining the 3-pointrange.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz disagrees with Governor Wallich about the policy of monetary restraint and the opportunity to bring inflation down.


Passage number 401.
MR. PARTEE. May I ask: What does 3 percent imply for therest of the year. If [M-1B growth] were to come in at 3 percent,Steve, what would June to December be then.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and seeking clarification.


Passage number 402.
MR. AXILROD. Well, the June-to-December growth would bearound 6-1/2 percent. That would be the alternative C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is made by Mr. Axilrod without any opposing views or conflicting opinions stated.


Passage number 403.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given phrase "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER" does not provide enough context to determine any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 404.
 It's consistent with alternative C incontinuing to--MR. AXILROD. That's alternative C. [M-1B growth] comes inat 3 percent for the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating that the information is consistent with alternative C. There is no disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 405.
MR. BLACK. You'd leave the upper part of the range unchangedthen, Fred.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions Mr. Black stating a statement about leaving the upper part of the range unchanged. Without further context or conflicting statements, it is not possible to determine if there is disagreement.


Passage number 406.
MR. SCHULTZ. I would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not provide any information about any disagreement or contention. It simply states that "Mr. Schultz" spoke without indicating any opposing views or conflicting opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 407.
 I'm very much afraid--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're also saying you'd leave itunchanged in '82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In the passage, one person expresses fear while the other person suggests leaving something unchanged in '82. The differing opinions indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 408.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'd leave the upper part of the range alone forthis year or lower it 1/2 point. I wouldn't lower it by more thanthat. I am afraid of tightening these ranges too far.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their opinion and concern about not lowering the upper part of the range by more than half a point to avoid tightening the ranges too much.


Passage number 409.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you reduce the bottom limit of therange for this year, just pictorially, I think you'd want to reducethe top too because you wouldn't want to be widening the range in themiddle of the year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that if the bottom limit of the range for this year is reduced, it would make sense to also reduce the top limit in order to maintain consistency and avoid widening the range in the middle of the year. The statement is presented as a logical suggestion rather than a point of disagreement.


Passage number 410.
MR. SCHULTZ. All right. I'd accept that. I'm really muchmore concerned about the bottom part than I am the top. I'd acceptthe lowering of the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is expressing his agreement with something mentioned before and stating his own preference.


Passage number 411.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What would you do for '82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply asks a question about what someone would do for a specific year, '82.


Passage number 412.
MR. SCHULTZ. 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement, "2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent," is simply providing a range without conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 413.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would leave the top the same as thisyear and would reduce the bottom by 1/2 point further from this year.Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply explains the potential effect of a decision on the top and bottom portions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 414.
MS. TEETERS. May I remind you that we shouldn't take toomuch credit for the price easing. I never thought we were totally atfault for the price increases that we suffered from OPEC and food; andI don't think the fact that OPEC and food have calmed down has a greatdeal to do with monetary policy per se, except in the very long run.As a result, I think we ought to be very careful about what we do interms of interest rates. Nobody yet has mentioned housing; nobody hasmentioned the Chrysler problem; nobody has mentioned all the companies-46-7/6-7/81that have had their credit ratings downgraded; nobody has mentionedthe possibility that the thrifts are going to go [under] if we keepinterest rates up. I get the impression that we're really tearing atthe fabric of the financial world and the economy. If we persist inhaving very high interest rates over very long periods of time, we'regoing to cause a disaster in this country. It may not be next monthand it may not be next quarter, but it's going to be a severe problemand it's going to come down on our shoulders for having pushed theeconomy over the edge.I happen to agree with Tony Solomon on the short run becauseif we aim for the 3-1/2 percent lower end of the M-1B range for thisyear, then we have no place to go next year. We can put our ranges atany place up to 5 percent, but if growth were to come in [at or] above3-1/2 percent, we're going to be in a position of increasing the rateof growth of the money supply and not decreasing it. So, I think it'sfoolish to try to come in at that lower end. I think we're going tocome in at the lower end and I think we're going to come in at thehigher end on M2, which we've known since the staff was telling usthat in February. However, the markets are totally aware of ourproblems with M1-A and M-1B and M2. If you read the most recent DRIreport it describes exactly what our problems are in getting thesethings to come together. Therefore, I don't think we have anycredibility problem in explaining the difference between M-1B at thelower end of the range and M2 at the upper end of the range. Thatleads me to the decision that I don't think we should change theranges. We should stick with the M-1 B range of 3-1/2 to 6 percent.We ought to have good conversations and a good flow of informationback and forth between ourselves, the market, and increasingly withthe Congress, and we can explain what is happening. We don't have tochange the ranges to do that. I don't think we should go foralternative II; it's too strict. If people look at the first half ofthis year, everybody is aware that we're way under on the M-1B growthrate. Even if we don't achieve our current range the second half ofthe year, they will be understanding of it. And we can talk about it.When we come to next year, if we aim for a higher rate ofgrowth in money and presumably some easing in interest rates, which Ithink is appropriate at this point in time, then my preference is withLyle; I don't see any reason to tighten up. Nominal GNP next year isgoing to be a great deal larger than it is this year. Why reduce themoney supply and almost assure ourselves that we're going to maintainhigh interest rates for this long a period of time. It seems to methat we don't have to adopt any of these strategies. We could stickalmost exactly with the numbers that we have this year and, in effect,that represents a fairly tight monetary policy. So, I come downsomewhere between alternatives 1 and 2 on page 8 and for retaining the1981 targets for 1982, particularly since we are setting preliminarytargets for 1982. In the past we've trapped ourselves by setting[new] targets in July and reaffirming them in February. With all theuncertainties that we have, it seems to me we'd be better off to stayput now and, if necessary, change them in February but not commitourselves to a lowering of the targets this far in advance of actualeconomic developments.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. Ms. Teeters disagrees with the idea of taking credit for the price easing, and expresses concern about the potential negative effects of high interest rates and tight monetary policy. She also disagrees with the idea of tightening the money supply and argues for retaining the 1981 targets for 1982.


Passage number 415.
MR. PARTEE. Well, all of those ranges on page 14 lower thetargets a bit, Nancy. Alternative I lowers the target ranges by 1/2point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the ranges on page 14 being lowered by 1/2 point in Alternative I.


Passage number 416.
-47-7/6-7/81MR. FORD. It raises the M2 and M3 and bank credit ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply states a fact about raising the M2 and M3 and bank credit ranges.


Passage number 417.
MS. TEETERS. I wouldn't take any of these, Chuck.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provided does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement made by MS. TEETERS.


Passage number 418.
MR. PARTEE. Oh, I thought you said you'd take alternative I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement of misunderstanding or miscommunication.


Passage number 419.
MS. TEETERS. No, I'm talking about alternative 1 on page 8,which is the shorter-run target. I'd take the present ranges for '81[instead of any of those] on page 14. I don't see any reason tochange them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing their opinion and suggesting a different course of action, but there is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 420.
MR. PARTEE. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only presents a statement without any indication of disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 421.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just make one point as afootnote. I think you are correct in worrying about [high] interestrates and what that might do to the financial fabric. The question ofstrategy is whether we take that risk in the short run or exacerbatethat risk by being too easy in some sense in the short run and havinghigh interest rates longer. I think that's the issue before us.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage indicates that there is a disagreement or contention regarding the strategy of dealing with high interest rates. One perspective is concerned about the potential negative impact of high interest rates on the financial fabric, while the other perspective argues for being easy in the short run despite the risk, potentially resulting in longer high interest rates.


Passage number 422.
MS. TEETERS. But that has been the issue repeatedly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is a simple acknowledgement of a recurring issue without expressing any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 423.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "That's right" is a simple statement of agreement or affirmation. It does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 424.
MS. TEETERS. It has been over the past 2-1/2 years that I'vebeen here, and all we do is end up with high interest rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrase "all we do is end up with high interest rates," which suggests that the speaker believes their efforts have not led to desirable outcomes.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 425.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you could argue we haven't beentight enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests that there can be an argument made about the lack of being tight enough, indicating some form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 426.
MS. TEETERS. Try to tell that to the construction industry.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a statement made by MS. TEETERS without engaging in any argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 427.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to provide the information you're looking for.


Passage number 428.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm embarrassed to say that I havechanged my position every day in the last four days, as I looked ateach of these permutations and combinations. I was in favor of almostevery single one that has been mentioned at one point or another. AndI must say I've come full circle. I won't bother you with why I camefull circle. The disadvantages of each of these approaches are prettyobvious, but let me explain why I now would recommend that we stay[with the targets we have] for the remainder of the year. Theproblem, I think we all agree, is primarily presentational. Fred,even though I agree with much of what you said, I would disagree withyou on the reaction of the market and the public. If we leave thetarget unchanged for this year and say that we expect to come in atthe lower end--I'm talking about M-1B obviously--I think that isbetter than lowering it a half point. If we lower it a half point,the market will believe we're going to make an enormous effort to comein at that lower target because, otherwise, why make the adjustment.If we leave the target range alone and say we expect to come in at thelower end or possibly even undershoot given unusual situations--velocity or what have you--I think the market would expect less of anexpansionary policy from us in the remaining few months. They wouldexpect less of a repeat of last year. There are so many disadvantagesof adjusting any of this or fine-tuning that I'm not sure what we gainthat is significant, and we constrain our hand for '82.-48-7/6-7/81We have a wide range of possibilities [for next year] becauseof this velocity question. It seems to me, however--and here I woulddisagree with Nancy--that for '82 we still need to show continuity ofpolicy and continued severe monetary restraint. What I would do isgive a preliminary view--emphasizing that it's very much subject toreview if there are unexpected changes in velocity and as we assessthe state of the economy--that we would cut the range for M-1B for '82by 1/2 point and leave the M2 and M3 ranges alone, recognizing that wehave not cut them for 2 or 3 years. It seems to me that there areoverwhelming technical arguments for that and I think they're fullyexplanatory. Everybody knows about the surge in moneymarket funds,and in general I think we have convinced everybody that we have a veryrestrictive policy. I don't think we have to worry about the factthat we haven't cut the M2 range in a couple of years. There are goodreasons, which everybody will accept. So, that would be myrecommendation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear examples of contention or disagreement. The speaker mentions that they have changed their position multiple times in the past few days, but this does not necessarily indicate disagreement with others. The speaker also mentions that they disagree with someone named Nancy, but the specifics of their disagreement are not provided. Overall, there is no clear disagreement or contention in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 429.
MR. WALLICH. That's a tighter fit for M2 than is proposed byany of the alternatives I through III on page 14, isn't it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. Mr. Wallich disagrees with the proposed alternatives on page 14 because he believes that the fit for M2 is tighter than what is suggested in those options.


Passage number 430.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He said leave it unchanged.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement "He said leave it unchanged" does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it simply entails a request to keep something as it is without any opposing viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 431.
MR. WALLICH. He'd leave it unchanged at 6 to 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any conflicting opinions or differing viewpoints. It simply states that Mr. Wallich would keep something unchanged.


Passage number 432.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 6 to 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The question is not specific enough to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Please provide more information or context.


Passage number 433.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would not lower it, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing the speaker's opinion on lowering something without any indication of disagreement or opposition.


Passage number 434.
MR. WALLICH. But the alternatives here all raise it, yousee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich is simply stating a fact or possibility and does not express any disagreement or contention towards it.


Passage number 435.
MR. PARTEE. They all raise it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that "they all raise it."


Passage number 436.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Part of this whole credibility issueis a perception of a kind of simple-minded, if you want to call itthat, approach. If we ignored the recommendations of the staff lastyear to raise the M2 range for '81, at this point I don't see theargument for going ahead and raising it [now]. I don't believe theinnovations in financial instruments that we should expect next yearare going to be such that we should have the kind of growth in moneymarket funds that will put more pressure [on M2]. I would not raisethe range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and rationale for not raising the range.


Passage number 437.
MR. WALLICH. I wasn't disagreeing with your proposal; I wasjust trying to point out that you were really making a very toughproposal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker explicitly states that they were not disagreeing with the proposal, but were trying to provide a different perspective on its difficulty.


Passage number 438.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I think it's reasonably tough.In some ways, as I explained earlier, I think the markets are stillfocusing more on M-1B. And as I said, perversely I'm afraid, if welower the range a half point, the markets will expect us to make aneven greater effort to hit it than if we leave it alone and say weexpect growth to come in at the lower end.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the market focusing on M-1B and the potential impact of lowering the range. They do not mention any conflicting views or opposing arguments.


Passage number 439.
MR. SCHULTZ. Explain to me what worries you about that. Areyou worried that we would be making a major effort to get growth up to3 percent. Is that what bothers you. Or are your worried that thatis too constraining. Which side are you on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is asking for clarification on the person's concerns or worries, but there is no indication of any conflicting positions or debate.


Passage number 440.
-49-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not talking about the substantivedecision on how we actually handle ourselves for the rest of the year,because we don't have full control of where we're going to come in.I'm talking about my impression of the public reaction or the marketreaction, which is that if we say that we're going to lower it a halfpoint, rather than say that we're leaving it alone but we expect tocome in at the low end, then the markets will expect a more determinedexpansionary effort on our part because we are fine-tuning the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing different approaches to communicating a decision and the potential reactions from the public and the market.


Passage number 441.
MR. SCHULTZ. A more determined expansionary effort if welower it to 3 percent than if we leave it where it is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It is a statement suggesting that a more determined expansionary effort would occur if the rate is lowered to 3 percent, compared to leaving it where it currently is.


Passage number 442.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Than if we leave it alone and say weexpect to come in at the lower end or even possibly undershoot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their expectation that something will happen without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing opinions.


Passage number 443.
MR. WALLICH. But the substance of it is that we shouldn'tmake M-1B grow very fast; whether we express that in terms of a targetor by saying we expect its growth to come in low is a matter ofstrategy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is discussing different ways to express the idea that M-1B shouldn't grow very fast, but there is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 444.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me say this, on the substance ofit: I feel that we should be careful not to [let growth] exceed thelower end and we should accept a little undershooting. I don't thinkwe'll get that much criticism because I don't see that it's going tobe timed with a recession. Obviously, if we were undershooting and wehad a recession simultaneously, we would get an enormous amount ofcriticism.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is expressing a personal opinion and discussing potential criticism.


Passage number 445.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The next appointee to the Open marketCommittee is going to be a market psychiatrist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 446.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we have every kind of therapisthere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that there are various types of therapists available.


Passage number 447.
MR. SCHULTZ. And the one who goes off will also need apsychiatrist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply suggests that the person who goes off will also need a psychiatrist.


Passage number 448.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any statement or information that would suggest contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 449.
MR. BOEHNE. I think we're positioned really rather well withrespect to our '81 targets. Looking forward from last February, Ididn't expect that we'd be as well off as we are now, and I think weought to accept the good fortune that we have. So, I wouldn't tinkerwith the '81 targets. To be at the bottom end with respect to M-1Band at the upper end with respect to M2 is about as good as we canhope for. In fact, I'd be very happy if we ended the year in roughlythat position. So, I would leave those targets unchanged. I amconcerned somewhat by the shortfall that we are getting in M-1B.We've now had [minus] 5 percent in May and [minus] 10 percent in June.We do have a forecast of growth in July and I think there's anunderlying feeling that the risks are for too much growth in thesecond half of the year. But I have seen this pattern develop before,so I have no problem in beginning to resist this shortfall some, whichI think is consistent with the idea of moving between now and year-endtoward the lower end of the M-1B range. It doesn't do us any good inthe market to run double-digit shortfalls because what comes from thatis the expectation that we can't tolerate that for very long and we're-50-7/6-7/81going to have to resist it. So, I think some resistance to that isappropriate.As far as 1982 goes, I think we ought to keep the ranges forthe broader aggregates about the same as those we now have for 1981and I am torn between whether we should lower the M-1B range by a halfor a whole point. I could live with either. If we lowered it by awhole point, we'd be getting a little more consistency between thenarrower and the broader aggregates. But the important thing is thatwe lower the M-1B range; whether we lower it a half point or a wholepoint I'm not sure is significant. We are going through a period ofmaximum danger with regard to the inflation problem and the potentialdanger to structure as well as a possible recession over the next 12months. However, I'd rather be running that gauntlet over the next 12months than the 12 months after that or the 12 months after thatbecause we have begun to make some progress down the anti-inflationroad and the costs and the amount of that risk will be less over thenext 12 months than in the subsequent 12-month periods. From thestrategic point of view, we have to try to keep this anti-inflationarymomentum, of which monetary policy is a part, going over this year andnext year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker expresses concern about the shortfall in M-1B and suggests resistance to it, which implies a disagreement or contention regarding the current targets and strategy. Additionally, the speaker is torn between whether to lower the M-1B range by a half or whole point, suggesting a disagreement on the appropriate course of action for 1982.


Passage number 450.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 451.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, making a couple of generalpoints first, I certainly count myself solidly in the camp of thosewho would say we should err on the side of firmness now. I think thatis very important. I also tend to agree with Mr. Solomon that in allof the scenarios that are laid out here, particularly in the shortterm but maybe even beyond that, the interest rate profiles are toohigh. I also think that the actual growth of money over the secondhalf of the year is very important in terms of how we start off 1982.And when I look at some of those numbers that have money growth at 8or 10 percent in the second half of this year looking toward gettingdown to 2 or 3 percent next year, the trajectory that presents createssome real problems for me as well. One other general point: I thinkSteve implied that the staff thought that some of the definitionalkinds of problems associated with M2 and M3 relative to M1 might beless next year. I'm not at all sure of that. It seems to me theycould be greater, given what the DIDC is doing and the possibility oflegislation for an all-saver type certificate or something like that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is expressing their own opinions and thoughts on various topics, but there is no indication of disagreement or debate with anyone else.


Passage number 452.
MR. AXILROD. I didn't mean to imply that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, states that he didn't mean to imply something, implying that there is no disagreement or contention.


Passage number 453.
MR. CORRIGAN. Okay. Well, I don't think we're out of thewoods by any means in terms of those problems with the broaderaggregates. As far as the specifics, taking the 1981 targets first, Irather strongly favor the view of retaining the '81 targets as is. Tochange them involves two problems for me: One is the strategicproblem for next year; and the other, which may be more important, isthat to do so would give the impression that we really know enough tobe able to fine-tune these aggregates at midstream by 1/2 point orwhatever. I don't find that very appealing. So, I would retain theexisting targets for 1981 although, as I will indicate later, Icertainly would not mind an outcome that looks like alternative 2 onpage 8. I would not change the targets. I do have some sympathy forthe idea of getting rid of the M1-A measure just to get rid of it.-51-7/6-7/81In terms of 1982, again partly because of this potentialproblem I see with M2, M3, and bank credit, my view at this time wouldbe to state a target for M-1B of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, using the3-point band. And as Mr. Solomon suggests, right now I would leavethe targets for the broader aggregates for '82 where they are for '81,with some rather full explanation in your testimony that partlybecause of uncertainties about the tax legislation or whatever we willhave to take a harder look at these at the beginning of next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, expresses his view on retaining the existing targets for 1981 and his preference for not changing them. He also expresses his view on setting a target for M-1B in 1982. There is no indication of disagreement or contention between Mr. Corrigan and any other person in the passage.


Passage number 454.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So you're recommending a full pointreduction in the M-1B rate for 1982.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any form of contention or disagreement. It simply mentions a recommendation for a specific point reduction in the M-1B rate for 1982.


Passage number 455.
MR. CORRIGAN. It's a half point on the top and a full pointon the bottom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 456.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. You would solve half theproblems by abandoning M-1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement simply suggests a possible solution, without any opposing views or conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 457.
MR. MORRIS. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only consists of one sentence, and there isn't any indication of disagreement or contention present.


Passage number 458.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That simplifies it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The phrase "that simplifies it" indicates that there is agreement or satisfaction regarding a previous statement or explanation. It does not mention any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 459.
MR. BLACK. If he wants to get rid of M2, he can do so.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting an option for someone to consider.


Passage number 460.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I wasn't proposing that we do that in '81.In general, in order to improve communications between the FederalReserve and the public, we shouldn't change the guidelines unlessthere's a pressing need to do so. I think it generates confusion.And I don't see any pressing need to change the 1981 guidelines. ButI'm not sure I would do what you're suggesting, Paul, which is tosuggest to the [Congressional] Committees that we're confident we aregoing to come in at the lower end of the range, because this M-1Bmonster is an extremely volatile instrument. Last year half of theyear's total increase in M-1B occurred in one week. I think it wouldbe fine to say that we want to be within the range, but I'm not sureI'd want to commit myself to coming in at the lower end even thoughwe're way below it at the moment. I thought Steve's remarks supportedextremely well my view of getting rid of the M-1s as a guideline. Heonly concluded that we should get rid of M1-A; I don't quiteunderstand that. But I would go beyond Lyle Gramley's position anduse M3 and bank credit as guidelines rather than go to the halfwayhouse of M2. If we were to do [as I suggest], we would accomplish oneof the things that we're concerned about. That is, we're concernedabout a one-time shift in the demand for the narrow aggregates in theevent of a sharp decline in interest rates, and it would no longer bea problem. I just don't see how we could accommodate that with anM-1B guideline. But if we had an M3 and bank credit guideline, wecould accommodate it very easily. There are two other advantages, itseems to me, of such a shift. One is that there's a great deal lessnoise in the broader aggregates than in a narrower one. The noisefactor, which is huge in M-1B, gives the monetarists a shot at usseveral times a year. They say the money supply is either growing toofast or too slow. There's no way we're going to get M-1B growing atanything approximating a straight line because of the heavy noisecontent, which was even demonstrated recently in the [articlepublished by] the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing his own views and opinions, but there is no direct contradiction or argument with anyone else.


Passage number 461.
-52-7/6-7/81MR. ROOS. Monetarists don't shoot at other monetarists,Frank, and we're all monetarists.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that "Monetarists don't shoot at other monetarists," implying that there is agreement and unity among monetarists.


Passage number 462.
MR. MORRIS. Another nice little problem it would solve isthe weekly money supply problem because even though we'd be givinginformation to the market every week on the M1s, the market would notbe weighing that so heavily since they would know we were no longergearing policy to M1 but to the broader aggregates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting a potential benefit of a certain solution, without any opposition or contradiction.


Passage number 463.
 Now, assumingthis advice is not going to be accepted--MR. GRAMLEY. I find it very persuasive. You ought keep on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley expresses agreement and finds the advice persuasive.


Passage number 464.
MR. PARTEE. You ought to be a debater, Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, MR. PARTEE is complimenting Frank's debating skills, so there is no clear indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 465.
MR. MORRIS. --if we could get away with cutting the rangefor M-1B by 1/2 of one percentage point next year and with keeping theother ranges where they were, I think that would be an excellentoutcome. If we can't, then I would be willing to cut the whole batchby 1/2 percentage point. And I would support Steve's suggestion thatif we're going to have an M-1B target, we have solely a shift-adjustedtarget. Having two targets for M-1B is also a source of confusion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris suggests cutting the range for M-1B by 1/2 of one percentage point and keeping the other ranges where they are, while also advocating for a shift-adjusted target. However, there may be resistance to his suggestions as others may not agree with cutting the whole batch or having two targets for M-1B.


Passage number 466.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure that's what Steve wassuggesting. We would have an M1 target period, not shift-adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker is expressing uncertainty and offering an alternative suggestion, indicating a lack of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 467.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, no M1-A.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states "Yes, no M1-A," which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 468.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's on the presumption that we declarethe shift is completed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply presenting a presumption without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 469.
MR. MORRIS. I see.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states that Mr. Morris sees something, without indicating any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 470.
MR. AXILROD. Or irrelevant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It seems to be a statement or utterance made by Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 471.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either completed or irrelevant, one or theother.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presenting two possible options, suggesting that something is either completed or irrelevant, without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 472.
MR. MORRIS. But it may not be completed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their belief or opinion without any contradictory statements.


Passage number 473.
MR. PARTEE. That's the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a statement or observation made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 474.
MR. AXILROD. That's why I was suggesting widening the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 475.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to make a parentheticalcomment that may be of some use. I encountered enormous resentment inEurope among government officials and central bank officials about ourcontinuing to publish the weekly money supply statistics. Maybe theirreaction is much too excessive, but they believe that we unnecessarilyencourage extra volatility above and beyond what our October '79approach involved by our continuation of the weekly publications. Ijust pass that along for what it's worth.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The speaker mentions that there is resentment among government officials and central bank officials regarding the continuation of publishing weekly money supply statistics. This implies a disagreement or contention between the speaker and these officials.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 476.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to have to consider that oneof these days. I take it that the predominant comment from marketpeople, as you would expect, is that they want us to continue it.There are some comments in the other direction, however; but all themarket people argue that the more information they get the better.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some disagreement in the passage. While the majority of market people want the continuation of something, there are some comments in the other direction. However, all market people argue that the more information they get, the better.


Passage number 477.
-53-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I find that quite a few leadingbankers in New York feel exactly the opposite.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It states a personal observation about the feelings of leading bankers in New York without presenting any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 478.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The farther away you get from the marketoperator types, the less sympathetic people, including the more seniorbankers, are to that. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It simply states that the more one moves away from market operators, the less sympathetic others, including senior bankers, become.


Passage number 479.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with the generalthrust of your opening statement, especially the part where you seemedto say that we should take the risk on the side of more softness inthe economy rather than try to counter any sluggishness that mightoccur in the short run. From my point of view, probably the mostcritical question right now is whether we continue to do what we saidwe were going to do--whether we are going to continue to reducegradually the growth of money--or whether we are going to try toadjust our position in light of what we think we see developing in theeconomy. To me it's extremely important to be perceived as doing whatwe said we were going to do. Rather than try to adjust to the short-run changes that we see, which might make more sense from the short-run point of view, I think it's better to continue to do what we saidwe were going to do. That is likely to have a much more decisiveimpact on inflationary expectations. So, for that reason I wouldfavor, as have others, keeping the 1981 targets where they are. Iwould not change the ranges at all for the reasons set forth byseveral of you, particularly those set forth by Tony Solomon. I wouldalso for the rest of 1981 opt for alternative 2 on page 8. But it'simportant to try to keep M2 and M3 as close to their target ranges aspossible, and therefore, I would be willing to accept growth in M-1Bof 3-1/2 percent [or less in the second half of this year]. In theinterest of trying to keep M2 and M3 close to their ranges, it'simportant to accept the shortfall for the rest of the year in M-1B.As for 1982, I would favor strategy 2 as indicated on page12, accepting the 3-1/2 percent growth for M-1B for 1981, and movingback to the 4-1/4 percent midpoint of the range for 1982. That, Ithink, implies some variant of alternative II on page 14.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. The speaker expresses agreement with the chairman's opening statement and discusses their own views on monetary policy and target ranges. There is no mention of opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 480.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's alternative I.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement by Mr. Partee expressing his own opinion.


Passage number 481.
MR. RICE. You may be right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "You may be right" suggests agreement rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 482.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you might ask what the staff had in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not include any statements or indications of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 483.
MR. RICE. What I was going to propose is that, in effect, wedo what we said we were going to do and reduce the M-1B range by 1/2percentage point. So, [for 1982] I'd move to a range of 3 to 5-1/2percent and leave the ranges for M2 and M3 where they are right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of a proposed action without any conflicting opinions or opposition.


Passage number 484.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say that given all thecomplications of this, I think the meeting is going to run until afterlunch. I'd like to get through this preliminary go-around and maybebefore we resolve this turn to the short run because I think that hassome influence on how we finally come out. I suspect we're going tocontinue the meeting after lunch. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their belief that the meeting will run until after lunch.


Passage number 485.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me just make acouple of preliminary comments as background to my recommendations.First of all, I feel that there's a good deal of latent strength in-54-7/6-7/81the economy and that at any indication of lower interest rates, forexample, that strength will come forth and we'll have a quitedifferent problem than we may be facing right now. Secondly, it doesseem to me that we've made some real progress against inflation andthat the public is at least willing to accept that. To be sure, mostof it has not been of our own making; it has been in both energy andfood prices. Nonetheless, the stage is set. And one lastobservation: If it is true that we've come to this point for whateverreasons, whether we've had a part in it or not isn't important.Historically, the Federal Reserve has always come up to the hitchingpost and then backed off simply because the Administration and theCongress have thrown bricks at us or have not been supportive of apolicy of restraint. Through the course of recent history at least,we've backed off and we've made a mistake each time. I think we havean opportunity this time to carry forward what we should have donebefore because for the first time ever we do have, for whatever lengthof time, the support of the Administration at least. So, we ought totake advantage of that opportunity. That is the background.With that background, I would like to propose that we notchange the ranges for the remainder of 1981. I'd leave them the samewith the understanding, [explained] through testimony or otherwise--and I think the market already understands--that we're probablylooking to the lower end of the range. The fact that M2 and M3 arerunning very high in the range or outside of the range at the momentseems to me to be consistent with perhaps running at the bottom endof, or even below, the M-1B range for the remainder of this year,while M2 and M3 are right at the top of their ranges. As a result,the fact that we may end up with M-1B below the lower end of the rangefor 1981 is not important. I wouldn't move the ranges downward simplyto accommodate that shortfall.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: In this passage, Mr. Guffey is presenting his recommendations and providing background information. There is no evident contention or disagreement.


Passage number 486.
MR. MORRIS. We could juggle the shift adjustment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, Mr. Morris suggests a possible solution (juggling the shift adjustment), but there is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 487.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unfortunately, the only new evidence wehave on the shift adjustment would lower the adjusted M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the new evidence would lower the adjusted M-1B.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 488.
 If wewanted to take that evidence from this Michigan survey, that's--MR. GUFFEY. Well, I think we ought to leave it right whereit is. That story can be told from the picture that will unfold in1981, and I think it leaves open the lines of communication even withthe monetarists. For 1982, from the alternatives on page 14, I likelowering the range of M-1B coupled with broadening the range to 3percentage points, so 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent has some attractivenessto me. But I'd also retain the present ranges for M2, M3, and bankcredit. I'm not sure what those all mean. For M2 at least I'd retainthe present range, the 6 to 9 percent. As to the short run and whatwe do in the next month, as I understand the procedure, we're notgoing to talk about that right now. So I'll stop. I do have somecomments to make about that, however.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Guffey expresses his opinion on what actions should be taken regarding monetary policy, while also acknowledging that he is not sure about the meaning of some terms. This suggests that there may be differing opinions among the individuals involved in the conversation.


Passage number 489.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as no conflicting ideas or opposing opinions are presented. The passage simply refers to someone named Mr. Ford without providing any information or context to suggest disagreement or contention.


Passage number 490.
MR. FORD. On the substantive issues of where policy shouldgo, I agree with your opening statement and with the consensus that'sdeveloping that, given that there are risks on both sides, we have torun the risk of holding tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The speaker, Mr. Ford, agrees with the opening statement and the consensus that is developing, indicating there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 491.
-55-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just restate my own semantics. Ithink you have stated it correctly. There are risks in everything wedo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention as it simply restates the speaker's opinion without any opposing viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 492.
 I think the lesser risk is--MR. FORD. The holding tight.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion about the lesser risk.


Passage number 493.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --holding tight, not that that's thegreater risk.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is stating that holding tight is not a greater risk.


Passage number 494.
MR. RICE. Did I summarize it wrong.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply questioning if they accurately summarized something.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 495.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think the sense of it is clearenough, but just as a semantic matter I think we're minimizing whatinevitable risks there are by doing that. There are risks with any ofthese alternatives.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker acknowledges that there is disagreement about whether the risks are being minimized, stating "just as a semantic matter I think we're minimizing what inevitable risks there are by doing that." This indicates a difference in opinion regarding the extent to which risks are being reduced.


Passage number 496.
MR. FORD. Next, with due regard for Nancy's and otherpeople's concern about the thrifts, I very deeply share that concern,but I think we can lose with the thrifts either way in that there's alesser risk of playing to win now in the next few months than byletting their equity run down longer and facing the same problem ayear from now with less equity when that turnaround comes, as Fred sonicely put it. Substantively, my thinking goes from that point. Thatsays then, concerning the '81 targets, to leave the ranges where theyare. There are two approaches: the one Fred suggested or leaving theranges where they are and explaining that we're willing to acceptbeing at the lower end or even a little below [on M-1B]. I'd put morestress on getting M2 within the top of the target, if we possibly can,even though the staff forecast suggests it will be a hard thing to dowithout blowing interest rates through the roof. But I just amskeptical of that view, or I should say more optimistic about theoutlook for interest rates than they show in their forecast. We'repraying for a better interest rate forecast than the one they have.If theirs is right, we're in big trouble with the consensus that we'redeveloping here.Concerning the 1982 targets, like a number of previousspeakers, I think we need an alternative to the ones shown.Basically, it's alternative II with a modification on the M2 target.I'd like to see M2 kept where it is because if we set an M2 targetwith a cap of 9-1/2 percent, that would be the highest rate we've hadat any time--if my table here is correct--since July of 1977. And I'mworried that even though there are technical reasons for seeing M2 asbeing somewhat more expansive than previously, the markets keeprecords of this stuff and if they see us moving M2 to the highestrange we've set in four years, that could hurt our credibility andexacerbate the problem of getting within the targets. So, I'd saylet's go for alternative II on the M-1B range, but cut M2 down to thepresent range of 6 to 9 percent [despite] the grounds that it's hardto cut it given the structural changes that Steve and the staff havepointed out to us. Concerning the short run--well, we don't need totalk about the next quarter yet since you want to do that after lunch.The only other thing I'd say is that, Frank, you're not completelyalone in the woods. I have developed a touch of Morrismania and I'dsay we should move in the direction of considering dropping M1-Aimmediately. I'd go at least that far with Frank.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker expresses their concern about the thrifts and shares their thoughts on the targets for M-1B and M2. They also mention their agreement with another person's suggestion and their support for considering dropping M1 immediately.


Passage number 497.
MR. MORRIS. You don't have much mania.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement by Mr. Morris.


Passage number 498.
-56-7/6-7/81MR. BLACK. Even I have that much.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It appears to be a simple statement or response.


Passage number 499.
MR. FORD. And step two toward Morrismania is at least torestate our concerns about the very substantial structural problemswith M-1B. Deemphasizing M-1B a bit in our statements would be theway I'd lean toward Mr. Morris's position on which aggregates toemphasize.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Ford, is suggesting that they should restate their concerns about the structural problems with M-1B and de-emphasize it in their statements, aligning with Mr. Morris's position. There is no opposing viewpoint or disagreement indicated.


Passage number 500.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the following passage as the sentence provided is incomplete.


Passage number 501.
MR. BALLES. Basically I'm in favor of what I call the KISSapproach: Keep it simple, sir.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Balles, expresses agreement with the idea of keeping things simple.


Passage number 502.
MR. SCHULTZ. Or keep it simple, stupid.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The phrase "keep it simple, stupid" is a popular saying that emphasizes the importance of simplicity. It does not indicate disagreement or contention.


Passage number 503.
MR. BALLES. Your opening statement, which has been supportedwidely around the table now, was that there's much more to be lostthan to be gained by tinkering with these 1981 ranges. In fact, Idon't recall that we've done a midyear correction heretofore. Ifthat's wrong, I withdraw the comment.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Balles makes a statement and then withdraws it if it is incorrect.


Passage number 504.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't had much experience. I thinkwhat that means is that we haven't done it for two years.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a fact that they haven't had much experience and offering their interpretation of what that could mean.


Passage number 505.
MR. BALLES. The latitude with the present ranges seems to meto be adequate for the balance of this year. With respect to thealternatives for 1982 set forth on page 14, I would go for alternativeI for M-1B, which is to drop the range by 1/2 point, but I find itdifficult to buy any of those alternatives for M2, M3, and bankcredit. A number of people have spoken on this so far, and I wouldcome out bottom line the same way, to leave those ranges for thebroader aggregates the same as they are now. However, I would beginformally and more explicitly, following up on what Lyle said, to givemore recognition to M2. We have done that in a very subjective way inour recent published directives. We can all recall the time when wewent as far as saying we would give it equal weight. That has beensome years ago now. Perhaps it needs to be discussed at some lengthhow far we go in the formal sense in giving more recognition to M2.If you look at the spread between M1 and M2 over quite a long periodof time, it bounces all over. I have a table--Bill says he has onetoo--that shows that over the last 20 years that spread has averagedabout 3-1/4 percentage points. The 4-1/4 point spread which is shownon page 14 between the midpoints of M-1B and M2 just seems to me to beexcessively high. Coming in somewhere around the historical averagespread of 3-1/4 points would justify leaving the M2 range at 6 to 9percent for next year, which is where it is now. One of the reasons Iwould lean more toward M2 in a formal sense in our policydeliberations is that I have some skepticism about M-1B; I don't shareFrank's view completely, but we are dealing with a very tricky animalin the shift-adjusted M-1B. And at least for next year, that gives usperhaps good reason to place more weight on M2. As a number of othershave said, I wouldn't be unhappy at all if we dropped M1-A altogetherand do it right now. When we get into the short-run specs, the June-to-September period, I'd like to say more about leaning asaggressively against undershoots as overshoots, but that discussioncomes up later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is expressing his views and preferences regarding different alternatives for monetary aggregates. He does mention that other people have different views, but he does not argue or directly oppose their opinions.


Passage number 506.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without knowing the specific content of the passage. Please provide more information or the specific passage for further analysis.


Passage number 507.
-57-7/6-7/81MR. BOYKIN. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I also would agree with thesubstantive comments that you made in your opening statement. Withrespect to the strategy for the rest of 1981, I would tend to favoralternative 2 on page 8. I would not make any adjustments in the '81ranges; I would just let those stand the way they are.As for the strategy for 1982-83, I would look to strategy 2.With respect to the ranges for 1982, I would go for a 1/2 pointreduction in the M-1B range to 3 to 5-1/2 percent. I would also bevery inclined to leave the M2, M3, and bank credit ranges where theyare currently. It may be because I sit next to Frank Morris, but I'mbeginning to find quite a bit of sympathy for looking a little closerat M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply expressing their agreement and preference for certain strategies and ranges.


Passage number 508.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions "Mr. Winn," but does not provide any information or context to determine if there is contention or disagreement involved.


Passage number 509.
MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I'm impressed with the power of thenumber. We should remind ourselves that [when] we were sitting here ayear ago and thinking about the future we forgot base drift in settingour targets. If we go back and adjust for that and secondly if weadjust for the changes that have occurred in M-1B--and the Michigansurvey, I think, does not include corporations' use of money funds inthe transactions balance set-up--the adjustment probably is in theother direction. [If] we were sitting around the table at the momentfaced with the fact that we were over our targets, not under ourtargets because of the base-drift problem and the adjustment of M-1B,I wonder what our reactions would be. I think we can get trapped bythe numbers we're playing with here if we're not careful.Second, contrary to the view most people have expressed, I'dbe very strongly in favor of changing our targets at the moment. Ithink we're going to get trapped next spring if we don't. Supposewe're successful in the sense of coming in at the lower end or less;that becomes our base, if we use precedent on this score. Think whatkind of adjustments we're going to have to make and to explain at thatstage to make this fit any kind of economic analysis related to thosethat we've heard. If we're not careful, we're going to be increasingour numbers in February. I feel it's much easier to try to explain itnow. Also, if we set targets, we ought to try to shoot for themidpoint. When we set targets and say we're going to shoot at thelower end or less, I think we're playing games a little. Moreover, ifwe have to make an adjustment, I think it is easier to make it now andthen not make one in February. I think we have ourselves trapped bythis annual review, particularly when we base it on where we arerather than on having some continuity in the series over time. I'd bein favor of making the adjustment now and, if we're lucky, that wouldbring us closer to the midpoint of the adjusted range. Then we wouldnot have to make a change on an annual basis to make a continuouseffort to achieve our inflation objective. It seems to me that weought to avoid getting trapped into basing our ranges on where we areand do it rather on a continuous series over time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage discusses the need for adjustments to targets and expresses a preference for changing targets at the moment. It also talks about the potential challenges of explaining and making adjustments later on. However, there is no contention or disagreement present in the passage. The speaker is presenting their viewpoint and suggestions without arguing against or opposing any other specific viewpoint.


Passage number 510.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn, you can make an interimconcluding comment and we can have a coffee break.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply suggesting that Mr. Keehn make a concluding comment before taking a coffee break.


Passage number 511.
MR. KEEHN. Well, I'd best be brief. With regard to 1981, itseems to me that from the earlier discussion, we're clearly in alearning phase [regarding the relationship] between M-1B and M2. And-58-7/6-7/81until we learn more about the downward shifts, it's awfully hard to beprecise. To change either range at this point implies a greaterdegree of precision than may perhaps be the case. I don't see how wecan logically change one without the other. Being new to this, Ithink the outside perception is that the actual results count muchmore than how they actually relate to our ranges. So, I'd be in favorof not making any change at this point.With regard to 1982, it seems to me that a great deal hasalready been accomplished and that for all the reasons that have beenstated we will have lost a great deal if we do not continue thedownward shift. The visibility of reducing the numbers somewhat has agreat positive effect. Therefore, I'd be in favor of alternative Ifor M-1B but would leave the other ranges where they currently arefor fear that if we raise them at all, it would have a negative marketreaction.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own opinion and reasoning, but they do not contradict or argue against any previous statements or positions.


Passage number 512.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make one or maybe two commentsbefore the coffee break. Most people have said: "Keep the rangesthis year the same," which was my instinct when I was thinking aboutit before. However, I found that Governor Schultz raised some rathercogent points. I did a little arithmetic this morning and I think onecan argue, although I'd want to confirm this arithmetic, that it'sreasonably safe--that may overstate it a bit--to expect that we wouldcome within the M-1B range if we lowered it by 1/2 percentage point.That may give us the leeway that Frank is worried about in theunfortunate circumstance that M-1B growth would go up. I still don'tthink it's going to go up above the upper end, but as opposed tosaying we're going to be in the lower end of the range there may besome advantage in just reducing the range a little this year.Everybody probably changes their mind on this, like Tony Solomon, butI find the case for keeping the range less persuasive than my owninitial instinct suggested, depending upon just how the arithmeticworks out. I think the arithmetic works out rather favorably on that,although I'd want to look at it again. Anyhow, let's go to the coffeebreak and after the coffee break we'll go to the short run; and thenwe'll go back to the long run again and make sure the short run fitswith what we want to do in the long run.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing various perspectives and considerations related to adjusting a range.


Passage number 513.
[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we are back on page 15 [of theBluebook]. Is that where we are, Mr. Axilrod, for the short-runranges. I'm not sure on the arithmetic of how the short-term rangesmatch with the long-term ranges. Maybe you can inject something now.Do you have another statement to make about the short-term ranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a regular conversation discussing a topic without any opposing views or conflict.


Passage number 514.
MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, I had not planned on anysubstantial statement in view of the preceding one. But I thought itmight be useful to expand at least a little bit on how these short-runranges relate to the longer-run ranges. And that would give me anopportunity to provide some additional data that would be relevant tothe Committee's preceding discussion. We constructed alternative A toreach the midpoint of the present longer-run range for M-1B by thefourth quarter. Given the shortfall in money growth in May and thenin June bringing the level down even further, unfortunately that[calls for] a very rapid growth rate for M-1B month by month [in theJune-to-September period] of around 10-1/2 percent. Alternative A is-59-7/6-7/81associated with a slower growth rate on a quarterly average basis inthe third quarter of around 4 percent, and then of course by thefourth quarter [as the quarterly growth rate] veers toward the 10-1/2percent monthly rate, the fourth-quarter average rate would be around10.3 percent. Alternative B again has a relatively rapid growth monthby month of 8-1/2 percent in M-1B, and that alternative wasconstructed to get toward the bottom end of the present range. Itactually implies a growth Q4 to Q4 of 3.9 percent, which is somewhatabove the bottom of the present range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 515.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Fourth quarter to fourth quarter. And itimplies for the two quarters, 2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is providing a statement of data without presenting any contention or disagreement. It simply states that the comparison is being made from the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter.


Passage number 516.
8--MR. AXILROD. For the two quarters it's about 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is a factual claim about the percentage.


Passage number 517.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, for the two quarters on average. Butit would imply [quarterly average growth rates], assuming [a fairlysmooth trajectory month-by-month], of 2.8 and 8.2 percent, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a specific calculation or scenario based on certain assumptions. There is no contention or disagreement involved.


Passage number 518.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. And alternative C, Mr. Chairman,goes to the bottom end of a range that is 1/2 point lower than thecurrent 3-1/2 to 6 percent range, should the Committee be consideringthat. Even so, that would imply month-by-month growth in M-1B on theorder of 6-1/2 percent, again given the low starting point of June.Of course, if there should be any upward revision in that figure andif you're thinking of the level as the ultimate target, it would tendto lower that growth rate; and a downward revision would tend to[raise] that growth rate. That would give you growth of 1-1/2 percentin the third quarter and 6 percent in the fourth quarter, againveering toward the monthly growth rate by the time of the fourthquarter, and it would only give you 3 percent Q4 to Q 4 .Now, those are a lot of numbers, but if the Committee wouldindulge me with a little patience for a bit, I think it would behelpful, Mr. Chairman, to give two more sets of numbers that aren'tshown [in the Bluebook], because the upper ends of the ranges are notirrelevant in terms of announcement effects when the Committeereaffirms or changes or does whatever to its targets. Given what hashappened in the first half of the year, the growth rates in the secondhalf implied by the upper ends of the ranges are, of course, verylarge as you can tell. For example, if we had Q4-to-Q4 growth of 6percent, which is the upper end of the M-1B range, given what hashappened thus far this year, the monthly growth rate would be on theorder of 13-1/2 percent; that would give you quarterly average growthof 6 percent in the third quarter and 13-1/2 percent in the fourth.If the upper end of the present range were reduced by 1/2 point, say,the potential monthly growth to get 5-1/2 percent would be around12-1/4 percent from now on, with a third quarter of 5-1/4 percent,which looks reasonable, and a fourth quarter, as the arithmetic worksout, of around 12-1/2 percent. That gives you an idea of thedimensions that are involved.Finally, associated funds rate ranges were presented [in theBluebook] with the three alternatives. The only range that implies aneasing in the money market, from our analysis, is the rapid growthrates of alternative A, and that I think has been amply explained. Itcomes out of this dilemma involved in analyzing money demand relativeto GNP. If there is a further sharp downward shift in money demand or-60-7/6-7/81if GNP is indeed weaker than we have projected, then of course thatlower funds rate range of alternative A could well develop with lessrapid growth than is called for in alternative A. But under theassumptions that we have been working with, we have more moderatemoney market conditions associated with "A," while "B" and "C" implycurrent or somewhat tighter money market conditions on our analysis,again I stress, given the GNP projection.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting different sets of numbers and explaining the implications of each set.


Passage number 519.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's apart from the difficulties ofany short-run interest rate forecast. According to the model theydepend upon a GNP projection, which may be unreliable; and, therefore,if we get a weaker GNP we can get much lower interest rates consistentwith any of these forecasts. Who would like to wade into this short-run problem. Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is acknowledging the difficulties of short-run interest rate forecasting and the potential unreliability of GNP projections. The question at the end is asking for someone's opinion or input on the matter, rather than expressing disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 520.
MR. BOEHNE. I think it comes down to how one weighs therisks of growth in the aggregates in the second half of this year thatis too rapid and a repeat of what happened last year versus acumulative shortfall in the aggregates. We've seen the possiblebeginnings of [a cumulative shortfall] in June and July and I do givesome weight to that possibility. I would come out somewhere between"B" and "C" on page 15, preferring to err more in the direction of "C"than "B," but somewhere in that "B" to "C" area.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker expresses that they give some weight to the possibility of a cumulative shortfall in the aggregates in the future, while acknowledging that others may have a different opinion on how to weigh the risks of growth. This suggests that there is disagreement or differing perspectives on the matter.


Passage number 521.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 522.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman I would support alterative B.I like the idea of having a plan to hit the lower level of the rangeor to get close to it by November. I don't think I would want topublish that objective in the report we put out or, in other words,commit ourselves to being on that particular course, given thevolatility of these numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Morris supports alternative B, while expressing his reluctance to publish that objective in the report, indicating a disagreement over whether to commit to a specific course of action.


Passage number 523.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What alternative do we have other than topublish.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply poses a question without presenting any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 524.
MR. MORRIS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 525.
 The alternative would simply be to state thatour objective for the June-to-September period is to produce thegrowth rates in alternative B, without stating explicitly that theyare designed--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, you would put in the 8-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is simply suggesting an alternative approach without any conflicting views or arguments.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 526.
MR. MORRIS. Oh, yes. But I'd just not say that these aredesigned to get us to the lower end of the range by November. Since Ithink the third quarter is going to be weaker than the staff isprojecting, this can probably be accomplished without as much interestrate pressure as in the forecast, so I would support a funds range of14 to 20 percent rather than the 16 to 22 percent shown.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. In this passage, Mr. Morris disagrees with the forecast and suggests a different funds range of 14 to 20 percent instead of the 16 to 22 percent shown.


Passage number 527.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have a comment on the funds range,Mr. Boehne.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 528.
MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I would have something like 16 to 22percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement made by Mr. Boehne is a specific percentage range without any conflicting opinions or opposing views mentioned.


Passage number 529.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 530.
-61-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we can afford to do arepeat of last year and that seems to be a pretty widespread feelingin the Committee. It seems to me, therefore, that we have to befairly close to alternative C for the remainder of this year. I wouldgo for something between 6-1/2 and 7 percent [for M-1B]. We couldphrase it as "6-1/2 percent or slightly more" in the directive. Thatwould be consistent with a borrowing assumption of $1-1/2 billion inour view and would probably give us a fed funds range of 15 to 20percent. The midpoint of that is where we would likely come out,which would be a fed funds rate in the 17 to 18 percent area. Thatwould be my view, Mr. Chairman.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is describing the speaker's opinion on what the fed funds rate should be, but there is no explicit contention or disagreement being expressed.


Passage number 531.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage only mentions Governor Wallich without providing any information about any contention or disagreement related to him.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 532.
MR. WALLICH. I share the view that we have to avoid arepetition of '80 but we also have to avoid a repetition of '79. Itwould be the third year if that happened. I don't think M-1B byitself is all that important, but the appearance that it is risingrapidly would be very damaging. I think we ought to stress that moreweight is being attached to M2 and, in that context, I would say M2growth at 8 percent seems desirable with M-1B at 7 percent, let's say,and the funds rate range at 17 to 22 or 23 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Wallich believes that M1B growth at 7 percent and the funds rate range at 17 to 22 or 23 percent would be desirable, while others may hold a different view on the matter.


Passage number 533.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 534.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the near-term growth rate[for M-1B] shown in alternative B would be about right and, as Steveindicated a moment ago, that would give us a fourth quarter '80 tofourth quarter '81 growth rate of 3.9 percent, which would put us alittle above the floor of our current range. I think the moreimportant question may be what we do with the federal funds raterange. As I have stated several times, I favor elimination of thesefunds rate ranges, and we have moved several steps in that generaldirection. We first widened them, and then we had the top and lowerlimits as points where we would check, and now we have moved into therealm where they are points where you may ask us to consult. I'd liketo go a step further and just eliminate those altogether. But Irecognize that that's probably not going to be the consensus of thegroup. So, I would put the range at about 14 to 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Black, is expressing his personal opinion and recognizing that it may not be the consensus of the group.


Passage number 535.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 536.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would opt foralternative C as shown on page 15 for both M-1B and M2 for theintermeeting period. Because of all the uncertainty that surroundsthe velocity and shift in demand for money and all the other boogie-men we seem to come up with, it seems to me that it is a time to focusa little more closely on interest rates. Thus, I would start out onthe side of not wanting to see interest rates drop very quicklythrough the remainder of this year, and a 16 to 20 percent range is mypreference for federal funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. Mr. Guffey is simply expressing his preference for alternative C and his desire to focus more on interest rates.


Passage number 537.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 16 to 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The given numbers (16 to 20 percent) are simply stated without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


Passage number 538.
MR. GUFFEY. I beg your pardon, 16 to 22 percent. The "B"federal funds rate range, but the "C" aggregates rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 539.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage simply mentions "Mr. Ford" without providing any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 540.
-62-7/6-7/81MR. FORD. I come out close to "C" with the fed funds rangeof "B," as Roger has just said, or better yet widening the bandfurther or certainly not narrowing it because fed funds today I'm toldare trading at 19 percent. A couple of people have suggested that weput the cap at 20 percent; were that to lead the Desk under anycircumstances to start injecting funds after we walk out of here, thatwould undermine the whole philosophy or strategy that you laid out atthe beginning of the meeting. So, I think we either have to widen thefed funds range or for sure not lower its upper end to avoid givingany signals in the next few days of loosening policy significantly. Iam concerned about the target base drift question, which only oneperson raised--about where all of this leaves us at the end of theyear, depending on where we come out in the range, and how we adjustto that. I don't have the answer, but I want to share the expressionof concern--I think it was Willis who put it on the table--that weshould think ahead as to where this short-run decision we're makingtoday leaves us at the end of the year in terms of bringing theaggregates in line with the longer-range objectives that you have totalk about on the 21st of July. I just need more information from thestaff as to whether we face a base drift problem that is the reverseof the usual drift up. If I understood Willis right, he was implyingthat if growth comes in low and we have trouble getting M-1B up intothe range, we might have a reverse base drift problem. I don't knowabout that. I'd like to hear more. So, put me down for a little lesstight than "C," keeping the fed funds range about centered on where itis now, 19 percent, and either loosening that up or certainly notlowering the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Ford expressing his concerns and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 541.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just explore the implications.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is expressing their intention to further examine the consequences or possible outcomes of a certain situation or idea.


Passage number 542.
 Yousay leave the federal funds where it is, meaning--MR. FORD. It's 16 to 22 percent now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 543.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, that's the range. But where wouldyou put the borrowing. If you lower the borrowing, the funds ratepresumably will come down. The borrowing this week was $1.4 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the effect of lowering borrowing on the funds rate.


Passage number 544.
Was that what--MR. FORD. Yes, $1.5 billion seems consistent with that; I'mnot exactly sure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Ford is confirming that $1.5 billion seems consistent with what was previously mentioned.


Passage number 545.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage provided, "Governor Gramley," does not contain enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 546.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we as members ofthe Committee are indulging ourselves a bit in picking and choosingfrom these various alternatives in trying to get a package here. I'dlike the monetary aggregates to come in low and interest rates to be alittle lower and the economy to keep going where it is. I don't knowif we can get there from here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It expresses the speaker's personal opinion and uncertainty about whether they can achieve their desired outcome.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 547.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a consensus on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The phrase "Do we have a consensus on that" suggests that there may be differing opinions or disagreement on the topic being discussed.


Passage number 548.
MR. SCHULTZ. No, I want the economy to be a little weaker.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, expresses his desire for the economy to be weaker.


Passage number 549.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would suggest something along the followinglines: Using the aggregates of "B," a federal funds rate range of 15to 21 percent, a borrowing figure of $1-1/2 to $1-3/4 billion, and anunderstanding that if the aggregates fall short and that does not-63-7/6-7/81happen in the context of a weakening economy, we let them. I amprepared to see actual money growth well below where we are targetedso long as it reflects a downward shift in money demand. And that's,in effect, what I'm saying. If we get a continuation of the downwardshift in money demand and, therefore, low growth in the aggregates, Iwould not fight it. But I would like to see us arrive at someagreement that if in fact the staff is right and we get a reversion ofmoney demand to what normal relationships would suggest, we won't letinterest rates go up a long way.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Gramley, is suggesting a course of action and expressing his willingness to let money growth be below target if it reflects a downward shift in money demand. He also expresses the desire for an agreement to not allow interest rates to increase significantly if there is a reversion of money demand to normal relationships. There is no evident disagreement or contention in this passage.


Passage number 550.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage without the accompanying text. The phrase "Governor Teeters" is not sufficient to determine the presence of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 551.
MS. TEETERS. Well, I come down close to where Lyle does. Iwould put the federal funds rate at 14 to 20 percent and borrowingsbetween $1-1/4 and $1-3/4 billion. If [money growth] begins to fallshort, I would permit it, but I certainly wouldn't permit it to theextent that we did in May and June. I think we overdid it in movingdown on that particular path. Like Frank, I think the [nominal GNP]is going to be somewhat weaker than is being projected, and I'm notsure whether it's going to come out of the real side or inflation. Wehave had some short-term inflation gains that are going to betemporary and we may get a nominal GNP that's a little low over thisthird quarter; so we could get the 8-1/2 percent rate of real growthwith the 14 to 20 percent fed funds rate at this point. If growthfalls short because we don't get the rebound in money, that's onething; but if it's falling short because the economy is plunging, Iwill have a different attitude toward it. I assume that if we getinformation that the economy is either growing too fast or too slow interms of what we're anticipating, we will have a conference call.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is mainly an individual's perspective on the federal funds rate and borrowing, as well as their thoughts on the projected nominal GNP and potential factors affecting it.


Passage number 552.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it only mentions Mr. Corrigan without providing any statements or opinions that could potentially lead to contention.


Passage number 553.
MR. CORRIGAN. Steve, what's the published fed funds band inthe last directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for information.


Passage number 554.
MR. AXILROD. 16 to 22 percent. It will be published.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement provides a specific percentage range, and it is stated without any contrasting or contradictory information.


Passage number 555.
MR. CORRIGAN. For the past 3 weeks in this past intermeetingperiod, what did you think the borrowing level was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The question is simply asking for Mr. Corrigan's opinion or thoughts on the borrowing level during the past intermeeting period.


Passage number 556.
MR. AXILROD. First we thought $1.6 billion; that was a weekago. This week we think $1.4 billion, but it's averaging $1.9 billionto this time. We thought consistent with $1.6 billion we'd have tosee the funds rate move down toward 18 percent and it didn't; and wethought consistent with $1.4 billion, the funds rate would be in the17 to 18 percent area and it isn't there yet.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents the changing estimates of the amount of money and its impact on the funds rate, without indicating any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 557.
MR. CORRIGAN. Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The word "okay" suggests agreement or acceptance.


Passage number 558.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically, they ought to be givingaway federal funds tomorrow afternoon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage presents a statement that is not disputed or contradicted. It simply states a hypothetical situation where federal funds should be given away.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 559.
MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I'm in the area of "C" partlybecause I think we don't want to repeat 1980 but also because I havean eye on where we're going to start off 1982. Steve said that thequarterly average number toward the end of the year with "B" gets usup in the 8-1/2 percent area and that to me is troublesome. I getmore and more attracted to "C" with the advantage of Mr. Solomon's-64-7/6-7/81comment to the effect that, at least as they view the world, we couldget [the growth rates of] "C" with a funds rate of 15 to 20 or 21percent--either one would be all right with me--and an initialborrowings level of $1-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Corrigan expresses disagreement with Steve's suggestion to stick with option "B" and instead suggests option "C" with a higher funds rate and initial borrowings.


Passage number 560.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I ran out of names--no, Mr. Schultz.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the speaker ran out of names and addresses someone as "Mr. Schultz."


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 561.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think the economy is going to be a littleweaker in the third quarter and to me that's a consummation devoutlyto be wished for. I would not move too rapidly to offset a littleeconomic weakness; and under those circumstance I think alternative Cis as fast as we ought to go, not as slow as we ought to go. So, Iwould favor alternative C for M-1B and M2 and I would start theborrowings at $1.5 billion and put the fed funds range at 15 to 21percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, expresses his view that the economy being weaker in the third quarter is something he wishes for and believes that alternative C is the appropriate response. However, it is not clear what the other participants in the conversation believe, so there may be differing opinions among them.


Passage number 562.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The passage does not mention any conflicting ideas or opinions and instead simply refers to Mr. Balles.


Passage number 563.
MR. BALLES. This platter of choices is almost enough togive us indigestion. Reverting to what Bob Black had to say in hisopening remarks yesterday about the June 17th conference call, I sharethe view that the weakness we accepted was a little more than I had inmind at the time. But after last year's M-1B growth of 6-3/4 percent,if I recall the adjusted figure, the 3-1/2 percent lower end of therange, if that's where we're going to end up this year, is an awfullysharp deceleration. The only way I can justify that in terms of notpushing the economy over the brink and creating a serious recession isthe evidence, reasonably persuasive, that there has been a downwardshift in the demand for money. I think it would be a great mistake ifwe ended up the year under that 3-1/2 percent lower limit, even givenwhat seems to be going on in terms of a downward shift in moneydemand. But to hedge my bet to make sure that we don't undershoot forthe year as a whole, for the June-to-September period I'd lean moretoward the alternative B specs, including the [associated] federalfunds range, than I would those of alternative C. Again, I would liketo raise the issue of whether we should at this time explicitly placemore emphasis on M2, which I would favor.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is expressing the speaker's views and considerations regarding the economy and monetary policy.


Passage number 564.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just comment on this sharpdeceleration. I think it really is misleading. I looked at somefigures yesterday on the annual growth. We started out this year fromthe highest quarter we had last year, and it was an exceptionally highquarter. When you look at this in a broader perspective, taking allthe quarters into account, if we end up at the 3-1/2 percent lower endof the range, we're only slightly below the average we had for lastyear--on the order of 1/2 percentage point below as I remember thefigures. And we had an increase for the whole of last year of what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing their perspective and analysis of the data. They are expressing their opinion that the sharp deceleration is misleading and providing facts and figures to support their viewpoint.


Passage number 565.
MR. AXILROD. 5.8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "5.8 percent" appears to be a numerical value or statistic, so it does not involve any argument or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 566.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5.8 percent. If we end up at the bottomof the range in the fourth quarter, in a straight line from here tothere, the annual growth in M-1B would be what.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is providing information about the potential annual growth in M-1B if it ends up at the bottom of the range. There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage.


Passage number 567.
MR. AXILROD. 5.1 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The quoted statement simply states a numerical percentage, which does not indicate any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 568.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would only be about 3/4 of a percentagepoint reduction in growth from a year ago.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement in the passage is a factual statement without any indication of contention or disagreement. It simply presents a specific percentage reduction in growth from a year ago.


Passage number 569.
-65-7/6-7/81MS. TEETERS. But we can always get those sorts ofpeculiarities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 570.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my argument is that I don't thinkthat's a peculiarity. The peculiarity is the fourth quarter. Thefourth quarter happened to be the only quarter last year when we wereabove target, and it was an abnormally high quarter. If we say theworld begins and ends with the fourth quarter of last year, we get adifferent picture than if we say the money supply was lower during thefirst three quarters of last year than it was in the fourth quarter.Anybody putting in any kind of econometric equation puts in an annualfigure. Nobody just picks out one quarter to put in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply presenting their argument and discussing the peculiarity of the fourth quarter.


Passage number 571.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, to put this in a slightly differentlight, but I think it reinforces what you're saying: If we had drawnour cone not from where we ended up in the fourth quarter but from themidpoint of the range, [unintelligible] is 3-1/2 percent, which is nowthe lower part of our 1981 range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is offering a different perspective that reinforces the previous statement, indicating agreement.


Passage number 572.
 It would be a little above themidpoint of that range--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's another way of saying the samething. Or if we draw it as a channel from the end of the cone lastyear, as I sometimes draw it, we are now a little below the middle ofthe channel, or maybe quite far below in June. But for the first halfof the year as a whole, we're right in the middle of the channel.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply expressing different ways to describe the same concept of being in the middle of a range or channel.


Passage number 573.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If there were a credible way of de-emphasizing the fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter growth to formulatethe target--I don't know how--the right formulation would be year overyear in some broad sense.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author is simply discussing the idea of finding a credible way to de-emphasize fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter growth for formulating the target, although they are unsure of how to do so.


Passage number 574.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought of doing that last year. Thereason I didn't was because it looked too damn difficult to get theannual average down. But it looks as if we have achieved it, or mayachieve it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement expressed in the passage. The speaker is reflecting on their own thoughts and actions from the past and how they initially believed achieving the goal was too difficult but now they may have achieved it or are close to achieving it.


Passage number 575.
MR. PARTEE. Possibilities.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 576.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that is in a sense more meaningfullyin economic terms. One can argue it either way. Obviously the year-to-year change is influenced by what happened last year. But justpicking out one quarter and saying that's the end of all existence isclearly not right either.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The author presents two different perspectives on the matter but does not take a definite stance or engage in a debate.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 577.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The scary thing is the psychologicalpressure on us [depending on] where we end [in any] fourth quarter.If we're seriously overshooting or undershooting, we're going to makethree times the effort--or at least we're going to be under that kindof pressure psychologically--to make a much bigger response than isgood for the economy, simply because it happens arbitrarily to be thefourth quarter and people will be judging us on the fourth quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 

The speaker is expressing concern about the psychological pressure that is placed on them depending on their performance in the fourth quarter. They believe that if they overshoot or undershoot in their response, they will face excessive pressure to make a larger response than what is actually beneficial for the economy. The speaker disagrees with the idea that the judgment of their performance in the fourth quarter should dictate their actions, suggesting that it happens arbitrarily.


Passage number 578.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have the figures, but if we lookedat the year-to-year changes in M1 now, they are still high, I think.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have the figures but believes that the year-to-year changes in M1 are still high.


Passage number 579.
If we looked at the first half of this year against the first half oflast year--MR. AXILROD. Oh, I don't have that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that they do not have the information being referred to.


Passage number 580.
-66-7/6-7/81MR. GRAMLEY. I can look it up. Six months this year overlast year's is plus 6.3 percent. The second quarter of this yearrelative to last year is [plus] 7.4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 581.
MR. PARTEE. Because it dropped out of bed in April.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about something that happened in April.


Passage number 582.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. "That's right" is a statement of agreement or confirmation, indicating that there is no contention or disagreement.


Passage number 583.
MR. PARTEE. Wait until we get to the third quarter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states a statement made by Mr. Partee.


Passage number 584.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I can't generate a response without more information about the passage.


Passage number 585.
 Then the year-over-year will be--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it will narrow from now on with any ofthese numbers. By the end of the year we would be down just a bitbelow where we were last year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests a prediction about the year-over-year numbers narrowing and potentially being slightly lower than the previous year.


Passage number 586.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's becoming a seasonal pattern.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, this statement does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply states that something is happening in a pattern that is becoming seasonal.


Passage number 587.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Next year we'll straighten this out byputting back the first half of the year in the seasonal patterns thatwe left out and then it will all look very even during the year.Governor Partee.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 588.
MR. PARTEE. I would opt for alternative B. And I wouldpoint out that in a way we're getting a deceptive look because we'retaking a snapshot as of June, which is the very low point, we hope, ofthe [downward] movement. After all, as a result of the cumulativeeffects of a minus 5 and a minus 10, alternative B gets us a third-quarter growth rate of 2.8 percent. Now, 2.8 percent is not a highmonetary growth number, so it seems to me quite a reasonable thing toshoot at.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and providing their reasoning for preferring alternative B.


Passage number 589.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Quite true.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 590.
MR. PARTEE. We'll have to decide on the fourth quarter alittle later. But, you know, it's a long time to the fourth quarter.We may well have a double-digit plus or a double-digit minus betweennow and then so we will be talking in an entirely different arena whenwe get to discussing the fourth-quarter average, which I wouldn't wantto see go up as fast as that 8.2 percent or whatever Steve has onthat. I also disagree with Lyle that we should not pay any attentionto shortfalls below the number because I can't tell whether there's ademand shift or not. That is, when we're experiencing it, it can beeither a demand shift or it can be a weakening in the economy; and themoney supply numbers can very well predate the weakening in theeconomy somewhat so that we're not all that aware of it. But we'renot talking about a very strong economy when the auto companies reportan annual sales rate of 5.4 million and wonder whether they cansurvive to the end of the year. That's not a strong economy. It'salso obvious in housing that we're not talking about a strong economy.Builders are going out of business every day. So, I don't want totake a lot of risk of a cumulative shortfall. Remember, if we put Mayand June together we have as much of a drop as the April drop lastyear, which really galvanized us, perhaps improperly, into action.So, I think we shouldn't accept a substantial shortfall from thenumbers that would be occasioned by alternative 2. I guess the fundsrange could be 15 to 21 percent. Interestingly, I had greatdifficulty finding what the funds rate range had been over the last-67-7/6-7/81period when I read the Bluebook; it wasn't in the usual place. We'vedeemphasized it to the point that we don't even report it now.Assuming it was 16 to 22 percent, which is in the crossed out sectionof the directive, 15 to 21 percent seems all right. I wouldn't wantto see the borrowing target above $1.4 billion, which as I understandit is where we are currently in this period. I don't think we oughtto raise the borrowing target above what it now is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee disagrees with Lyle's suggestion that shortfalls below the number should not be paid attention to. He also disagrees with the idea of accepting a substantial shortfall from the numbers that would be occasioned by alternative 2.


Passage number 591.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage "Governor Rice" without any specific context or text provided.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 592.
MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative B. Itseems to me that if we pursue alternative C, we run a substantial riskof not getting M-1B back even to the lower part of the target range.We just may not get back to the range. Alternative B gets us back tothe range by November and we're still on the low side, so alternativeB makes more sense to me. And I would go with a federal funds rangeof 16 to 22 percent and borrowing at $2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker, Mr. Rice, expresses disagreement between alternatives B and C and argues in favor of alternative B. He believes that pursuing alternative C risks not reaching the target range, while alternative B gets them back to the range by November. This shows a contention in the passage.


Passage number 593.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 594.
MR. RICE. $2 billion. That's the borrowing that goes with"B." I'm being a purist.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 595.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that may be what they have in here.Okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply acknowledges something that may be a certain way in a different location (presumably referring to a different context or situation).


Passage number 596.
MR. RICE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Since there is no passage provided, it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement in it.


Passage number 597.
 That's what one has to expect with a--MR. ROOS. I would opt for "C" in its entirety. I just thinkwe [can't] afford to announce that we're going to tolerate aggregategrowth above the "C" figures. We must remember that these areadjusted. If you take off the adjustment, the rate of growth is evenhigher. But I'd suggest a borrowing assumption of about $1-1/2billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 598.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You may be right. These are adjustedfigures, certainly; and if we continue to get some growth in NOWaccounts, the unadjusted figure will be still higher. It's a pointworth making. I'm not so sure that we're going to get much growth inNOW accounts from now on. In the last couple of months we haven'tgotten much, but nobody knows, obviously. It may be that thesefigures are coming together. But the chances are you're right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker initially agrees with the other person by saying "You may be right" but then contradicts that by expressing doubt about future growth in NOW accounts. This indicates disagreement or contention.


Passage number 599.
MR. ROOS. I would just add that I was very much intrigued orimpressed with Fred's suggestion of reducing the bottom of the longer-term targets by 1/2 point, which would enable us to come up to thebottom of what we're seeking with this alternative C, if I understandit right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their interest and positive impression of Fred's suggestion.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 600.
MR. BLACK. If we go with "C," we need to lower the bottom ofthe M-1B range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement suggests a disagreement about the decision to lower the bottom of the M-1B range.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 601.
MR. ROOS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the response "Yes" given by Mr. Roos.


Passage number 602.
MR. SCHULTZ. To be consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not contain any statements or arguments that show contention or disagreement.


Passage number 603.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are a few more people who have totalk here. Mr. Boykin.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement simply states that there are additional individuals who have yet to speak. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 604.
-68-7/6-7/81MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would go with alternative C, aborrowing assumption of $1-1/2 billion and a fed funds range of 16 to22 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement of Mr. Boykin's opinion without any opposing viewpoint or conflicting information.


Passage number 605.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm unable to understand the context of the passage you're referring to. Could you please provide me with the full passage or more details?


Passage number 606.
MR. WINN. I remind the group that we come back together inabout six weeks, so we are not casting this in cement for the next sixmonths. I'd be inclined to somewhere between "B" and "C" with thefunds rate range of 15 to 21 percent or something of that nature and$1.4 billion in borrowing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Winn is simply suggesting a range for the funds rate and borrowing amount for the next six months.


Passage number 607.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehne, you bring up the cabooseagain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply acknowledges that Mr. Keehne is once again in a position at the end or "bringing up the rear" (using the metaphor of a caboose).


Passage number 608.
MR. KEEHN. Well, for the reasons that have been reasonablycovered, I would be in favor of alternative C with a federal fundsrange of 16 to 22 percent; and if mathematically the $1.5 billionborrowing level results from that, I'd be in favor of that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker clearly states their support for alternative C and a borrowing level of $1.5 billion if it aligns with the suggested federal funds range.


Passage number 609.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's see where we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 610.
 Obviously,we're between--MR. GRAMLEY. Let me ask for a staff interpretation of theconsistency of a borrowing number of $1-1/2 billion with a midpoint of19 percent on the funds range. I thought when we last talked about afunds rate in the 19 to 20 percent area we were talking aboutborrowings of about $2-1/4 billion. I think we're talking aboutnumbers here that are just inconsistent with one another.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is questioning the consistency of the borrowing number of $1-1/2 billion with a midpoint of 19 percent on the funds rate range. He believed that the previous discussion about a funds rate in the 19 to 20 percent range was associated with borrowings of about $2-1/4 billion. He finds the numbers discussed to be inconsistent with one another.


Passage number 611.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we wouldn't know. The money supplynumbers, depending on developments in the economy, could beconsistent. But we wouldn't think that borrowing of $1-1/2 billionwould be consistent with a funds rate of 19 to 20 percent. We thinkthat implies lower funds rates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their opinion and observations regarding the money supply and borrowing rates. There is no indication of a disagreement or argument with anyone else.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 612.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We would argue somewhat differently.We believe that borrowing of $1-1/2 billion implies a fed funds rateof 17 to 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The statement "We would argue somewhat differently" suggests that there is disagreement or contention between the speaker and someone else.


Passage number 613.
 We'd be about a point--MR.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not suggest any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about a point or a measurement.


Passage number 614.
 SCHULTZ & MS. TEETERS. That's what he said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 615.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought he said 19 to 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a recounting of what the speaker thought they heard. There is no indication of contention or disagreement.


Passage number 616.
MR. SCHULTZ. No, he said it would not be consistent with 19to 20 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a direct statement from Mr. Schultz and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 617.
MR. PARTEE. I don't think your numbers are terriblyinconsistent [with the staff's numbers], Tony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee says that he does not think Tony's numbers are terribly inconsistent with the staff's numbers, indicating agreement or a lack of disagreement.


Passage number 618.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's why I picked the 15 to 21 percent fundsrange for a borrowing [assumption] of $1-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz is simply stating his rationale for choosing a specific range for borrowing funds.


Passage number 619.
MR. RICE. And $2 billion would be consistent with what kindof funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a statement without any conflicting opinions or opposing views.


Passage number 620.
-69-7/6-7/81MR. AXILROD. Well, it had been running in the 18-1/2 to 20percent area, or more like 18-1/2 to 19-1/2 percent. That's adiscount rate structure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply provides information about the discount rate structure without offering any opposing viewpoints or conflicting information.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 621.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you still using a rough rule ofthumb, Steve, that a $100 million difference in borrowing represents1/2 of a point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. 

There is contention in the passage as the speaker, presumably addressing Steve, questions if they are still using an outdated method of estimating borrowing differences. The phrase "rough rule of thumb" suggests that the speaker believes this approach to be imprecise or inaccurate.


Passage number 622.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's very rough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 623.
MR. PARTEE. It's rough on amount and timing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. 

Explanation: The statement made by Mr. Partee is simply stating a fact or observation about something being rough on amount and timing. There is no indication of any conflicting views or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 624.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the funds market has been rathermixed up for some weeks now, really beginning around Memorial Day, Iguess, as Paul Meek suggested. It is mixed up partly because thestaff said weakness in M-1B should bring a pretty prompt easing and ithasn't happened, so they don't know where it should be. We havesentiment ranging from "B" to "C" with some emphasis on "C." I sharethe concern about just the publication effects of saying we want toaim for 8-1/2 percent over any period of time. I would not mind a bigrebound in July, if we could sneak it in there and get it over with.In fact, that would be the desirable result. But we're starting Julyfrom a very low base and I don't know what the chances are of gettinga very high growth rate in July, considering how low we're starting--if last week's figure is borne out when we get the final numbers. Anumber of people have mentioned M2. I would be strongly inclined,whatever we say about M1, to stick something in the directive thatsays we don't really want to see M2 going outside its range. Thatprovides something of a fail-safe. Having done that, we swallow thepictorial effects of any of these things. So, we're someplace between"B" and "C." For the borrowing assumption, $1-1/2 billion seems tobe about where we are now; it's not too bad to start with. The realquestions are the ones that Lyle and others raised about what happensunder various contingencies. The most straightforward way to play it,I suppose--if we decide on an initial borrowing level of, let's say,$1-1/2 billion at the moment, which is lower than the staff says isneeded to restrain the money supply over the whole quarter--is to takeit symmetrically. If the money supply began rising faster than isprojected here, we would simply let the mechanical [process work]; wewouldn't change the nonborrowed reserve path but would let borrowingsrise. It depends upon what happens to M2, but if M2 is behavingitself, we would just let borrowings rise, which would mean a rathergradual rise in borrowings to a higher number. And we'd do thereverse if it's falling short, which would mean a rather gradual fallin borrowings. If it fell short, we'd bring the caveat on M2 intoplay. If M2 were rising very fast, that might trigger a change in thenonborrowed reserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a discussion of the funds market and potential strategies for managing borrowing levels.


Passage number 625.
MS. TEETERS. You mean to lower it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states an inquiry made by Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 626.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if M2 was high, we'd lower the path.Or if it was low, we'd raise the path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply outlines a conditional statement that depends on the value of M2. Depending on whether M2 is high or low, a decision is made on whether to raise or lower the path.


Passage number 627.
MR. WALLICH. But why start with what seems to be anunrealistic relationship between borrowing and the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is a statement by Mr. Wallich, presenting a question or a topic for discussion. It does not express any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 628.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's unrealistic to you. What would yousuggest. I don't know. You didn't suggest anything, I guess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing uncertainty and seeking suggestions from others.


Passage number 629.
-70-7/6-7/81MR. SCHULTZ. He suggested something very high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "He suggested something very high" does not indicate any conflicting opinions or opposing views. It simply suggests that someone made a suggestion that was of a high nature or magnitude.


Passage number 630.
MR. WALLICH. I suggested a high funds rate, but I didn'tknow what the borrowing assumption was that would match it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is discussing his suggestion of a high funds rate and acknowledges that he does not have information about the borrowing assumption that would correspond to it. There is no conflicting opinion or disagreement mentioned in this statement.


Passage number 631.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have a borrowing number down foryou.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 632.
MR. WALLICH. I didn't put one down because I don't have therelationship in mind. But it seems to me that it should be closerperhaps to $2 billion than to $1.5 billion, or somewhere in the middlethere.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion, suggesting that the amount should be closer to $2 billion rather than $1.5 billion.


Passage number 633.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't been at $2 billion for a longtime, theoretically, and we've had a decline in the money supply. Wewere at or above $2 billion on the borrowings at the beginning of someweeks. But we haven't been aiming for a $2 billion number for a monthor more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a fact about the decline in the money supply and the borrowing amount, without any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 634.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We believe that there have been somehang-ups in the fed funds market recently and that if we stay at thisborrowing level we will see the fed funds rate get lower over a periodof time--I don't know how long--at the same borrowing level.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is stating a belief and a possible outcome, without any conflicting or contradictory views.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 635.
MR. CORRIGAN. A question to Paul Meek: Do the market peopleperceive that the 18 percent surcharge rate is a de facto [floor] onthe federal funds rate. It shouldn't be, but is that the perception.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Corrigan, is suggesting that the perception among market people is that the 18 percent surcharge rate is acting as a de facto floor on the federal funds rate, while also stating that it shouldn't be the case. This implies a disagreement or controversy regarding the perceived impact of the surcharge rate on the federal funds rate.


Passage number 636.
MR. MEEK. I don't think it's perceived that way. I havesome feeling that with that 18 percent rate it may be a little harderthan it otherwise would be for the rate to go much below 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement expressing a personal belief or opinion without any opposing views or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 637.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not provide any information or context that suggests contention or disagreement.


Passage number 638.
 If you're selling federal funds--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's true. It's harder togo below but I think the experience is that it will go below. It'sjust that the higher that rate is, the higher the funds rate will be.If we cited the target in terms of a quarterly average, itwouldn't look frightening because that's going to be low. Suppose weput that in the directive. Can you give us your evaluation of thepros and cons of citing the target that way, Mr. Axilrod.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It seems to be a person discussing their thoughts and opinions.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 639.
MR. AXILROD. If you put it in the directive along with thegrowth rate for June to September, I think it would have diminishedimportance. It would just call to the market's attention that this isnot such a high growth rate month-by-month. If you put it in withoutthe growth rates month-by-month, unless we understood what it is theCommittee intended for the growth rates month-by-month, there would besome difficulty in targeting. That is, if July came in very strong,the quarterly average would really depend on the projections forAugust and September. So, if that average were the sole target, wewould be back in the arena of simply making the money marketconditions depend to a great extent on how the staff happened to seethe projections, right or wrong, in the months and weeks ahead.Whereas if we had some idea of the implicit monthly targets that theCommittee preferred, then we would not be so dependent on projections.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is expressing his disagreement with a proposed directive. He argues that including the growth rates month-by-month would diminish their importance and make targeting more difficult. He suggests that having explicit monthly targets would be more preferable.


Passage number 640.
-71-7/6-7/81MR. PARTEE. I don't think we ought to operate on a quarterlyaverage, but it would be very reasonable to talk about 8 percent, orwhatever we have in mind, for June to September and to say that wouldmean a second-to-third quarter increase of about 2-3/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about operating on a quarterly average, but there is no opposing viewpoint or argument presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 641.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You raise some question in my mind aboutwhat kind of quarterly pattern you have in mind.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes.

Explanation: The passage suggests that the speaker has raised questions or doubts about the quarterly pattern mentioned by the other person. This implies contention or disagreement between the speaker and the other person's idea.


Passage number 642.
MR. AXILROD. What we normally would put down is a straightline. But this time, as you can see, we put a little more in July andslightly less in August and September simply because we expect thesocial security payment in the week of July 8th to add a couplebillion dollars in that week and 1 percentage point at an annual ratefor July as a whole.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement explaining the allocation of funds based on a specific event.


Passage number 643.
 That's probably excess perfectionism, but it--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be right if we were startingfrom a reasonably high level or a normal level. But we need anawfully high figure in that first week just to get any growth in July.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not express contention or disagreement. It is stating a condition and providing a reason for it.


Passage number 644.
MR. AXILROD. July 8th doesn't show an increase from July1st. If July 1st is at the low level, then we'll have a very low Julyprobably. And if the Committee adopts 8 percent for the quarter--wedidn't project a very high latter part of July--presumably an easingprocess would be needed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no explicit contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Axilrod, is simply discussing the potential outcomes based on the data presented.


Passage number 645.
MR. PARTEE. Right away I'd expect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a statement from Mr. Partee and does not indicate any conflicting opinions or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 646.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just don't know how this works outarithmetically. But I have some concern that if we don't have areally big increase in the week of July 8th, we are starting July solow that we'd have to drive the borrowing down to $700 million orsomething to have any chance of getting there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It expresses uncertainty and concern about the possibility of meeting a certain goal, but there is no conflict between different parties or ideas.


Passage number 647.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Unfortunately, the passage "MS. TEETERS" is not provided. Please provide the passage in order to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 648.
 Well, isn't that what you're--MR. AXILROD. We're very dependent on tomorrow's figures.There are such big [differences] implied.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely stating their dependence on tomorrow's figures and acknowledging the potential differences that could be implied in those figures.


Passage number 649.
MS. TEETERS. If we don't get that rebound in the week of the8th, then we're off the bottom of the chart, aren't we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement presenting a conditional scenario.


Passage number 650.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd like to get a rebound. I just don'tknow what we'll do if we don't get it. I devoutly hope that if infact we have a big decline this week, we'll get an offsetting increaseor a little more next week.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses a desire to achieve a rebound and hope for a potential increase in the following week if there is a decline.


Passage number 651.
MR. BLACK. That touches upon the reason I want to lower thetop of that range somewhat because I foresee that we would have tohave very high rates. And if the range had been dropped, it would bemore acceptable to the market.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement by Mr. Black regarding his desire to lower the top range and his reasoning behind it. There is no opposing viewpoint or conflicting argument presented.


Passage number 652.
MR. PARTEE. This is the old principle of aggregates on thehigh side and interest rates on the low side.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a principle relating to aggregates and interest rates.


Passage number 653.
MR. BLACK. If we don't lower the top bound, we could have12.4 percent growth between June and December on that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black is stating a possibility or potential outcome without opposing or conflicting views.


Passage number 654.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll return to that question.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 655.
-72-7/6-7/81MR. BLACK. Well, I would just like the market to know wearen't even thinking about that. And if we hit the middle of therange, we could have, as I suggested, 10.4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating a potential percentage without any conflicting opinions being presented.


Passage number 656.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can return to that argument at thenext round.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is simply stating that the argument can be revisited in the next round.


Passage number 657.
MR. BLACK. I was trying to help you with your problem; I wassaying that it doesn't look as bad against that background as it doesif we don't lower that top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Black is simply offering his opinion on how the problem appears in a certain context.


Passage number 658.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We could put a footnote in that we'renot seriously thinking of getting to the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. The statement is expressing that they are not seriously considering reaching the top and suggests adding a footnote to clarify this intention.


Passage number 659.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In some sense the specifications here areeasy enough. It's just how we should act if we go off course that isa little more difficult. The specification seems to me to besomething like--well, just to use a round number--7 percent. We maywant to have a small range and say provided that M2 is within itsrange. I don't see why borrowing somewhere around the present levelof $1-1/2 billion isn't reasonable.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply expressing their opinion and suggesting a course of action.


Passage number 660.
MR. RICE. But is it consistent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 661.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The staff says no. Or, what is coming outof the machine says that we have to have a higher borrowing level.But I don't know. A lot of skepticism was expressed around the tableabout whether in fact we do need a borrowing number that high.Balancing my general feeling about where the major risks lie, giventhe shortfalls that we have had, I don't want to run an undue risk ofa further shortfall. Borrowing of $2 billion would produce, at leastI would think, a 20 percent federal funds rate around this time. I'mnot sure we want to be that tight; and 20 percent is what the staffsays that $2 billion would produce.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing skepticism and uncertainty about the necessity of a higher borrowing level, despite what the staff or the machine is indicating. They are also hesitant about the potential risks and the potential impact on the federal funds rate.


Passage number 662.
MR. RICE. I thought $2 billion would give us 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear evidence of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is merely stating their thought and opinion without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 663.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 18 percent on the funds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

This statement does not involve any contention or disagreement. It simply states a specific percentage (18 percent) for the funds rate, without any opposing view or conflicting information.


Passage number 664.
MR. RICE. That's what Steve just said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 665.
MR. AXILROD. With alternative B, we say the funds rate wouldbe in the 19 to 20 percent area. That's in paragraph 22.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states the projected funds rate under alternative B.


Passage number 666.
MR. RICE. But in answer to my question just a minute ago, Ithought you said 18 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 667.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two billion dollars is literally higherthan what we have had for a month.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It presents a straightforward comparison between two amounts of money.


Passage number 668.
MR. AXILROD. Well, [$2.1] billion was the average level ofborrowing last month. It only fluctuated a bit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states a fact without any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 669.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd have to have one week of $2.3 billionor something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement about a hypothetical scenario.


Passage number 670.
MR. AXILROD. In June, borrowing ran $2.0, $2.2, $1.9 and$2.3 billion; then it dropped in the first week of July to $1.7-73-7/6-7/81billion and it's running $1.9 billion thus far this week with someexpectation of a drop-off.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply presents a series of borrowing figures without any conflicting views or opposing opinions.


Passage number 671.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been higher than I thought it was.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement in the passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. 


Passage number 672.
MR. SCHULTZ. At any rate, $1.5 billion should certainly beconsistent with a lower funds rate than we're experiencing right now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement suggests that a lower funds rate would be consistent with $1.5 billion.


Passage number 673.
MR. AXILROD. That's what we think, if we get it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states their opinion.


Passage number 674.
MR. SCHULTZ. Theoretically, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any indication of contention or disagreement. It only states a theoretical agreement.


Passage number 675.
MR. AXILROD. Theoretically, a lot lower on borrowing and thefunds rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 676.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can be a little higher on theborrowing, but I think that's taking a chance of the money--. Thesedifferences are so small. Let me try 7 percent and $1-1/2 billion.SPEAKER(.). What was the second number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting a higher borrowing amount but acknowledges that it may be risky. They also mention that the differences in the numbers are small.


Passage number 677.
MR. SCHULTZ. Borrowings of $1-1/2 billion.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is a simple statement of fact without any conflicting viewpoints or opposing arguments.


Passage number 678.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And 15 to 21 percent. I'd be happy with15 to 20 percent, but 15 to 21 percent seems to catch more people.What else do we need to know. And the caveat on M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage is simply stating a range of percentages (15 to 21 percent) and expressing preference towards the lower end (15 to 20 percent). There is no indication of disagreement or contention. The phrase "What else do we need to know" suggests seeking additional information, but it does not imply any disagreement. The mention of a caveat on M2 is unrelated to the given statement, so it does not contribute to any contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 679.
MR. CORRIGAN. Does that mean that M2 is within its range forthe year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The passage includes a question about whether M2 is within its range for the year, indicating that there is uncertainty or differing opinions on the matter.


Passage number 680.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Right now it's at the upper end ofthe range, so it means M2 growing at 9 percent or a bit less.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is stating a fact about M2 growing at 9 percent or slightly less. There is no contention or disagreement present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 681.
MR. CORRIGAN. The implication is that it has some relevancefor whether or when we change the nonborrowed path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in this passage. The phrase "The implication is" suggests that the speaker is presenting a different interpretation or understanding of the situation than someone else. This implies a disagreement or contention between differing viewpoints.


Passage number 682.
MR. ROOS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The provided passage does not contain enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 683.
 If we have the top of the fed funds range at 21percent and it reaches 21 percent and the Desk starts injectingreserves, won't that be as--MR. SCHULTZ. That's not the way it works, though.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It seems to be a clarification or correction of information.


Passage number 684.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not what they will do. We willjust have a consultation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "That's not what they will do" indicates a contrasting statement without necessarily implying disagreement. The subsequent statement "We will just have a consultation" further supports the absence of contention, as it suggests a potential course of action without any confrontation or argument.


Passage number 685.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That caveat on M2 may be very easilytriggered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating that the caveat on M2 can be easily triggered.


Passage number 686.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're right on the margin of it now.There's no question about that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 687.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: I'm sorry, but more context is needed to accurately determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage. Could you please provide the specific passage you would like me to analyze?


Passage number 688.
 Especially with the wild card [certificate]coming at the end of this month, we could almost--VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage provides information about the wild card certificate without indicating any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 689.
 I don't object to it, but I don'twant to underestimate the importance of that--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's very important.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker first states that they do not object to something, indicating their agreement or acceptance. Then, they go on to express their belief that the topic being discussed is very important. Both statements express agreement rather than disagreement.


Passage number 690.
-74-7/6-7/81VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though M2 grew only 5 percent ineach of the last two months, that's because M-1B was negative.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage states a fact regarding the growth of M2 and M-1B in the last two months, without any opposing viewpoints or disagreements.


Passage number 691.
Therefore, if we get M-1B--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To have a very high M-1B figure and haveM2 within the 9 percent would be very unlikely.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a logical conclusion based on the information provided. There is no opposing viewpoint or contradictory information presented.


Passage number 692.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, if the caveat is triggered--andit is very likely--we may end up seriously falling short of the 7percent objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement of possibility and likelihood.


Passage number 693.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What has the growth in the nontransactionspart of M2 been in the last couple of months at an annual rate. Doyou have such a number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage simply poses a question about the growth in the nontransactionspart of M2 and asks if there is a corresponding number available.


Passage number 694.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, the question is whether I can find it. Itwas running 7-1/4 percent in May and 10 percent in June; both of thoseare a lot lower than it ran in the previous months.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating different interest rates for different months.


Passage number 695.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the arithmetic is, but Ipresume the nontransactions part of M2 could run at approximately 10percent with this kind of M1 figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker simply states that they don't know the exact arithmetic but presume that the nontransactions part of M2 could be around 10 percent based on the given M1 figure.


Passage number 696.
MR. AXILROD. That's right; it's about 75 percent of M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as it states a factual statement without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting perspectives. The speaker simply states that 75 percent of M2 is what they are referring to.


Passage number 697.
MS. TEETERS. What about Chuck's point about the lifting ofthe Regulation Q ceilings on the longer-term CDs. We could get asurge in some of those.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 698.
MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, but we're likely to have some offsettingweakness in the money market funds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It simply states that there is likely to be some offsetting weakness in the money market funds.


Passage number 699.
MR. PARTEE. Or it could come out of the securities markets.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply presenting an alternative possibility.


Passage number 700.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage since only the name "VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON" is mentioned.


Passage number 701.
 What we need is an M-2A and M-2B--atransactions component, shift adjusted--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shift-adjusted M2 numbers.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a straightforward statement that suggests a need for an M-2A and M-2B transactions component, shift adjusted, as well as shift-adjusted M2 numbers.


Passage number 702.
MR. BALLES. Updated seasonally.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context in the passage to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 703.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't intend this to be quite asprecise as you're talking about. We can't judge M2 that closely. Thefigures come in a little late. But if M2 is running 9-1/2 percent--and we won't even know it [currently]--that's within our range oftolerance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they do not have precise information about M2 and its current rate, but if it is within a certain range of tolerance (9-1/2 percent), it would be acceptable.


Passage number 704.
 If it's clearly running high, it's very important--MS. TEETERS. But shouldn't we take a look as to why it'srunning high.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing the importance of understanding why something is running high.


Passage number 705.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Inevitably we have to [unintelligible].Well, let me try this. Have I mentioned all the variables: 7percent, $1.5 billion, 15 to 21 percent, and a strong M2 caveat.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It seems to be introducing different variables or factors without expressing any conflicting viewpoints or opinions.


Passage number 706.
MR. PARTEE. With any kind of target number for the period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement by Mr. Partee about having a target number for a specific period.


Passage number 707.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7 percent for M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 708.
-75-7/6-7/81MR. PARTEE. For M2 I mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. It presents a mathematical expression or equation.


Passage number 709.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For M2 I think it would be rather explicitthat we're talking about 9 percent or less. If it got over 9 percent,we'd be concerned about it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their own opinion and expressing concern if the value exceeds 9 percent.


Passage number 710.
MR. PARTEE. Restrain it if it's over 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is suggesting to restrain something if it exceeds 9 percent, but there is no one else expressing any disagreement or conflict.


Passage number 711.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean 9 percent for the nextintermeeting period.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is presented as a straightforward question or suggestion, without any opposing viewpoints or conflicting ideas.


Passage number 712.
MR. FORD. It's over 9 percent now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This is a statement of fact. There is no contention or disagreement present in this passage. It is simply stating that the percentage is over 9 percent.


Passage number 713.
MR. PARTEE. No, he means for the period ahead.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In this passage, there is no contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply clarifying the meaning of something.


Passage number 714.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We [tried to draft] some wording. We cancome back to the precise wording, but let me see what Steve has: "Inthe short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregatesconsistent with growth in M-1B from June to September at an annualrate of 7 percent"--or whatever number we put in--"after allowance...,provided such growth is consistent with M2 growth remaining around theupper limit of or moving within its range for the year." Everybodyknows that's 9 percent, I presume.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that they drafted some wording and are open to making adjustments. They also make a statement about a certain percentage that everyone supposedly knows, indicating a shared understanding rather than disagreement.


Passage number 715.
MR. WALLICH. That's really between "A" and "B," when most ofthe discussion has been for between "B" and "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention between "A" and "B." It states that most of the discussion has been between "B" and "C".


Passage number 716.
"MS. TEETERS. It's a combination of all three of them. M-1Bis between "B" and "C;" M2 is between "A" and "B;" the borrowings areat "A;" and the interest rates are between "A" and "B." You guysscrambled the whole mess.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating their understanding of the situation and expressing frustration with how it has been handled.


Passage number 717.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No

Explanation: The passage only mentions Mr. Partee without providing any information about his views, actions, or any potential conflicts.


Passage number 718.
 We could conceivably have a very weak M-1B thatwe would encourage getting weaker because our M2 constraint is at theupper end--MR. WALLICH. I think M2 is the more critical variable now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and an additional perspective on the topic.


Passage number 719.
MR. PARTEE. You don't mind minus numbers in M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement evident in the passage. It is a simple statement/question regarding the inclusion of negative numbers.


Passage number 720.
MR. WALLICH. I mind very strong numbers in M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply states that they strongly consider certain numbers in M-1B.


Passage number 721.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think any of these relationshipsis all that precise but it's true that, according to the staff'sestimate, if we got 7 percent, the 9 percent M2 constraint wouldn'toperate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion or thought about the relationships and constraints, without opposing or conflicting with any other point of view.


Passage number 722.
MR. AXILROD. We have a relatively restrained growth in thenontransactions component, not very different from last month. It's alittle lower actually in most cases than the June growth. It's prettyrestrained.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply states the fact that there is a relatively restrained growth in the nontransactions component, with a slight decrease compared to the previous month.


Passage number 723.
MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, what does this mean for M-1B. Howweak would M-1B have to get--how far below 7 percent would it have tobe--before it would trigger something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a question seeking clarification.


Passage number 724.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the answer is: I don't know. Butif you accept the staff's analysis here, they would say there's no-76-7/6-7/81problem. Their estimate is that if we get 7 percent on M-1B, M2 willcome in at 8-1/4 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not display any contention or disagreement. The speaker is presenting information and stating that they do not know the answer to the question. They mention the staff's analysis and their estimate without expressing disagreement or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 725.
 It has met this--MR. BOEHNE. I could conceive of a situation where we couldend up with M2 approaching the 9 percent upper limit and the bottomfalls out of M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a hypothetical situation regarding the potential increase of M2 and the possible decrease of M-1B.


Passage number 726.
MR. WALLICH. I think that would be more a reflection on M-1Bthan on the economy.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the situation, stating that a certain outcome would be more reflective of M-1B than the economy.


Passage number 727.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's precisely what this would say. Wewouldn't worry very much about that shortfall in M-1B if M2 is risingrapidly. That's what we would be saying.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is expressing agreement or alignment of thoughts.


Passage number 728.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I'd have some problems with another monthor two of negative growth in M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Boehne expresses his concerns about another month or two of negative growth in M-1B, indicating personal doubts or potential issues.


Passage number 729.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with the negative growth in M-1Bwe've had an M2 figure of 5 percent or so. So, we're not likely toget a combination of 9 percent on M2 and a negative M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply providing information about the negative growth in M-1B and the 5 percent figure for M2, without any conflicting viewpoints or arguments being presented.


Passage number 730.
MR. BLACK. If we get 7 percent, it's still coming in belowthe lower limit of our long-term ranges. It takes 7.4 percent to hitthe lower limit. I don't know whether we really want to set it thatlow just from the standpoint of appearance because it's deliberatelysaying we're not going to hit our target.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Black discussing the possibility of setting the percentage at 7.4% to hit the lower limit. There is no indication of opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 731.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so concerned about thequestion of what the appearance is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not involve any disagreement or contention. It is a statement expressing the speaker's lack of concern about the question of appearance.


Passage number 732.
MR. BLACK. Well, I prefer Fred's suggestion. Or Willis'suggestion could take care of that aspect, if that's what we want todo with it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating their preference for either Fred's suggestion or Willis's suggestion as possible solutions to a certain aspect.


Passage number 733.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, the proposal is not quite as constrainingas I would like. I still prefer a straight alternative C, with alittle lower figure on everything; but you're halfway between "B" and"C" on both M-1B and M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate contention or disagreement. Mr. Schultz expresses his preference for a different alternative but acknowledges that the proposal is halfway between options B and C.


Passage number 734.
MR. PARTEE. It's not halfway; it's closer to "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It appears to be a simple statement of fact or opinion from Mr. Partee.


Passage number 735.
"MR. SCHULTZ. Well, okay, you're right; it's closer to "C.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

In the passage, Mr. Schultz agrees with the statement made by the other person by saying "Well, okay, you're right." This indicates that there is no contention or disagreement between them.


Passage number 736.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm happy to go all the way to "C," ifthat's where you people want to go.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not show any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing their willingness to go along with the desires or decisions of others.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 737.
MR. GRAMLEY. I don't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The use of the word "don't" indicates a contradicting opinion or alternative stance to something previously mentioned.


Passage number 738.
MS. TEETERS. That's too stringent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 739.
MR. PARTEE. I can't even [unintelligible] accept what we'vegot.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their inability to accept something, but there is no opposition or clash of opinions present.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 740.
MR. BOEHNE. Is there some way to build in that a littleweight would be given to weakness in M-1B. It's all loaded the otherway.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Boehne, suggests that there should be some consideration given to weakness in M-1B, while also indicating that the current approach is biased or "loaded" in the opposite direction.


Passage number 741.
-77-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how much you want to buildin. But to the extent you want to build some in, you have the staff'sestimate, for what it is worth--and the staff's estimate is always thebest technical analysis that can be provided--that M2 is going to comein below this constraint if M1 is really weak.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that if M1 is weak, the staff's estimate suggests that M2 will come in below a certain constraint.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 742.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, as I recall, for June we started out withan estimate of plus 5 percent and ended up in the negative at minus 10percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. This passage indicates a disagreement or contention. The speaker initially estimated a positive growth rate of 5 percent for June but ended up with a negative growth rate of -10 percent. The difference between the estimate and the actual outcome suggests a disagreement or unexpected change.


Passage number 743.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. "That's right" is a statement of agreement or affirmation.


Passage number 744.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, did I understand your explanationright that for whatever number the Committee chooses for M-1B, if itruns weak and required reserves go down and M2 stays at 9 percent orsomething like that, the borrowing would tend to come down and we'dadhere to the nonborrowed path and vice versa if it went up. I wasnot sure exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is a straightforward question seeking clarification on a previous explanation. There is no contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 745.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure exactly either, because wehave 19 different permutations and combinations. I didn't go quite asfar as what you said. I said that if M1 were coming in weak, we wouldjust let the natural result come in on the borrowings. I haven'tfaced explicitly what we would do if M1 is in fact [weak] and M2 isabove 9 percent. I suppose at some point if M2 got strong enough--there's some shady area there--we would have to reduce the nonborrowedreserve path.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is some contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges that they are not sure about the exact course of action, indicating some level of uncertainty or disagreement. Additionally, the phrase "there's some shady area there" suggests that there might be disagreement or conflicting opinions about the situation.


Passage number 746.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At that point, I think we'd want aconsultation, if we really had a head-on collision between too weak anM-1B and too strong an M2, because of the caveat you're building in.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing a hypothetical situation and the need for a consultation in that case.


Passage number 747.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage only mentions Chairman Volcker without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 748.
 Obviously, there are lots of circumstancesin which we'd have enough of a conflict that we would have aconsultation, but the clear implication is that we would let M-1B getweaker than 7 percent if M2 is running strong in the short runpending--MR. GRAMLEY. One thing that I think would [address] theconcerns of a number of people is [to agree that it] would be a signalfor a consultation also if we were to see some significant weakness inincoming economic statistics and at the same time a weak M-1B number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This can be seen in the phrase "but the clear implication is that we would let M-1B get weaker than 7 percent if M2 is running strong in the short run pending." The clear implication mentioned suggests a difference in opinion or potential conflict between the parties involved.


Passage number 749.
MR. WALLICH. Let me give you an argument that's against myown case. If interest rates should come down, M2 probably wouldaccelerate because money market funds would gain relative to marketinvestments. That gives me some pause in the mechanics of theconstraint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It presents a counterargument or a potential opposing point of view, but does not express disagreement with it.


Passage number 750.
MR. PARTEE. You know, M2 growth in the second quarter was10.8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement provided by Mr. Partee is a straightforward fact without any conflicting opinions or disagreements.


Passage number 751.
MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough information provided to determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 752.
 But if the economy weakened, even thoughinterest rates were coming down, in fact there would be some forcepushing M2 up, but at the same time M-1B is likely to be---78-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can't handle every possible contingencyhere. The ultimate answer has to be we would have a consultation ifthings go askew enough.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "We can't handle every possible contingency here" suggests that there is a disagreement or uncertainty about how to handle certain situations. Additionally, the phrase "The ultimate answer has to be we would have a consultation if things go askew enough" indicates that there is a disagreement or difference in opinion on what the ultimate solution should be.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 753.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, would you want toconsider that we would have an understanding on this M2 caveat but notinclude it in the published directive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "but not include it in the published directive" suggests that there is a disagreement about whether or not to include the M2 caveat in the directive that will be published.


Passage number 754.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd like to get it in the publisheddirective, frankly, because I am hesitant. Whatever the M1 figure,the arithmetic of what we publish is going to look high, and I'd liketo get something in the directive that says we're not going wild inincreasing the monetary aggregates. And the way to do that is to getM2 in there.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing a personal preference and hesitation about the M1 figure and wants to ensure that the published directive indicates that they are not increasing monetary aggregates excessively. The speaker suggests including M2 in the directive as a way to manage this.


Passage number 755.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think your earlier suggestion of perhapsputting something about the quarterly average in the operatingparagraph would be very useful.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Gramley is expressing agreement and support for the earlier suggestion mentioned.


Passage number 756.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would that create a precedent, Lyle,for later quarters when we don't want to put in a quarterly figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking Lyle if the action being discussed would establish a precedent for future quarters.


Passage number 757.
MR. ALTMANN. We have done it before.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a simple assertion without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 758.
MR. CORRIGAN. We could say that just in terms of settingthis objective, the Committee noted that the quarterly average wassuch and such. That would clearly divorce it from any operationalsignificance.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any disagreement or contention. It is a statement about a suggestion made by Mr. Corrigan to divorce a certain objective from any operational significance.


Passage number 759.
MR. WALLICH.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: There is not enough context provided to determine whether there is contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 760.
 Will you qualify your M2 constraint in thesense that unless there are special factors causing it to rise--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're getting into an area where there aremore things than we can write into the directive. If there arespecial factors causing it to rise, we better consult. But what we'retalking about here is a relatively brief statement that eventually isgoing to come out in the public and we're talking about the best wayof expressing it. We can be straightforward and just say we'relooking for M2 growth of around 8 to 8-1/2 percent; that's what thisdraft says.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing the best way to express a statement about M2 growth, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict between different perspectives or individuals.


Passage number 761.
MR. WALLICH. And let it overshoot if it does. M2 at 8percent would suit me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, states their preference for M2 at 8 percent, indicating their agreement with the current situation or proposed plan.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 762.
MR. SCHULTZ. That's what I argued for before, Henry; I ranthat up the flag pole and there were some who didn't salute.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker mentions that there were some who didn't salute, indicating disagreement or lack of support for their ideas.


Passage number 763.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the more traditional way of doingit--just to say we want x percent on M-1B and 8 or 8-1/2 percent onM2. You think the staff is wrong, Mr. Solomon.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating the more traditional way of doing something and then expressing uncertainty or doubt about the staff's perspective.


Passage number 764.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. Given what we've been saying,I don't see how we're only going to get one point more growth in M2than in M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their agreement with the previous statements and presenting their perspective on the issue.


Passage number 765.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I cannot resolve that technicalargument; I don't know what the answer is. I suggested the way Isuggested because I think we probably want to be in a posture of not-79-7/6-7/81 -80-easily looking at overshoots of the broader aggregates. And that'swhat this attempts to express.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker acknowledges their lack of knowledge and suggests a course of action based on their understanding.


Passage number 766.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I prefer your caveat to spelling out8 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 767.
MR. GRAMLEY. I much prefer language that would suggestsomething below the upper end of the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is simply expressing a personal preference for language that suggests something below the upper end of the range.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 768.
MR. FORD. Paul, you read us just a small part of thesuggested language; I take it there's a lot more on both sides of itthat doesn't leave the impression, as that one paragraph does, thatthis whole decision--even though it's the most conservative choice--sounds expansive.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests contention or disagreement between the speaker (Mr. Ford) and someone referred to as "Paul". Mr. Ford implies that there is additional language that contradicts the impression given by one paragraph, which suggests there is disagreement or contention over the interpretation of the decision.


Passage number 769.
 You have 7 percent--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think there's enough problem inthis language that we ought to fiddle around with language duringlunch and get wording that we're satisfied with. But the substance ofit is what I'm suggesting. Have we had enough discussion. It's 1:00p.m. and I don't see anything better at the moment than the 7 percent,$1.5 billion, 15 to 21 percent and the caveat of M2 staying within therange basically.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is proposing a specific percentage and amount, and is asking if there has been enough discussion on the topic.


Passage number 770.
MR. FORD. It's a helluva formula.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their admiration for the formula.


Passage number 771.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many find that acceptable.SPEAKER(.). Voting members only, right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply asking a question and clarifying who the question is directed towards.


Passage number 772.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess a lot of people find itacceptable. If nobody has anything better to suggest, let's have avote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 773.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesMr. Boehne YesMr. Boykin YesMr. Corrigan YesMr. Gramley YesMr. Keehn YesMr. Partee NoMr. Rice YesMr. Schultz YesMs. Teeters YesMr.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: All of the individuals listed are expressing agreement or assent by saying "yes" except for Mr. Partee, who says "no." Therefore, there is disagreement or contention among the individuals in the passage.


Passage number 774.
 Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have sandwiches out here. Let's take alittle time to begin eating the sandwiches and return to the longer-run discussion in the light of the shorter-run decision.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting taking a break to eat the sandwiches and then continuing the discussion later.


Passage number 775.
[Lunch recess]CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we more or less solved the problemof where we are for the rest of this year--that's implicit in thedecision we just made--which is around the lower end of the range forM1 and around the upper end of the ranges for M2 and M3 and [credit].I'm not sure that needs a lot more discussion. What we have to decide7/6-7/81is whether to change any of the ranges for this year and what to dofor next year. On next year, there isn't a tremendous amount ofdifference in the alternatives the staff has given us. I share thepredilection cited by a good many people that we probably shouldn'traise M2 and M3, which means that M2 would be lower than cited in anyof these alternatives by a full 1/2 percentage point if we neitherlowered them nor raised them. My own feeling about M-1B, though I'mnot even sure at this stage whether we will call it M-1B next year--I'm assuming we can be rather general and just call it M1, but it'snot adjusted--is that we are left with an unknowable about what thenontransactions component of M1 means conceptually. One can argue, asI guess Steve argued--I'm not sure he quantified it--that having thatcomponent in there and the fact that it is household transactionsaccounts at best, means that it has a higher growth trend than theothers and that, all things equal, [its growth] ought to be what--1/2to 1 percent higher on this combined basis.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is presenting their own thoughts and opinions on the topic, but there is no indication of any opposing viewpoints or disagreement with others.


Passage number 776.
MR. AXILROD. Well, our calculations are a little lower thanthat. It depends on the ratio one expects at the end. Maybe 0.3 to0.5 percent is a little too specific, but it's 1/2 point or lower.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply stating that their calculations are slightly lower than the specific ratio mentioned, but they do not provide any contrasting information or arguments.


Passage number 777.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I also worry a bit about the opposite ofthat. We have a lot of nontransactions [balances] in the initialadjustment of M-1B, but when people get [funds] in there and lookaround at all these attractive rates in the market, they may take itout over time, which artificially depresses that aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any clear contention or disagreement. It is expressing the author's worry and speculation about a potential situation.


Passage number 778.
MR. GRAMLEY. May I just ask what the logic of this is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple question asking for clarification.


Passage number 779.
 Isthis just an empirical result or is it an argument that the incomeelasticity of demand for household deposits--MR. AXILROD. It's essentially that. It's higher than thedemand for other transactions deposits in M-1B. And with theincreased weight of the household balances in M-1B, this is an effortto see, for any given growth rate in M-1B prior to the increasedweight, what this would mean. So, 5 percent might mean 5.3 percent tostart with but, of course, we would reduce it 1/2 point thereafter.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is providing an explanation for the empirical result that has been observed.


Passage number 780.
But's that's purely mechanical; the increased savings deposits may becompensating balances for all I know and not really--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The burden of my comment is not that weknow any of these things empirically or logically. The burden is that[we have] all these uncertainties. I'm basically agreeing with FrankMorris; I'm going a long distance [in that direction] but I don'tthink we can abandon M1 because people would question our good faithif we abandon M1 at this point, given all the emphasis on it. I thinkwe have to end up giving them a target for M1. But I don't see why wecan't make a radical change and make it a 3-point range instead of2-1/2 points and just tell them there are all these uncertainties inboth directions. So what I would be inclined to do--I don't knowwhether to call it alternative III or not--is to take that 2-1/2 to5-1/2 percent range [under alternative III], which gives us areduction of 1 percentage point on the lower end of the range and 1/2percentage point on the upper end of the range from where we now are,and leave the others unchanged tentatively.SPEAKER(.). We're back on what page.-81-7/6-7/81SPEAKER(.). 14.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is discussing their agreement with Frank Morris and proposing a change in the target range for M1.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 781.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's about what a lot of people aresuggesting, but I would cast my vote on widening the M1 range a bit.You might want to say a word about M3, Steve. You told me you havethe feeling that it may be a little high here or that it could becomfortably lowered.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting widening the M1 range, while Steve has a different opinion and thinks M3 could be lowered.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 782.
 I don't know whether we want to do that or not,given the--MR. AXILROD. Well, just to be clear on these ranges, we hadcentered them in alternatives I, II, and III on our projections of themidpoints [of the associated M1 ranges]. The alternative III range,therefore, has a midpoint of 8 percent [for M3 and for alternative Iit's] 8-1/2 percent. And with the Committee willing to say thatgrowth in the broader aggregates could be in the upper ends of theranges, it would not be too difficult to lower the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent range to 6 to 9 percent because we're not projecting growthabove that [upper limit]; our midpoint is not above or even very nearthat 9 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker is suggesting that the range be lowered to 6 to 9 percent, while the initial statement is expressing uncertainty about whether or not to do something. Therefore, there is contention between the two statements.


Passage number 783.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For both M2 and M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Not applicable.


Passage number 784.
MR. AXILROD. Well, particularly for M3. If you lowered theM2 range to 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent, the top of that range is reallyroughly the "midpoint." It's not a case where the top of that rangewould be uncomfortably near the midpoint we're actually projecting.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is simply stating a fact about the range of M2. There is no contention or disagreement present.


Passage number 785.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just be clear. Your analysis saysM2 would grow faster than M3.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage simply states the speaker's opinion or analysis without presenting any contrasting viewpoints or arguments.


Passage number 786.
MR. AXILROD. No, they're growing about the same. But ifgrowth is about the same next year, I would say that if you can standthe 6 to 9 percent range for M2, you can also stand the 6 to 9 percentrange for M3. But for M3 that would be 1/2 point lower than the rangeyou now have.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Axilrod is simply discussing the growth rates and making a comparison.


Passage number 787.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. Well, that's an alternative thatwe could consider then. It gets us another reduction in one of theseranges.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply acknowledging an alternative option and mentioning its potential benefit, which suggests a collaborative tone rather than a disagreement.


Passage number 788.
MR. PARTEE. Why wouldn't we hold off making that change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply asking a question about delaying a change, but does not express any opposition or disagreement.


Passage number 789.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: not find a passage to analyze, as there is no passage provided in the question.


Passage number 790.
MR. PARTEE. We could do that in January, if it still seemedto be relevant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee suggests the possibility of doing something in January if it remains relevant, but there is no opposition or disagreement expressed.


Passage number 791.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think you're right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing agreement with the other person's statement.


Passage number 792.
 We have tokeep--MR. PARTEE. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply agrees with the statement made by someone else.


Passage number 793.
MS. TEETERS. Why announce any reduction now. By Januarywe'll have a much better idea of which way we're going.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. It simply expresses a question and suggests that it may be better to wait until January for more information before making an announcement about reductions.


Passage number 794.
MR. PARTEE. That's what I said.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage simply states that Mr. Partee said something without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 795.
-82-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only reduction that this would involveat this point is M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a mathematical equation with no room for interpretation or disagreement.


Passage number 796.
MS. TEETERS. I don't think we even need to reduce the rangefor M-1B at this point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any indication of contention or disagreement. It appears to be a statement expressing the opinion of Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 797.
MR. WALLICH. If we don't, aren't we saying that we now thinkwe're not going to reduce it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is posing a question and expressing a possibility, without stating any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 798.
MR. PARTEE.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Without the specific passage, it is not possible to determine whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the relevant passage so that I can assist you further.


Passage number 799.
 Because we'll have it so low this year--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me restate that. I said M-1B; what Istated [earlier] is that we are just calling it M1. It will beconceptually the same as the present M-1B, but it would be anunadjusted number.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply clarifies a change in terminology without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 800.
MS. TEETERS. Then it would be 3-1/2 to 6 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage is providing information about the percentage range, but there is no contention or disagreement being expressed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 801.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm saying 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent but3-1/2 to 6 percent is the present range. Well I don't know if it is;it's 3-1/2 to 6 percent or 6 to 8-1/2 percent, depending upon whichway you look at it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The speaker initially states that the range is 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, while later suggesting that it could also be 3-1/2 to 6 percent or even 6 to 8-1/2 percent. This disagreement is evident in the contradictory statements made regarding the range.


Passage number 802.
MR. ROOS. How would that relate to our present range, whichis 3-1/2 to 6 percent. Is that unadjusted or adjusted or--.MESSRS. PARTEE and SCHULTZ. That's adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any disagreement or contention. Mr. Roos is simply seeking clarification and asks a question, to which Messrs. Partee and Schultz provide a direct response.


Passage number 803.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the argument is purely intellectualbecause I don't think we have any empirical evidence. If you took theAxilrod analysis, you would say that the effective range is reduced byanother 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point because of this growth factor thathe builds into the total. If you gave weight to my suspicion thatthat wouldn't be true, it might even be the opposite. But who knows.My suspicion is that people have excess money in M-1B now, unadjusted,that might be withdrawn.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is primarily expressing a personal opinion and uncertainty.


Passage number 804.
MS. TEETERS. Is Steve saying, on purely technical groundsbecause of the technical factors he's referring to, that if we wantedno change we'd add 1/2 percentage point to the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is seeking clarification from Steve on his statement.


Passage number 805.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: Without providing the passage in question, it is not possible to determine with certainty whether there is contention or disagreement. Please provide the passage for further analysis.


Passage number 806.
MR. AXILROD. Conceivably, if you wanted to make someallowance for the fact that household deposit balances may have ahigher income elasticity than balances of nonhouseholds.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It is stating a hypothetical possibility without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 807.
MR. GRAMLEY. This would mean you are moving the midpoint ofthe range down by roughly 1 percentage point and possibly more.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any evidence of contention or disagreement. It simply presents information about moving the midpoint of the range down by approximately 1 percentage point, without contradicting any previous statements or introducing conflicting arguments.


Passage number 808.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It means moving it 1/2 percentage pointmore than you otherwise would.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The statement is a straightforward explanation without any contention or disagreement.


Passage number 809.
MR. GRAMLEY. And the movement down from the present figureis just 3/4 of a percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage is a simple statement of a fact without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 810.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In terms of the midpoint, that's correct.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement "In terms of the midpoint, that's correct" implies agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 811.
-83-7/6-7/81MR. PARTEE. On an unadjusted basis wouldn't 3 to 6 percentbe sufficient.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply a statement or question discussing the sufficiency of 3 to 6 percent on an unadjusted basis.


Passage number 812.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would be much more comfortable with 3 to 6percent. I think we're building trouble for ourselves. You're right,Mr. Chairman. We'll probably not [unintelligible] today when therelation between money growth and GNP is going to revert to somethingmore nearly normal, given the reduction of inflation. But that isn'tgoing to happen all at once; it's going to happen progressively. Ifthe rate of inflation comes down and nominal interest rates fall andwe keep real interest rates where they are, the target next year--eventhe same target--will be more binding in terms of its meaning foreconomic activity than it was this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Gramley agrees with the Chairman's statement and acknowledges that the relation between money growth and GNP will gradually revert to a more normal state. They both also agree that if inflation decreases and nominal interest rates fall, the target for next year will have a stronger impact on economic activity compared to the current year.


Passage number 813.
 And that's going to beincreasingly the case, if one takes into account the fact that it's--MR. SCHULTZ. But the midpoint between 2-1/2 and 5-1/2 is 4percent, which is above where I certainly hope growth will be thisyear. So, in fact, if we adopt 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, we areactually allowing for more growth than we're likely to get this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No


Passage number 814.
MR. GRAMLEY. But that ignores the shift adjustment that hasbeen taking place. This year we will be adding roughly if we haven'talready--if the staff is right and we have no further shift in moneydemand--about 2-1/2 percentage points of money growth, effectively,that doesn't show up in the numbers. And one needs to take that intoaccount. There is just as much effect on the economy from a 1percentage point drop in money demand, given the money supply, asthere is by adding 1 percent to money supply, holding demand constant.It has no different effects on output, employment, prices, oranything. And we just can't count on this concealed money growth;sometimes we don't even want to recognize it ourselves, but it ishappening. It's not going to continue to happen unless this processof innovation develops new steam.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 815.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, don't you think the process of innovationis going to continue, though, to some degree.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The presence of the word "though" implies a contrasting viewpoint or potential disagreement about the continuation of the process of innovation.


Passage number 816.
 The momentum involvednow--MR. GRAMLEY. To some degree, yes. But the staff has pointedout that this process of innovation is stimulated by the move ofinterest rates to new peaks. Following new peaks we have this burstof innovations which then settles down. We had it last year in thesecond quarter; we had it in 1975-76; we had it again in the firsthalf of this year. And while it will continue, it will be at a muchslower rate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage is explaining the cyclical pattern of innovation and acknowledges that it will continue, albeit at a slower rate. There is no explicit disagreement or contention.


Passage number 817.
MR. WALLICH. I thought theory said that the incomeelasticity for transactions balances was a good deal less than unity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No 

Explanation: There is no explicit disagreement or contention expressed in this passage. The speaker simply states their understanding of a theory regarding the income elasticity for transactions balances.


Passage number 818.
MR. GRAMLEY. It is. It's about .75 by most estimates.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply states a fact about the estimated value of something.


Passage number 819.
MR. WALLICH. Then we would expect a continuing rise invelocity, wouldn't we.SPEAKER(.). Why.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is a simple exchange of information and a follow-up question.


Passage number 820.
MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, for velocity, sure. It's only a questionof the rate of increase in velocity. There's a trend factor that-84-7/6-7/81would take place even if there were no innovations because the incomeelasticity of money with respect to real income is less than 1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is explaining a concept and providing a logical explanation without any opposition or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 821.
MR. WALLICH. Right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not involve any statements or arguments that indicate contention or disagreement.


Passage number 822.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have copies of this that you candistribute, Mr. Altmann.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no indication of contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply asks if Mr. Altmann has copies of something that he can distribute.


Passage number 823.
MR. ALTMANN. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide any context or details about Mr. Altmann's statement, so it is not possible to determine if there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 824.
MR. PARTEE. In addition, we have the shift adjustmentquestion, Fred. Since we're going to give them a plain figure, thatadds something.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Mr. Partee is simply providing additional information.


Passage number 825.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This statement does not indicate any disagreement or contention as it implies that there is no obligation or requirement to perform a certain action.


Passage number 826.
 But at somepoint fiddling around with a very small adjustment--MR. PARTEE. I would very much like to do it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 827.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can change our minds at the end of thisyear, if we think a big shift is going on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is simply suggesting the possibility of changing one's perspective or opinion if there is evidence of significant changes occurring.


Passage number 828.
MS. TEETERS. But in the past we haven't changed our minds atthe end of the year. We feel stuck with what we do [at this meetingeach year].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no clear contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker simply states that in the past, they have not changed their minds at the end of the year. The tone is more reflective and factual rather than confrontational or contradictory.


Passage number 829.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The given passage does not display any contention or disagreement. It simply mentions the VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON without any conflicting thoughts or opposing views.


Passage number 830.
 He's just talking about calling it M1rather than doing a shift-adjusted--MS. TEETERS. Oh.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There does not appear to be any contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is simply discussing a suggestion of calling something M1 instead of a shift-adjusted MS.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 831.
MR. SCHULTZ. But the other side of it is that we wouldcertainly, we hope, get substantially less nominal GNP next year thanthis year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The use of the phrase "we hope" suggests that there is a difference of opinion or uncertainty about whether they would get substantially less nominal GNP next year.


Passage number 832.
MR. PARTEE. Remember, though, that we have to say whether ornot this is consistent with the Administration's 12 percent nominalGNP growth [forecast].
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply reminding others to consider whether the statement aligns with the Administration's forecast.


Passage number 833.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, it isn't.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not depict any form of contention or disagreement. It seems to be a response or statement without any conflicting opinions.


Passage number 834.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage only mentions the chairman without any indication of contention or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 835.
 Yes, but we have a--MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, but listen: When you talk to[Administration officials] in private they are very clear about thefact that they really don't believe in these numbers that they arepublishing here at midyear. They say it quite directly. They havesaid it to me.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is evident from the phrase "Yes, but listen" which suggests a contradictory viewpoint is about to be presented. Additionally, the statement that the administration officials do not believe in the numbers they are publishing further indicates a disagreement between the officials and the speaker.


Passage number 836.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have unreconcilable inconsistencies inthat respect, I guess. There's a great question as to whether it'sconsistent with their GNP forecast. On the other hand, they willpresume that the money supply is declining from year-to-year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage presents different perspectives or concerns about a situation, but there is no explicit disagreement or contention between the statements. The inconsistencies and questions mentioned do not create conflict between the ideas presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 837.
 So,we'll have to say we are inconsistent with that assumption if we--MR. PARTEE. Yes, they [assume] rising velocity, too. Well,maybe it will go up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. This is indicated by the phrases "we are inconsistent with that assumption" and "Well, maybe it will go up." These statements suggest that the individuals involved have differing opinions or viewpoints.


Passage number 838.
-85-7/6-7/81MR. SCHULTZ. I know, but they just have wild numbers.Privately they say quite directly: Don't pay much attention to thesemidyear figures we are coming out with.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is stating that privately, people say not to pay much attention to the midyear figures being released because they are not reliable. There is no conflicting viewpoint or argument presented.


Passage number 839.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I recognize all the problems, but it's alittle hard to say we're not going to reduce the target next year inany respect.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker acknowledges the existence of problems but expresses difficulty in saying that they will not reduce the target next year in any way.


Passage number 840.
MR. GRAMLEY. 3 to 6 percent would be a reduction of 1/2percentage point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply provides a numerical calculation without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 841.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But on the nonbinding end of it.SPEAKER(.). On the floor, not the ceiling.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply stating that something is on the nonbinding end and on the floor, not the ceiling.


Passage number 842.
MR. WALLICH. We used to do that--nibble at the upper edge ofone and then next time at the lower edge of the other. I figured outit took ten years to bring about a moderate reduction. I think wehave to go across the board.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a statement made by Mr. Wallich about his own perspective or strategy.


Passage number 843.
MR. SCHULTZ. By across the board, do you mean on all theaggregates or on the top and bottom of M1.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is simply seeking clarification on the meaning of "across the board" in the context of M1.


Passage number 844.
MR. PARTEE. Top and bottom.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any disagreement or contention. The speaker simply mentions "top and bottom" without any conflicting opinions or arguments.


Passage number 845.
MR. WALLICH. I think, barring technical inconsistencies, allof them.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement is expressing a personal opinion without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 846.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only other decision we have to make,as nearly as I can see based upon the earlier discussion--tell me ifI'm wrong--is [on M1]. Nobody talked about--well, maybe somebody did,but the great majority did not--changing the M2, M3, and bank creditranges. We had this debate. We had a predominant view, which was notto change anything. But Mr. Schultz raised some arguments, and one ortwo others did, on reducing the [M1 range] this year, which may havesome bearing on this. That's the only other decision I think we haveto make here.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain contention or disagreement. It simply describes a previous discussion and presents the options that need to be considered.


Passage number 847.
MR. MORRIS. Except that Steve told us we can reduce M3 nextyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement given by Steve about reducing M3 next year is presented without any conflicting information or opposing views.


Passage number 848.
MR. PARTEE. Next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide sufficient information to determine whether there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 849.
MR. AXILROD.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not mention Mr. Axilrod.


Passage number 850.
 It seemed, within these numbers, relatively--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right; we could do that. So theopen questions are M-1B this year, M1 next year, and M3 next year ifwe're sticking with the 6 to 9 percent for M2 next year, which seemsto be reasonably satisfactory. These differences are small but,unfortunately, the one that is critical is the Ml range for next yearjust in terms of public appreciation and the psychology of gettingsomething down.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is discussing different numbers and expressing that some are satisfactory while one is critical for public perception.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 851.
MR. BALLES. I have a question on that Mr. Chairman.Obviously we're making some provisional statements on the 1982 ranges,but at what point in time do you foresee our moving to the actual M-1Bas compared to the shift adjusted.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Balles, is questioning the timing of when they will move to the actual M-1Bas compared to the shift adjusted ranges. It suggests that there may be differing opinions or uncertainty surrounding the decision.


Passage number 852.
-86-7/6-7/81CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "CHAIRMAN VOLCKER -86-7/6-7/81" appears to be a heading or label, providing information about the identity of the chairman and the date or timeframe mentioned.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 853.
 Well, I am hoping--MR. BALLES. I can see us going on forever and ever ignoringwhat the actual is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention in the passage. 
Explanation: The statement "I am hoping" implies that there is a difference in opinion or perspective between the speaker and Mr. Balles regarding the topic being discussed.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 854.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we've run out of speed on thisalready. It has exceeded my tolerance for having any faith in theadjustment now.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It has exceeded my tolerance for having any faith in the adjustment now" suggests that the speaker no longer believes in the adjustment, indicating a disagreement or lack of agreement with someone else.


Passage number 855.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You'd start it for next year,wouldn't you.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply suggests starting something for next year and seeks confirmation or agreement from the listener.


Passage number 856.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope that we will find in the next sixmonths that there isn't much difference between the two and thatagainst that background we'll say "Forget about it next year." Iwould plan to say in the testimony as background for whatever numberwe put in here that we don't think [the shift] is going to besignificant next year, so we are very tentatively assuming it's notgoing to be. But if it still looks significant by December, we'llhave to give you a different judgment. However, we are assuming inthis very tentative way that it's not going to be significant nextyear.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It expresses the speaker's hope and tentative assumptions about the future, without any contradictory statements or conflicting viewpoints.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 857.
MR. ROOS. If that's the case and if these next six monthsare critical and we will have another opportunity to change what we'regoing to do for '82 next February, in order to reassure the marketsand to be consistent, why don't we say this time that we're going toreduce the numbers on M1 by 1 percentage point at both ends. And ifat the end of the year the picture is different, we can still make anadjustment next February with less problem, in my opinion, than we'dhave if we come out with testimony on July 22nd that we're really notgoing to continue our 1 percentage point reduction each year. I thinkthis is an important time to state once again what we're doing.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. 
Some members of the group are suggesting reducing the numbers on M1 by 1 percentage point, while others may have a different opinion or approach. This can be inferred from the phrases "why don't we say this time..." and "in my opinion."


Passage number 858.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to make sure you realize thearithmetic of what Mr. Roos said: If we reduce the range by 1percentage point on both ends, it would be 2-1/2 to 5 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement is providing a clarification on the arithmetic calculation explained by Mr. Roos.


Passage number 859.
MR. ROOS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement as it only includes a brief response, "Yes," without any further arguments or conflicting statements.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 860.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's horrendous. One would have toassume an increase in velocity of circulation of something on theorder of twice--or 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 times--the normal secular increasein velocity of circulation. That is too heroic an assumption to make,Larry. The fact that we've come in comfortably so far is strictly dueto this rather fluky situation. If the staff is right and we don'tsee that, and we just have the normal situation continue for the restof the year, if I'm understanding this right, we would still come inat about what--5 + 3, Steve. Is 5 the increase for the first half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "That is too heroic an assumption to make, Larry" indicates that the speaker disagrees with Larry's assumption.


Passage number 861.
MR. AXILROD. For which aggregate.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement by Mr. Axilrod asking for clarification or confirmation regarding something related to an aggregate.


Passage number 862.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For the velocity of circulation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The passage does not mention any disagreement or contention related to the velocity of circulation. It simply states a statement or fact without presenting any contrasting views or arguments.


Passage number 863.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The word "oh, yes" in this context is expressing agreement or affirmation, rather than contention or disagreement.


Passage number 864.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The growth plus the normal.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage provided. The passage simply states a mathematical equation without presenting any conflicting or contrasting viewpoints.


Passage number 865.
-87-7/6-7/81MR. AXILROD. That's right; the excess is more like 5 to 7.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. It simply states a range or approximation for the excess.


Passage number 866.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. The chances of repeating thatsituation don't look very good. If I were a betting man, I would betthe chances are maybe 1 out of 5 that we're going to get that kind ofgrowth in velocity next year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about the chances of repeating a certain situation.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 867.
MR. WALLICH. We seem to assume that growth in velocity is aspecial event due to definable changes in technology. But if peopleare circumventing the need for transactions balances right and left byusing money market funds and overnight arrangements and so forth, thenreally all that is happening is that M-1B is becoming a smaller partof the transactions balances. And its velocity isn't really ameaningful figure; it's just a statistical number relating M-1B toGNP. But it doesn't exert any constraint. That is what I fear may behappening, although one can't be very sure. But that makes a rise invelocity more probable than thinking of it in terms of a specialinnovation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Wallich, is expressing his fear that the assumption of growth in velocity being a result of definable changes in technology may not be accurate. He argues that the increase in velocity is more likely due to people circumventing the need for transactions balances through alternative financial arrangements such as money market funds. This contradicts the assumption that velocity growth is solely driven by technological changes.


Passage number 868.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that much of a rise seemsunlikely to be repeated next year because we won't have, I assume, asbig a growth in money market funds starting from the present base aswe had this year.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is expressing their opinion and stating a prediction for the next year.


Passage number 869.
MR. SCHULTZ. But we don't need anything like that kind ofrise next year, depending on what one is assuming on nominal GNP. If[GNP growth] is in the 9 to 10 percent range and [money grows at the]midpoint of 4 percent and normal velocity is 3, that would give you anextra velocity of 3 rather than 5. You can play with numbers likethat. I don't think you--SPEAKER(.). A lot of that is possible.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Schultz is suggesting that different assumptions about GNP growth and money growth can result in different velocities, and the speaker agrees that "a lot of that is possible." They seem to be having a conversation about different possibilities rather than arguing about a specific point.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 870.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fact is we don't know. We're allgiving grist to Mr. Morris's mill.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. The statement suggests that there is uncertainty and lack of knowledge. Additionally, the mention of providing material for Mr. Morris's mill implies that different individuals may have different opinions and perspectives, leading to potential disagreement.


Passage number 871.
MR. PARTEE. Well, what does M2 mean.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Partee is simply asking for clarification on the meaning of M2.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 872.
MR. GRAMLEY. But you could also argue that M-1B doesn't makeany difference. Whether our money supply comes in at 2 or 3percentage points above what is otherwise stated, what difference doesit make if we have more money or more velocity. It all accomplishesthe same objective.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention in the passage. 

The phrase "But you could also argue that M-1B doesn't make any difference" suggests that there is a differing viewpoint or disagreement about the impact of M-1B on the money supply. The speaker presents a counterargument against the idea that M-1B has any significant effect.


Passage number 873.
MR. SCHULTZ.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: To determine if there is contention or disagreement in the passage, we need to see the complete passage. Please provide it for a more accurate analysis.


Passage number 874.
 No, I wasn't making that kind of--MR. GRAMLEY. Well, you slip into that sort of argument thatsomehow the economy will always manage with whatever money we put out.If M-1B is that elusive in terms of its relationship with GNP, thenthe proper interpretation is that we ought not to be targeting M-1B.We ought to be looking at what we think is relevant.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 875.
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I think you know that I have less andless confidence in M-1B; I give less and less weight to it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. Mr. Schultz expresses his reduced confidence and diminishing importance of M-1B. This indicates a difference of opinion or contention.


Passage number 876.
MR. BLACK. One thing that has been overlooked is theassumption that the inflation rate will be as high as the staff has-88-7/6-7/81said. If it's lower than that, one doesn't have to make such heroicassumptions about the increase in velocity.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply pointing out that a certain assumption about the inflation rate has been overlooked and suggests that if the inflation rate is lower than expected, certain assumptions about the increase in velocity may not be necessary.


Passage number 877.
MR. PARTEE. And if it's higher than that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage.


Passage number 878.
MR. BLACK.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: It is not clear in the given passage whether there is contention or disagreement. The context seems to be missing as only the name "Mr. Black" is provided, which does not offer any information about potential disagreements or contentions.


Passage number 879.
 Well, then you have to be really--MR. ROOS. If our primary purpose at this moment--maybe thisisn't our purpose--is to impact inflationary expectations, we wouldhave to announce, in understandable terms, a reduction in the rate ofgrowth of the narrower aggregates. I don't think it's realistic tothink that we can say we're only going to shade down M1--if we'regoing to call it that--very slightly because we think something isgoing to happen to a thing called velocity or the money demandfunction. When I read these financial letters, I seldom see anyreference made to these more technical aspects of what we're trying todo. They talk about our published ranges in simple terms and whetheror not they think we're going to be able to achieve them. So, I thinkthey are two different things. The technical aspect of what we'redoing is something different from the impact we're trying to make oninflationary expectations. And the latter has to be done in a simplemanner and has to involve a discernable reduction in the actualfigures from the current 3-1/2 to 6 percent to something that to lessknowledgeable and less technically oriented people looks like acontinuation of our resolve to reduce these ranges gradually.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. The speaker is discussing different aspects of monetary policy and expressing the need to communicate in understandable terms.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 880.
MS. TEETERS. There are two other problems here, though.It's going to be impossible for us to raise the number. Suppose weget a repeat of last year and get a sudden expansion in the moneysupply over the fall; we will end up with a high base. Then we willface the problem we faced at the end of last year as to whether we caneven meet the targets that we set for ourselves in July. And if welower them too much--by a whole percentage point, say, or even if welower them at all at this point--and then in February we really needto raise them 1/2 percentage point, we're not going to be able to doit. A second consideration here is that if we get the ranges too low,we will never be able to get within them and we'll lose credibilitybecause we can't achieve our targets. We have to balance whetherwe're going to achieve the targets as well as whether we're ever goingto have the opportunity to raise them, which I don't think we are.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage presents two problems and the speaker expresses concern about not being able to meet targets and not being able to raise them if needed. The speaker argues that there is a need to balance achieving targets and the ability to raise them in the future, which implies a disagreement or contention.


Passage number 881.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Obviously there's no perfectsolution, but I would argue that the right balance to strike is onethat retains our credibility in terms of continuing to squeezeinflation. Certainly there's a widespread perception in the countrythat the Federal Reserve is very strictly committed and dedicated tomonetary restraint. I think we can achieve that with only a 1/2 pointreduction; I don't think we need a full point reduction. There is acontinuity in policy with a 1/2 point reduction and it lessenssomewhat the problem that Nancy is talking about. If we end up at thelow end of the target this year, or even with some undershooting, wehave to start from that point; we can't go back to where we weresupposed to be. Then it's quite a tight target. So, my sense ofbalance between the expectations of the country for us to continuethis policy in a persistent way and the danger that it's going to betoo tight is to strike a balance with a 1/2 point reduction. Now, Idon't particularly care if we lower the floor a full point because Idon't think that's the meaningful constraint. I have a slight-89-7/6-7/81preference for a 1/2 point reduction on both the floor and theceiling. But if you want to lower the floor a point, and you don'tthink we're going to get criticism because we're widening the range,[I could accept that]. You were telling me that Senator Proxmire waspushing you to narrow the range.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any explicit disagreement or contention. It is a discussion of different opinions and preferences regarding the appropriate balance and approach to monetary policy.


Passage number 882.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At midyear. But I see some positivebenefit to widening the range to explain to them that these numbersare not so solid and reliable. It's a symbolic recognition of thefact that there are great uncertainties about M1 and what M1 meansthese days.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not present any contention or disagreement. It simply expresses the author's perspective and suggests widening the range to acknowledge the uncertain nature of M1.


Passage number 883.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think we should lower theceiling a whole point.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is expressing their opinion about not lowering the ceiling by a whole point, but there is no opposing view or argument presented in the given statement.


Passage number 884.
 That really is risking a major problem in theeconomy in terms of our not making--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've heard the arguments on bothsides. Having heard both sides, I conclude that 2-1/2 to 5-1/2percent is still the right compromise. I feel somewhat open-mindedabout M3. Let me just try 2-1/2 to 5-1/2, 6 to 9, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent, but I am perfectly happy to try the same [M1 range] and 6 to9 percent for both M2 and M3. What are the preferences between thosetwo.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is considering different options and ranges for the economy, but they do not express any conflicting views or arguments.


Passage number 885.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage given.


Passage number 886.
 If it doesn't cause any more problemsto lower M3 a half point--MR. AXILROD. That's what it looks like at this point.There's no guarantee on what it will look like in December.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 887.
MR. PARTEE. We don't need to do that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The statement implies that there is no need to do something without presenting any opposing viewpoints or disagreement.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 888.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What about not doing it now butwaiting to see the situation.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. The passage suggests considering an alternative option of not doing something immediately and instead waiting to assess the situation. This presents a potential disagreement or difference in opinion regarding the timing of taking action.


Passage number 889.
MR. AXILROD. Last year, Mr. Chairman, I believe theCommittee lowered M2 at midyear and then raised it back.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage.


Passage number 890.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that what we did. I thought we raisedone of these.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It appears to be a simple statement where the speaker is expressing their thought process or clarifying their understanding.


Passage number 891.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. I think it was M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement of agreement or confirmation.


Passage number 892.
 Youlowered it at midyear and then at the beginning of last year--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we have precedence for that. Let mejust ask the preference between those two approaches. There are othercombinations and permutations, but let me just see how those two go.Everything the same with 2-1/2 to 5-1/2, 6 to 9, but a 1/2-pointdifference on the M3 range. Who is for the leaving the M3 range at6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent, given that choice.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is discussing different approaches and asking for preferences, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflict between the parties involved.


Passage number 893.
MR. SCHULTZ. I think Chuck made a pretty good argument fornot doing it now and taking a look at it later.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: There is no contention or disagreement in this statement. The speaker is expressing agreement with Chuck's argument and suggesting that they consider revisiting the topic at a later time.


Passage number 894.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many have a reasonably strong feelingabout the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent versus 6 to 9 percent. Well, amongthose registering feelings anyway, the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent commandsa little more support. Now, let me just ask a general question. Does-90-7/6-7/81anybody else, after hearing this debate on both sides--on lower orhigher, visual, substance, or uncertainty--want to propose anotherchange. If not, I am going to go ahead with the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2, 6 to9, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The passage is simply discussing different percentages and asking if anyone wants to propose a different change.


Passage number 895.
MS. TEETERS. I would much prefer 3 to 6 percent on M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is a statement of preference by Ms. Teeters.


Passage number 896.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not provide any information about contention or disagreement. It simply states that someone named Chairman Volcker exists.


Passage number 897.
 There have been preferences expressed onboth sides, but let me just ask--MR. RICE. How about 3 to 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement simply acknowledges that there have been preferences expressed on both sides, but it does not indicate any specific disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 898.
MR. GRAMLEY. It's only the upper limit that is reallybinding.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Gramley is stating a fact about the upper limit being binding, without any opposing view presented.


Passage number 899.
MS. TEETERS.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation:
The passage does not provide any information or context to indicate any contention or disagreement. It simply states "MS. TEETERS" without any further details.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 900.
 Yes, except that we--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are other possibilities. There's awhole range of numbers we can put down--different higher limits,different lower limits, whatever.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "except that we-- There are other possibilities" indicates that there is a differing viewpoint or alternative options being presented. The statement "There's a whole range of numbers we can put down--different higher limits, different lower limits, whatever" further emphasizes the existence of disagreement or contention about the numbers that can be chosen.


Passage number 901.
MS. TEETERS. We have never responded when [the growth rates]went down to the bottom; we only respond when they go to the top.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. Ms. Teeters is simply stating a fact or an observation about their response to growth rates.


Passage number 902.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there some reasonable contentment with2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 903.
MR. SCHULTZ. Do you want a show of hands.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The phrase "Do you want a show of hands" is a simple question and does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 904.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, [unintelligible], let's justreserve that for the moment. That's tentative. Now, what do you wantto do about this year. I've been on both sides of this issue and willremain on both sides of the issue. The argument, as I understand it,is: Why horse around for 1/2 percentage point and raise questionsabout fine-tuning and all the rest. If we go that way, I think wehave to say something about being comfortable on the low side howeverthat is precisely expressed.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It primarily discusses the speaker's own perspective on an issue.


Passage number 905.
MS. TEETERS. [Comfortable] for M-1B. We're uncomfortable onthe high side for M2.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not demonstrate any contention or disagreement. It simply states that they are uncomfortable on the high side for M2.


Passage number 906.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Sorry, but I'm not able to analyze text for contention or disagreement.


Passage number 907.
MR. PARTEE. Given what we voted for on the short run, Ithink we really ought to reduce the lower end. Growth is going tocome out awfully low.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker, Mr. Partee, is expressing his personal opinion and suggestion without any conflicting viewpoints being presented.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 908.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other side is: If we lower it, wehave a target that is more attainable on the low side, consistent withthe decision we made earlier. It's less frightening on the up side.It comes down, in part, to how convinced one is that if we saw asudden radical move in the other direction so that the upper side isthreatened, we'd be prepared to pull out even more stops than weotherwise would, given that we went out of our way now to lower it.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "It comes down, in part, to how convinced one is" suggests that there are differing opinions or perspectives on the matter being discussed.


Passage number 909.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's the decisive thing. I don't like thisfine-tuning; that argument is the one that is a real potential trap.-91-7/6-7/81And I just don't see why we want even to run the risk of findingourselves in that position.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. Mr. Corrigan expresses his own opinion and concerns about the fine-tuning argument, but there is no mention of opposing viewpoints or conflicting opinions.


Passage number 910.
MR. GRAMLEY. We gain so little by lowering the lower end ofthe target. [M-1B is] running below the lower end of the target andeverybody is saying right now "Gee, the Fed is doing great.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. The speaker is expressing agreement with the idea that lowering the lower end of the target has little benefit, and everyone is commending the Fed's performance.


Passage number 911.
" If itended up the year below 3-1/2 percent, I doubt that anybody would beseriously concerned about it as long as the economy--CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have anything to add to thisargument. Does anybody want to make a final statement that's going tobe persuasive on this score before I ask for preferences. Or doesanyone want to make a statement that's not going to be persuasive butthat they want to get off their chest.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is asking if anyone wants to contribute to the discussion or make a persuasive statement, but there is no indication of disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 912.
MR. BLACK. I'd like to make one statement.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker, Mr. Black, is simply expressing his desire to make a statement.


Passage number 913.
 What we have--MR. PARTEE. On the top half.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The passage is an incomplete sentence and provides no information or context to indicate any form of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 914.
MR. BLACK. No, I am going to leave that one alone. What wehave voted for would involve a rate of growth of 3.9 percent betweenthe fourth quarter of 1980 and the fourth quarter of 1981. No, wait aminute; I'm okay. I got mixed up.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Black seems to be clarifying his own confusion about the growth rate mentioned, but there is no indication of a disagreement with anyone else.


Passage number 915.
MR. ROOS. It's an expression: I'm okay, you're okay.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not present any form of contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement or expression without any conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 916.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else want to make astatement. One choice, as I understand it, is to leave the rangesunchanged but say something [specifically] about being low in, ormaybe even below, [the M-1B range] if necessary to remain comfortable.But we are not unduly uncomfortable on M2 and M3. We would expect tobe high in the M2 and M3 ranges. That's one approach. The other isthat we'd still say that we're going to be high in the M2 and M3ranges but in recognition of the undershoot in M-1B, in effect, we arelowering its range by a half point. Those are the two choices.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply presenting two different choices or approaches without expressing any preference or indication of disagreement with either option.


Passage number 917.
MR. PARTEE. Lower both ends [of the M-1B range] by a halfpoint.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

There is no contention or disagreement in the passage as MR. PARTEE is suggesting a specific action, which is to lower both ends of the M-1B range by a halfpoint.


Passage number 918.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd lower both ends by a half point if wewere doing it. I don't think we can widen the range in the middle ofthe year. Part of the purpose in lowering it actually is to constrainus on the up side and indicate that we are constrained. So, those arethe two choices. They seem to be quite evenly balanced, in myjudgment. Who does not want to change them, with that explanation.That seems to be the wide consensus, so I guess we don't movethem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage indicates that there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker explains that they believe the option to lower both ends by a half point is the best choice, and it seems to be the wide consensus among the group. Therefore, there is no indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 919.
MR. SCHULTZ. And I made such a beautiful argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker states that they made a beautiful argument, indicating satisfaction or pride in their own performance.


Passage number 920.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a beautiful argument.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The phrase "That was a beautiful argument" suggests that the argument was well-presented or persuasive, but it does not indicate any disagreement or contention.


Passage number 921.
MR. PARTEE. Sometimes that happens.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. Mr. Partee is simply stating that sometimes situations occur where something unexpected happens.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 922.
MR. SCHULTZ. Some get rained out.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes. There is a disagreement or contention in the passage. This can be seen from the phrase "Some get rained out," which implies that there is a variation in the outcome or result for different individuals or groups.


Passage number 923.
-92-7/6-7/81MR. ROOS. Hey, Fred, I changed my vote; I voted the[unintelligible]. I looked at it again.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 924.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He would have changed my vote, too. Butwe are still in the minority. Mr. Axilrod raises a question, whichreraises a question about what we just said before. I am hesitant torecite it to you but I will out of a feeling of loyalty. He says thatin general we are putting some additional emphasis on the broaderaggregates and the decision for next year doesn't lower any of thebroader aggregates. Is that going to diminish the psychologicalimpact. I guess that reraises the question of M3. Does anybody feelstrongly that we should reconsider the question of M3. If not, wewon't. So, what we have here is: No change this year with theexplanation that I cited; for next year 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percenttentatively for M1 period, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2percent for M3. Nobody discussed bank credit, which is still what--6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker is simply discussing different perspectives and raising questions for consideration.


Passage number 925.
MR. AXILROD. It's 6 to 9.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It is simply stating a numerical value.


Passage number 926.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we at 6 to 9 percent. Oh, yes, it'sthe same. I see. So, 6 to 9 percent on bank credit.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not contain any contention or disagreement. It simply presents a statement and confirms that it is the same.


Passage number 927.
MS. TEETERS. We don't have to vote on the whole package [forthe two years] do we.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The statement by Ms. Teeters is a question seeking clarification or confirmation, rather than expressing disagreement or contention.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 928.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At this stage, I think yes. It's clearthat for 1981 there isn't going to be any change.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "I think yes" indicates that the author holds a different opinion or viewpoint than someone else.


Passage number 929.
MS. TEETERS. Are we just voting for '82.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. MS. TEETERS is simply asking if they are only voting for '82.


Passage number 930.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's do it separately. It mightaffect somebody's vote, I guess. Shall we formally vote on '81. Allright, we will have a separate vote on '81.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It is simply discussing the idea of having a separate vote on '81.


Passage number 931.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We earn our salaries.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

The statement "We earn our salaries" does not imply any contention or disagreement. It is a simple statement about the earning of salaries.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 932.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a footnote in my mind to all ofthis, that if the figures for the next two weeks come out widelydifferent than our current expectation, I think we need to have aconsultation and relook at all these decisions. So, I will make a[mental] footnote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The author is suggesting the possibility of a consultation and reevaluation of decisions if the figures for the next two weeks differ significantly from their current expectation. This implies that there may be disagreement or dissatisfaction with the current decisions and a need for further discussion.


Passage number 933.
 Maybe we ought to put in our record that we aregoing to consult at--MS. TEETERS. That will give you time before your testimony.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. The speaker is suggesting the inclusion of a certain information in a record to allow for consulting before the testimony.


Passage number 934.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we will have a consultation beforethe testimony to confirm all of this. Maybe just put it like that,neutrally. But I don't expect any change unless we get some radicallywild figures in the next two weeks. Now we are just voting on '81.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The speaker simply mentions the need for a consultation before the testimony and expresses that they do not expect any change unless there are significant figures in the following two weeks. The statement about voting on '81 is unrelated to any disagreement.


Passage number 935.
MR. CORRIGAN. Leaving the targets as is.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


Passage number 936.
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Explanation: The passage provides a simple answer to the question of whether there is contention or disagreement without presenting any context or details from which to draw a conclusion. It merely states "Yes," which indicates that there is contention or disagreement.


Passage number 937.
MR. SCHULTZ. We're not changing '81.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage.


Passage number 938.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Exactly.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the word "Exactly." It is a statement that expresses agreement or accuracy without any opposing views or conflict.


Passage number 939.
-93-7/6-7/81MR. BOEHNE. We could say it both ways.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. In the given passage, there is no contention or disagreement. The speaker states that the statement could be expressed in multiple ways, indicating that there are different acceptable interpretations or expressions of the information, but not conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 940.
MR. ALTMANN.Chairman Volcker YesVice Chairman Solomon YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Corrigan YesGovernor Gramley YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Partee YesGovernor Rice YesGovernor Schultz I guess I have to vote "Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The members mentioned are all voting "Yes" in response to something.


Passage number 941.
"VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Have you ever dissented before. Nowis your time.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in this passage. It is a statement that encourages individuals to express their dissenting opinions.


Passage number 942.
MR. SCHULTZ. I was worried about how I would look if Idissented.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "I was worried about how I would look if I dissented" simply reflects Mr. Schultz's personal concerns about dissenting, rather than expressing any disagreement or conflicting viewpoints.


Passage number 943.
MR. WALLICH. They'd think you want it easier.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No, there is no contention or disagreement in this passage. Mr. Wallich is simply expressing a perception or assumption about how others might interpret wanting something to be easier.


Passage number 944.
MR. SCHULTZ. No, that's not the problem.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. The speaker, Mr. Schultz, is simply stating that something is not the problem without any indication of disagreement or contention.


Passage number 945.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can explain your vote.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. This passage does not indicate any contention or disagreement. It is asking for a simple yes or no answer.


Passage number 946.
MR. SCHULTZ. I'll vote "Yes.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 

Explanation: The passage does not show any contention or disagreement. It only includes a statement by Mr. Schultz.


Passage number 947.
"MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.

Explanation: The passage does not provide enough information to determine if there is contention or disagreement. It is only mentioning the person's name, "MR. ALTMANN," without any further context or details.


Passage number 948.
Governor Teeters YesGovernor Wallich YesCHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. That leaves us with 1982. This isall going to be described as tentative. The coloration around it isclear. It's 2-1/2 to 5-1/2, 6 to 9, 6-1/2 to 9-1/2, and 6 to 9percent, which is no change for any of the ranges except for M-1B.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. There is no contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Governor Teeters Yes" and "Governor Wallich Yes" indicate agreement, and the rest of the passage describes numerical ranges without any conflicting information.


Passage number 949.
MR. BALLES. What was the rationale, Mr. Chairman, on thethree-point spread, just so we understand that.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No. 
There is no contention or disagreement in the given passage. Mr. Balles is simply seeking clarification on the rationale of the three-point spread.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 950.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The rationale is "modified Morris." Isthat clear. There's a lot of uncertainty about what is going tohappen to M1 in terms of the technical interpretation of the figure.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is disagreement in the passage. The phrase "There's a lot of uncertainty about what is going to happen to M1 in terms of the technical interpretation of the figure" suggests that there is a lack of clarity and agreement regarding the technical interpretation of M1.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 951.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the press headline will be:"Volcker uncertain.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in the passage. The statement "Volcker uncertain" indicates that there is uncertainty or disagreement regarding Volcker's stance or certainty on a particular issue.


****************DISAGREEMENT DETECTED*******************Passage number 952.
"CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the problem in explaining.There's so much invested in this now. It's difficult to go up thereand say we don't have any faith in these figures. It happens to bethe case. We have more credibility, a lot more credibility, saying itwhen they are low than when they are high. Do you all remember whatyou are voting on.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: Yes, there is contention or disagreement in this passage. The phrase "It's difficult to go up there and say we don't have any faith in these figures" suggests a disagreement or lack of agreement with the accuracy or validity of certain figures. The statement implies that there is a difference in opinion on how much credibility those figures hold, with the speaker suggesting that they have more credibility when they are low rather than high. The mention of voting also suggests a disagreement among the audience or individuals involved.


Passage number 953.
MR. ALTMANN.
Does the passage contain contention or disagreement? Response from the model: No.


